G-I Holdings Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Deadly Driver Had Record Of Violations
The driver of the livery cab that killed a toddler in Crown Heights, Brooklyn, on Thursday accumulated more than two dozen traffic violations in New York and New Jersey over the last four years and had no valid driver's license, the authorities said yesterday.
The violations include speeding, running a red light and driving without a license.
They also include citations in another accident in which someone was injured.


Kerr Addison Mines reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Gibson Greetings Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Potential Tenants Line Up for Coliseum
Representatives of 14 enterprises varying from retailers to entertainment and exhibition entrepreneurs submitted proposals yesterday to set up shop in the New York Coliseum, in the latest step in the saga of the developer Mortimer B. Zuckerman's attempts to demolish the building and put up a new complex on the site.
The proposals offered yesterday were responses to a request from the Metropolitan Transportation Authority, which owns the Coliseum and other buildings on the site.
The M.T.A., hoping to get some income from the site, decided last month to invite proposals for its use, although Mr.
Zuckerman has a standing plan to build there that has been a casualty of court challenges and the decline in the real-estate market.


Jefferson-Pilot reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Abaxis Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Thefts of Copper Cable Threaten To Cripple New York's Subways
When the B, D and Q trains lurched to a halt in Brooklyn during yesterday's morning rush, few of the 100,000 riders who were delayed up to two hours could have guessed the reason for their inconvenience.
A section of copper cable had been stolen, disrupting signals and causing the delay.
The transit police say this kind of theft is widespread not only in the subways but also along electrical and telephone lines.
Drug addicts, the police say, are gnawing at the infrastructure to sell pieces of copper to scrap dealers for quick cash.  'We Are Going Crazy'
As a result, there may be hundreds of spots where missing sections of cable threaten to bring subway lines to a halt, officials say.
Because two or three copper cables are needed to carry electricity, sections of one cable can be cut away and remain undetected until enough is gone that a breakdown occurs when the strain of a morning rush begins, which is what happened yesterday at 8:25.


Sealy's Lost Playbook: Couldn't Pick It Up
The Knicks found more humor than importance in the public disclosure of the Indiana Pacers' playbook.
Before the game last night, all the players had heard about the Pacers' playbook being read by Don Imus on WFAN radio, after Malik Sealy left it at the airport and someone brought it to the station.


Review/Dance; Just Plain Home-Spun Clogging, Syncopated
The communal fervor and idiosyncrasies that lie at the root of Mark Morris's appeal as a choreographer are very much up front in the brief season, entitled "Dances to American Music," that his company is presenting through tomorrow night at the Brooklyn Academy of Music.
Mr.
Morris is never less than engaging as both dancer and dance maker than when he swings into his down-home act, and in a premiere actually called "Home" at the Mark Morris Dance Group's opening on Thursday night, the company performed a clog dance.


Aydin Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to April 3


Corrections
A football schedule on Thursday for the New York Jets in 1993 included an erroneous starting time in some editions for the team's home game on Sept. 26, against New England.
It is 8 P.M., Eastern time, not 4.


Corrections
The Home Video column on Thursday misidentified a television series.
It is "Star Trek: The Next Generation."


Berkley (W.R.) (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


CTS Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to April 4


Bridge
In all wars, expert minds make great efforts to decode the enemy's signals.
The same is true in the microcosm of the bridge table, as the diagramed deal demonstrates.
It was played a week ago in a Grand National Teams match in Ardsley, N.Y., with Ron Gerard of White Plains in the South position.
East and West were Bill and Rozanne Pollack of Englewood Cliffs, N.J., and they produced a brilliant defense against three spades.
West led her singleton club, and South won in his hand and led a trump to the queen.
West won the second trump lead and underled her diamond honors.
This let East win with the queen and give his partner a club ruff.


Dominion Textile reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Equitrac Corp.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28


Costar Corp.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Entergy Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Perfumania Inc. reports earnings for Year to Jan 30


Coca-Cola Beverages reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Bruncor Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


The Nets Are Struggling and Ailing but Optimistic
As if the Nets didn't have enough problems on their hands with the Cleveland Cavaliers, Coach Chuck Daly today found himself practicing without two of his key players.
Does this team seem to be under a curse?
Guard Maurice Cheeks played 19 minutes in New Jersey's 114-98 loss to Cleveland in Game 1 of the first round of the National Basketball Association playoffs because Rumeal Robinson had to sit most of the game after getting into foul trouble (he picked up three in about the first two minutes).
Today, Cheeks's back was sore and he didn't practice.


Ban on Press Statements in Trade Center Bombing Case Is Overturned
A Federal appeals court yesterday threw out the sweeping order forbidding all lawyers in the World Trade Center bombing case from discussing it outside of the courtroom, ruling that the order curbed their free speech rights unnecessarily.
The three-judge appeals panel, from the United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit in Manhattan, held that the order imposed earlier this month by Judge Kevin Thomas Duffy was overly broad and insufficiently justified.
The panel scolded him for issuing it without examining other, less restrictive means of insuring a fair trial.


Raymond James Financial reports earnings for Qtr to March 26


A Cool Tune on a Day That Gave Nobody the Blues


M/A-Com Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to April 3


Shell Oil Co. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Norcen Energy Res.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Sierra Pacific Resources reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


American Bankers Insurance Group (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Pacific Telecom Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Stanley Furniture Co. reports earnings for Qtr to March 28


Figgie International Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Euro-Nevada Mining reports earnings for Year to March 31


Extras! Extras! Read How Yanks Won
The baseball season in the Bronx is becoming more complicated, but in a way the Yankees prefer.
Matched against a fourth consecutive lefthanded starter, the first of three the Seattle Mariners are expected to produce this weekend, the Yankees responded with people who were all-but-forgotten at the beginning of the season.
Mike Gallego, one of them, listed the names.
Jim Leyritz.
Randy Velarde.
"Mike Gallego, even," Gallego said.
"You think, 'These guys are extras.' But these guys are hungry."


Crown Books reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 30


Brown &amp; Sharpe Manufacturing Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 27


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article yesterday about allegations of bribery and patronage in a Bronx school district misidentified the client of a lawyer, Stanley Schlein.
Mr.
Schlein represents Lucy Cruz, a former member of the District 12 board, not Virginia Noville, who was accused of having bribed a board member to obtain a principal's job.


William Ober, 72, Retired Pathologist And Medical Writer
Dr.
William B. Ober, a retired pathologist and author, died on Tuesday in Washington.
He lived in Tenafly, N.J., and was 72.
Dr.
Ober was attending a meeting when he collapsed after an aortal aneurysm, his family said.
He died at Sibley Memorial Hospital.


Edper Enterprises reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28


Robert Huyot, Official At Hotels, Is Dead at 84
Robert Huyot, an international hotel consultant and former president of the Hotel Carlyle in New York City, died Thursday at his home in Carmel, N.Y.
He was 84 and also had a home in Paris.
French-born, Mr.
Huyot graduated from a Paris school of hotel administration in 1928 as the first in his class.
He earned a law degree in Paris and studied law for two years at Columbia University, where he also took courses to become a certified public accountant and real-estate appraiser.
He became a United States citizen in 1942.


Sanders Says the Braves Betrayed Him
DEION SANDERS says he left the Atlanta Braves because he was tired of riding the bench, and has accused the club of "the worst betrayal by a team in all sports history."
Sanders spoke out in an interview in yesterday's Atlanta Journal-Constitution, one day after he was placed on the disqualified list by the Braves for refusing to return to the team after attending his father's funeral.


Victory Claimed for Areas Burdened by City Projects
For the first time a state judge has blocked New York City from placing an undesirable project in an unwelcoming neighborhood under a provision of the City Charter that forces officials to consider whether neighborhoods already bear their fair share of the city's burdens, from shelters to sewage treatment plants.
If it withstands a city appeal, the State Supreme Court decision, which applies to a $35 million Sanitation Department garage and fueling operation under construction on the Lower East Side, would signal that communities seeking to keep out projects like mental health clinics, incinerators or prisons have a powerful new legal tool, participants in the suit and other legal observers said.


NEWS SUMMARY
International 2-6  RETURNING TO THE WEST BANK
Fifteen Palestinians who had been deported by Israel for as long as 20 years returned to a tumultuous heroes' welcome in the occupied West Bank as thousands of jubilant Palestinians greeted them.  1  SERBIA'S CHIEF HAS CRUCIAL ROLE
News analysis: The Bosnian Serbs are under increasing pressure from Serbia's President to agree to an international peace plan, and whether they finally come around depends on how hard he is going to press them.  1
The threat of U.S. force may have swayed the Serbs.  6
News analysis: Bill Clinton as Commander in Chief.  6  POLAND REVIVES PRIVATIZATION
The Polish Parliament approved a privatization plan for many of the country's state-owned industries, reversing a vote taken last month.
The program calls for turning a majority of shares in 600 enterprises over to 20 national investment funds.  3  COMMUNISTS ARE COURTED IN ITALY
In Italy's newest crisis, three former Communists have defected from the new Cabinet, casting doubt on its ability to survive a required parliamentary vote of confidence.  3  U.S.
SAYS WORLD TERROR IS FALLING
The number of international terrorist incidents dropped sharply in 1992, falling to the their lowest level in 17 years, the State Department said, with 361 incidents in 1992, a 35 percent decline from 567 in 1991.  4  SAUDIS LIMIT MONEY TO GROUPS
Saudi Arabia is restricting solicitation from Islamic groups because some money has ended up in the hands of radical Islamic movements hostile to Saudi policy.  4  GLOBAL ECONOMIC FUND IS STALLED
The chief of the International Monetary Fund proposed that it be allowed to create $50 billion in new money to help end a global economic slump, but he said several major nations opposed the plan.  5  IN CHINA, SCHOOLING IS UNEQUAL
While China is producing a crop of brilliant scientists at its best schools, it is producing another generation of semi-illiterates at rural schools because of uneven financing.  2  IN MEXICO, A POLITICAL FUROR
Protests are reverberating across Mexico after the governing party put off the long-awaited vote for a new state governor in Yucatan until after next year's presidential election.  5  National 7-10  CLINTON UNVEILS AID PROGRAM
President Clinton outlined a college aid plan that he said would "revive America's commitment to community and make affordable the cost of a college education." 1  ASPIN DISMISSES GENERAL
In his first public show of strength in disciplining the military, Defense Secretary Les Aspin dismissed an Air Force general who had supervised a troubled program to build a modern cargo airplane.  1  QUESTIONING HEALTH STRATEGY
Critics are emerging from left, right and center to question everything from the morality to the practicality of the Administration's "managed competition" strategy for restructuring health care.  1  HILLARY CLINTON BRIEFS SENATE
Hillary Rodham Clinton tried to signal a new bipartisan approach to health-care reform, conducting a private briefing of Senate Democrats and Republicans on the emerging plan.
But the initial lines of partisan division were apparent.  8  SKEPTICISM OVER JOB STATUS
Federal judges expressed profound skepticism about Mrs.
Clinton's assertion that she is a Federal "officer or employee" entitled to exclude the public from meetings of her health policy panel.  8  RETROACTIVE RIGHTS LAW?
The Administration argued to the Supreme Court that a civil rights law enacted in 1991 should apply to discrimination suits that were pending when the law was passed.  9  RENO VAULTS TO PROMINENCE
Washington at Work: A week after presiding over the ill-fated assault on the Branch Davidian cult, Janet Reno seems to have emerged not only unscathed, but also with her popularity enhanced.  9
Three selected to oversee inquiry on Waco raid.  9  MOST WANTED MAN: COUNTY JUDGE
Once the most feared man in this western Pennsylvania town, a judge convicted in 1989 of demanding bribes has become its most wanted fugitive, last seen in Slovenia.  7  VICTORY FOR MORE EXPENSIVE DRUG
A high noon shootout between two rival drugs for treating heart attacks has led to a surprising win for the less favored, according to a large international study.  7
Beliefs: A meeting showed how fickle a deity inclusiveness can be.  10  Metro Digest 25  THEFTS DELAY COMMUTERS
When the B, D and Q trains lurched to a halt in Brooklyn during yesterday's morning rush, few of the 100,000 riders who were delayed could have guessed the reason for their inconvenience: the theft of copper for sale to scrap dealers.  1  Sports 32-36  SELES STABBED DURING MATCH
Robert H. Brimberg, a Wall Street executive.
Valentina S. Grizodubova, an aviator for the Soviets.
Editorials/Op-Ed 22-23  Editorials  Janet Reno's warning on crime.
The school mess, getting worse.
A kiss is still a kiss.
Removing the stain in Italy.
Letters  Russell Baker: A decline of rage.
Lester Bernstein: Clinton's hundred-day headache.
R.
Taggart Murphy: Stronger yen, weaker U.S.
Flora Lewis: A 19th century Balkan solution.
Eric Mann: "Foreign aid" for Los Angeles.


No Filly Finishes Beyond Dispute in Kentucky Oaks
Eliza, the prize filly who was groomed to challenge colts in the Kentucky Derby, returned to racing other fillies today with the goal of reclaiming her rank at the head of the class.
But in a dramatic upset, she was outrun by Ogden Mills Phipps's Dispute by a length and a quarter in the 119th Kentucky Oaks.
The race was run before a crowd of 81,882 at Churchill Downs, a record for Oaks day.
The fans bet Eliza down to 3-5, just one month after she tested colts in the Santa Anita Derby and ran third in a brave but punishing performance.
After that, her owner, Allen E. Paulson, abandoned his idea of running her in the Derby.
Instead, he aimed for a rare sweep by running Eliza in the Oaks and coming back the next day with an entry of Corby and Diazo in the Derby.


Parish Left With Scars By Scandal
A statue of St.
Joseph holding the infant Jesus stands near the altar at St.
John the Evangelist Church here.
The Rev.
Richard T. Adams directed his young parishioners' attention to the statue's base this evening, and found a way to drive home a lesson about human weakness.
"Very often a priest is put on a pedestal, too," Father Adams told the sixth, seventh and eighth graders gathered at the Roman Catholic church.
"But that's not me over there. This is me here. I'm not some angel sent down to Goshen. St. Paul tells us all men and women have sinned and fallen short of the glory of God. We're all in this together."


Kenan Transport reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Katherine J. Clark, 95, Georgia Preservationist
Katherine Judkins Clark, co-founder of the Historic Savannah Foundation in Georgia, died Thursday at a retirement home in Hilton Head Island, S.C.
She was 95.
The cause was cancer, her family said.


Man Carrying $100,000 Slain in Robbery
A man carrying $100,000 in cash was shot and killed at West 37th Street and Broadway yesterday afternoon in the midst of a rush-hour crowd, the police said.
The man, Edward Hong, 31, was apparently headed to a textile store he owns at 1375 Broadway, near 37th Street, with the money in a briefcase when a man approached him, shot him once in the head and took the briefcase, the police said.


LCI International reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Gilbert Associates Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to April 2


Gainsco Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Federal Screw Works (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Oregon Steel Mills Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Suffolk County Argues Future Of Underused Office Building
When its revolving doors first spun 20 years ago, the H. Lee Dennison Building here was the glittering symbol of a maturing suburban government, intended to bring Suffolk County offices under one roof, once and for all.
Now the building is strangely quiet, and the County Executive and the County Legislature are at odds over whether to leave it half-empty or to spend up to $20 million for renovations, including asbestos removal.
Never Big Enough
A skyscraper by Long Island standards, the 12-story building, named after Suffolk County's first County Executive, still has the offices of top officials, including the current County Executive, Robert J. Gaffney.
Until a few months ago, it was a busy place, though never big enough to house a county government that grew by leaps and bounds, gobbling up rental space in a chaotic pattern.


Disney Stage Show To Be Done at the Met
"Disney's Symphonic Fantasy," a touring theatrical production that celebrates the music of classic Walt Disney films, will give a series of New York performances at the Metropolitan Opera House from July 6 through 18, the Met announced yesterday.
The production features 90 musicians from the American Symphony Orchestra, a 32-member chorus and 18 dancers.
More than 200 Disney characters, including Mickey Mouse, Donald Duck and Roger Rabbit, are portrayed in the stage show, which will come to the Met after its debut engagement at the Hollywood Bowl in Los Angeles.


M.S. Carriers Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Siliconix Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to April 4


Bumper to Bumper: Another Word for Work in Progress on the West Side


American National Insurance Co. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Maybelline Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Pop and Jazz in Review
Chris Anderson  Pianist Bradley's 70 University Place Greenwich Village Through tonight
It takes a minute or two to understand the pianist Chris Anderson's playing.
Mr.
Anderson has made a career out of the elliptical.
His playing suggests instead of explaining.
His phrases curl, then vanish, like cigarette smoke dissipating in a breeze.
There's rarely any conventional grace or logic to his improvisations, and to understand them takes some thought.
Where most jazz improvising is aimed outward at an audience, Mr.
Anderson has developed an inward language, and it's brilliant.


Cabot Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Review/Dance; 'Sleeping Beauty' as a Training Ground
Peter Martins's version of "The Sleeping Beauty" for the New York City Ballet, which continues through tomorrow night, is as impressive as ever with its innovative approach to a 19th-century classic.
The action is streamlined, the music is played faster than usual and the spacious sets suggest that production values alone could carry the day.
Yet this "Beauty" also serves as a school or training ground for classical dancing.
Principals and soloists mature in roles that are more difficult than they seem and debuts are ceaseless.
Nikolaj Hubbe will dance for the first time as the Prince tonight at the New York State Theater; he tried his hand at the production's mixture of choreography by Marius Petipa and Mr.
Martins in last Sunday's matinee performance of the "Jewels" divertissement.


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY ADDICTS PREYING ON COPPER WIRE
When B, D and Q trains lurched to a halt in Brooklyn during rush hour, few of the 100,000 or so riders who were delayed for up to two hours could have guessed the cause of their inconvenience.
A section of copper cable wire had been stolen, disrupting signals and causing the delay.
Transit officials say that this kind of theft is growing.
Drug addicts, according to the transit police, are gnawing at the infrastructure to sell pieces of copper to scrap dealers.
Page 1.


Qualcomm Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 28


Plains Petroleum Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Citation Insurance (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Results Plus
GOLF Hammond in the Rain Donnie Hammond finished his rain-delayed first round with a five-under 67 and then shot a 65 for 136 yesterday to take the clubhouse lead by two strokes in the rain-plagued Shell Houston Open in The Woodlands, Tex.
Seventy-eight players remained on the course yesterday trying to complete the second round when tournament officials suspended play for the second time in two days, this time because of the threat of lightning.
Rain postponed Thursday's first round, and yesterday's start was delayed by fog.
Hammond had a two-shot lead over Loren Roberts and Payne Stewart. (AP) Zarley Shoots a 62: Despite a final-hole bogey, Kermit Zarley tied the Desert Inn course record with a 10-under-par 62 that gave him a four-shot lead after the opening round of the Las Vegas Senior Classic. (AP) HOCKEY Russia Beats Canada Russia rallied from a 3-1 deficit and defeated Team Canada, 7-4, last night in the semifinals of the world championships in Munich, Germany.
The Russians advanced to tomorrow's final against two-time defending champion Sweden, which beat the Czech Republic, 4-3, on a goal by Thomas Rundqvist 8 minutes 38 seconds into overtime.
After four straight Russian goals against Bill Ranford of the Edmonton Oilers had turned the 3-1 Canadian lead into a 5-3 deficit, Eric Lindros of the Philadelphia Flyers scored his tournament-high 11th goal to bring Canada to 5-4 just 39 seconds into the third period.
But Valery Karpov responded with a goal three minutes later for Russia.
Team Canada, coached by the recently hired Rangers coach, Mike Keenan, never threatened again.
Canada last won the world championships in 1961.


Classical Music in Review
Bradley Brookshire  Harpsichordist Mannes College of Music
A listener had to admire Bradley Brookshire's stamina and sense of responsibility on Sunday afternoon.
As a faculty recital project, the harpsichordist planned to play the second book of Bach's "Well-Tempered Clavier" in two concerts, the first on Sunday, the conclusion on May 9.
But because of a mix-up, two starting times were announced for the first concert.
Audiences turned up at each published time, so with just a short break after his 2:30 P.M. performance, Mr.
Brookshire played the concert again at 4 o'clock.


Review/Dance; A Role for Allen Ginsberg
In the past, Allen Ginsberg's poetry has often raged and mourned.
But Mr.
Ginsberg was in a genial mood when he collaborated with Cyndi Lee on "The Beat Suite," a new work presented by the Cyndi Lee Dance Company on Sunday afternoon at the 14th Street Dance Center of the Educational Alliance's Emanu-El Midtown Y.M.-Y.W.H.A.
Ms.
Lee's choreography was equally amiable.
At various times, the dancers (Matthew Carmody, Amy Cox, Eric Diamond, Steffany George and Philip Karg) wandered wistfully, bounced up and down, and set their limbs happily twitching while Mr.
Ginsberg, seated to their left, recited brief poems about such subjects as a melancholy, but never tragic, night and the joys of meditation.
One poem even managed to be jolly about broken bones.
The accompaniment included music by Mr.
Ginsberg, played live on the guitar by Steven Taylor, and recorded pieces by Michael Blair, Bill Frisell and Steve Swallow.


Audrey Hepburn Service
A memorial service for the actress Audrey Hepburn, who died at 63 on Jan. 20, will be held on Tuesday, the anniversary of her birth, at the Fifth Avenue Presbyterian Church, Fifth Avenue and 55th Street, at 12:30 P.M.
The New York Metropolitan Committee for Unicef is sponsoring the service and a daylong film tribute (at the Angelika 57 Theater, 225 West 57th Street) to Miss Hepburn, who traveled the world for the organization.


Finding Miracles, One Child at a Time
THE Carmona home on Bryant Avenue in the West Farms area of the Bronx is an active force field powered by love.
Alicia, who is 8 and has just come home from school, wants to ride her bike.
Taisha, who is 6, wants someone to read to her from her favorite book.
Viola, who is 5, is dancing.
Selena, who is 4, jumps and Cecillio, the 2-year-old who is nicknamed Papuch, is on the couch babbling in a private language.


Blacks Accuse Jews In 'Show Boat' Revival
"Show Boat Hurts," reads one picketer's sign.
Others say: "Stop This Racist Play" and "Terrible Use of Taxpayers' Money." A statement from the Coalition to Stop Show Boat declares that "the entire play, its plot and characterizations demean black life and culture."
A score of people, mainly blacks, are on the sidewalks around a nearly completed performing arts center in the Toronto suburb of North York.
The center's three theaters, one with treelike pillars merging into a gold-domed ceiling and another modeled on Amsterdam's Concertgebouw, and a 5,000-square-foot art gallery make the arts complex one of the largest in North America and the first to be built in Canada since the 1960's.


A Principal's Promise Puts Her on the Roof


David Waymer, Defensive Back In N.F.L. for 13 Years, Dies at 34
David Waymer, a durable defensive back for 13 seasons in the National Football League, collapsed and died yesterday at his farm home outside Mooresville, N.C.
A preliminary autopsy showed that Waymer, who was 34, had recently ingested cocaine.
Waymer, who played last season for the Los Angeles Raiders, suffered seizures and collapsed shortly before 8 A.M. while holding his 13-month-old son, David 3d, his wife, B. J., told the paramedics.
He was taken to Lake Norman Regional Medical Center in Mooresville, where he was pronounced dead.


Pop and Jazz in Review
Bob Geldof  Bottom Line Greenwich Village
Although the Irish singer and songwriter Bob Geldof has enjoyed considerable international success, he has had only two minor hits in America, where he is better-known as the organizer of the Band Aid and Live Aid benefit concerts than for his music.
Mr.
Geldof's failure to engage an American audience is odd, considering that he has a songwriting talent and stage charisma that are comparable to those of Sting and Mark Knopfler, fellow British pop stars who have had enormous trans-Atlantic success.


Micro Warehouse Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


CHRONICLE
FLEUR COWLES, the magazine creator, editor, author, painter and designer, wouldn't think of staying anywhere but at the Lowell when she comes to New York, and now she will be able to stay in a suite with her name attached to it.
FOUAD CHARTOUNI, owner of the quietly luxurious hotel on East 63d Street, has dedicated a suite on the 14th floor to her, and he and his wife, Dina, invited 60 of her friends to see it Wednesday evening.
"It sounds ridiculous," Ms.
Cowles said as she greeted guests.
"We have a castle in Spain, a place in Sussex and an apartment at the Albany" -- the renowned building in London.
"And," she added, "I can't wait to get back here."


American Annuity Group reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


FirstFed Financial reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Paragon Trade Brands Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 28


Mets Meet to No Avail As Young's Skid Hits 17
The doors to the Mets' clubhouse were closed for nearly an hour.
When they opened, players emerged without speaking, the manager came out visibly drained by the meeting, the top-ranking organization official walked off smiling politely, but grimly.
"It feels like August," said Gerry Hunsicker, the director of baseball operations.


Caraustar Industries (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Aftertaste of Scandal in the Schools
On the day after the latest scandal broke over a South Bronx school board long known more for patronage than pedagogy, Eugenia Irizarry took stock of her term on the board and pronounced it a failure.
After 10 years as an active parent in Community School District 12, including four on the board, the hardest years of her life, Ms.
Irizarry, decided not to run in the board election next Tuesday -- and she says she has not found another candidate worthy of her vote.


Rival Co. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Review/Film; Trying to Kill One's Way To a Title
The 15th Duke of Bournemouth has never had an easy time of it.
When he was a baby in the 1960's, his father, the hippie 14th duke, and his American mother mislaid him in a restaurant.
As an adult named Tommy (Eric Idle), the adopted son of a Pakistani family living in London, he continues to get the short end of the stick.
He's a passive fellow until the day he finds out that he's the rightful heir to the Bournemouth title.
It's then that Tommy takes action.
He schemes to kill off the bogus 15th duke, a nervy American nitwit named Henry (Rick Moranis), who also happens to be his best friend.
Though it's never really clear how Henry fell into his good fortune, don't look cockeyed gift horses in the mouth.


Corrections
An obituary on April 20 about Gottlieb Hammer, a financial consultant and active supporter of Israel who died on April 19 at the Miami Heart Institute in Florida, misstated his age, the cause of death and the identities of some survivors.
A corrected version appears today on page 31.


Riley Counsels Calm On the Journey to June
The first shot of the playoffs was fired last night by Reggie Miller, a 20-foot jumper.
Miller's man on defense, John Starks, came right back with one of his own.
So right away, those two had something in common to talk about.
Starks soon got called for bumping Miller in front of the Indiana Pacers' bench.
Miller said something to the effect of: don't even bother to check me.
Starks yapped back.
From the Pacers' bench, clearly heard by Starks, came the suggestion that he "shut his C.B.A. butt up and play."


Dart Group (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


Curtain Goes Up, and Knicks Nearly Fall Down
The Knicks were severely tested.
Charles Oakley was ejected.
But thanks to Patrick Ewing, who made a game-deciding 12-foot fadeaway jumper with 10.8 seconds to play, the Knicks managed to escape Madison Square Garden with a 107-104 victory over the Indiana Pacers in Game 1 of their three-of-five-game playoff series last night.
Reggie Miller missed a 26-foot 3-pointer at the buzzer that could have sent the game into overtime.
Squandering a 19-point third-quarter lead, the Knicks found themselves nervously finishing a game that many people expected them to waltz through.
New York won 60 games this season, while the Pacers (41-41) barely made the playoffs as the eighth-seeded team in the East.
Yet with two and a half minutes to play tonight, the Pacers put together a 10-1 run, turning a 9-point deficit into a tie game and setting up the pressure-packed ending.


Wolford Follows Signing With Surgery
WILL WOLFORD, who became the N.F.L.'s highest paid lineman when he recently signed with the Indianapolis Colts, was in the hospital recovering from surgery as the team opened its three-day minicamp yesterday.


Bankers Life Holding Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Paralyzed Player Shows Improvement
A Serbian basketball player was reported to be improving yesterday after spinal surgery to repair a neck injury suffered when he slammed his head into a concrete block in anger at a referee's decision.
Doctors at KAT Hospital in Athens said SLOBODAN JANKOVIC, a 30-year-old center, may recover use of his arms and legs as a result of the operation late Thursday.
Jankovic rammed his head against a cement support of the basket after being called for a fifth foul that put him out of a semifinal game in the Greek championship playoffs on Wednesday night.


Sensormatic Electronics Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Robert H. Brimberg, Executive Of Securities Business, Dies at 64
Robert H. Brimberg, a Wall Street executive who was known for the lunches he held so that major investors could meet each other and talk about their business, collapsed and died at a restaurant in Manhattan Thursday night.
He was 64.
The cause was cardiac arrest, his family said.


Judge Refuses to Dismiss Suit Against Mayor on Crown Hts.
A Federal judge refused yesterday to dismiss a suit charging that Mayor David N. Dinkins and other top city officials deliberately withheld police protection while Hasidic residents of Crown Heights were attacked by blacks during racial violence there in 1991.
The decision would move the case into the discovery phase, when depositions are taken.
The judge said that lawyers for the plaintiffs -- the area's Hasidic community and the estate of Yankel Rosenbaum, a Hasidic scholar from Australia who was stabbed to death by a group of blacks -- could question the Mayor and the former Police Commissioner, Lee P. Brown, about their actions in responding to the four days of violence.


Ionics Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Helmerich &amp; Payne reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Ambac Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Aspin Dismisses General as Head Of Plane Project
In his first public show of strength in disciplining the military, Defense Secretary Les Aspin today relieved an Air Force general of his duties for mismanaging a troubled program to build a new cargo airplane.
Mr.
Aspin also ordered that two other Air Force generals and a senior civilian official involved in the purchase of the C-17 cargo plane be barred from any further involvement in buying new weapons.


White-Knuckle Time Is Near for Hogue and Islanders
With the injured Pierre Turgeon out of the Patrick Division finals against the Pittsburgh Penguins, the Islanders turned their concern today to Benoit Hogue, the other part of their French-Canadian connection.
Hogue skated in practice, but didn't use his stick to control the puck because the swollen knuckle on the index finger of his right hand is more sore than before.
Hogue injured the knuckle twice in the first-round series against the Washington Capitals, which the Islanders won, four games to two.
The first injury came in Game 3 when Washington's Kevin Hatcher slashed him.
Ed Tyburski, the Islanders' trainer, said there was no fracture but said the knuckle has an arthritic condition.
The second injury came Wednesday night, in Game 6, and it was related to the Turgeon injury.


Fruehauf Trailer Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Allied Group Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Full House Of Horses Is Set for Derby
On the eve of battle, 19 horses and their trainers tried to impose some calm on the backstretch of Churchill Downs today as final preparations were made for the 119th Kentucky Derby, which most of the trainers agreed was a free-for-all with no towering favorite.
There was positive news from the weather forecasters, who said that Saturday would be partly cloudy and warm, with a high in the 70's and a 30 percent chance of showers late in the afternoon.
But no storms were predicted, so a fast track is likely when the horses are loaded into the adjoining starting gates at 5:40 P.M. to race a mile and a quarter before 125,000 or more spectators and an international television audience.


Review/Film; Pick a Fantasy, Any Fantasy
"Sidekicks" is one of the more far-fetched examples of what might be called the 97-pound-weakling school of film making.
The weakling in this case is Barry Gabrewski (Jonathan Brandis), an asthmatic high school student who turns himself into a karate champion capable of smashing nine bricks with the side of a skinny forearm.
Never mind that he looks almost as frail at the end of the film as at the beginning or that the transformation from mouse to Hercules seems to take place in only a few weeks.
Bullied by his fellow students and jeered at by his gym teacher, Barry, at the beginning of the film, spends much of his time lost in elaborate fantasies in which he and his hero, the action star Chuck Norris, execute pyrotechnical feats of cinematic bravery.
These daydreams, which usually feature the people in Barry's life, are extravagantly costumed parodies of assorted genres, from westerns to war movies.
As directed by Aaron Norris, Chuck Norris's brother, they are meant to be funny.
But they are so broadly acted, unfocused and pointlessly ornate that they sink under their own weight.


Envirosource (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Rogers Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to April 4


Chiquita Brands International Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Third State Trooper Arrested In Evidence-Tampering Case
A state police lieutenant who oversaw criminal investigations in seven upstate counties was charged today with evidence-tampering.
He is the third trooper to be arrested in a growing scandal that has shaken the state police.
The lieutenant, Craig D. Harvey, was suspended without pay after he pleaded not guilty in Delhi Court in Delaware County to fabricating fingerprints in a highly publicized double murder in 1986.
He was released on $25,000 bail.


COMPANY BRIEFS
BANCO NACIONAL DE MEXICO S.N.C., , Mexico City, agreed to swap 11 hotels and 395,000 acres of land for a 20 percent interest in the real estate and tourism developer Grupo Situr S.A.
CLARCOR INC., Rockford, Ill., has purchased Airguard Industries Inc. and expects the acquisition to increase its annual sales between $20 million to $25 million.


Peoples Energy Corp.  reports earnings for 12mos to March 31


Pop and Jazz in Review
Bustan Abraham Symphony Space Broadway at 95th Street
Musical borders are never as clear as national ones, even when national ones are themselves disputed.
That point was made without a word when Bustan Abraham, an eight-piece Israeli group of Jewish and Arab musicians, performed on Sunday night at Symphony Space in a concert presented by the World Music Institute.
"Bustan" means "garden" in both Hebrew and Arabic.
The octet plays Arabic instruments (oud, an ancestor of the lute; qanun, a 75-string Persian zither; baglama, a long-necked Turkish lute; darbukkah, a goblet-shaped hand drum, and daff, a tambourine) along with violin, flute, guitar, banjo, electric bass and assorted percussion, including cymbals and conga drums.


Sports of The Times; Imus Scores On Turnover By Sealy
POOR Malik Sealy.
The Indiana Pacers rookie lost his 75-page playbook/scouting report on the New York Knicks Thursday at Kennedy Airport.
By dawn yesterday, Don Imus, WFAN-AM's morning dybbuk, was reading aloud from it.
And he wouldn't give it back.


CHRONICLE
More than 200 former editors and reporters of The Ram, the Fordham University student newspaper, will get a jump on the college reunion season when they meet today to celebrate the paper's 75th anniversary.
The commemoration at the Rose Hill campus, in the Bronx, will include a panel on "Campus Journalism and the First Amendment Shuffle" and a dinner-dance.
And no doubt, there will be more than a touch of nostalgia.
The oldest living editor in chief, JOHN DEVLIN, 92, class of '23, is among those returning to the campus.


New York State Comptroller's Last Day on the Job


First Western Financial Corp.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


ANB Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Mentor Graphics (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Pop and Jazz in Review
Carol van Dijk  CBGB East Village
"The hell with common sense, it just won't do," Carol van Dijk sang on Thursday night at CBGB with her band, Bettie Serveert.
Love isn't always sensible, and the tension between passion and logic gives Bettie Serveert a limitless source for plain-spoken, wary love songs.
Ms. van Dijk's narrators can be anxious, defiant, affectionate, resilient and forgiving; they're clearheaded but never cold.
"If we could turn back the time," Ms. van Dijk sang, "we would have made the same mistake all over again."


Athlone Industries Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Review/Film; Mazursky's Sweet-and-Sour View of Hollywood
"The Pickle" is Paul Mazursky's comedy about a movie director who, though he is so famous that strangers often recognize him and talk about his work, has still been persuaded to sell out.
At the behest of a smug, overconfident young studio executive, Harry Stone (Danny Aiello) has been talked into making a movie about a giant pickle that flies through space.
"I didn't direct a movie," Harry says.
"I committed a crime."
Accordingly, "The Pickle" has fun with the kinds of studio high-rollers who keep too many cactuses in their offices, watch their weight fanatically and never make an independent decision when they can fall back on audience opinion polls instead.
The unceremonious way in which Mr.
Mazursky's film arrived here yesterday, opening at the Beekman and other theaters without benefit of advance press screenings, may more or less prove this veteran director's point.


'Tango Pasion' Closing
"Tango Pasion," a revue conceived by Mel Howard and choreographed by Hector Zaraspe, is to close after the matinee tomorrow at the Long acre Theater, 220 West 48th Street, Manhattan.
The matinee tomorrow will be the fifth regular performance of the show; it had six previews.


Halliburton Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Forschner Group Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


American Ecology (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Sylvia A. Boone, 52, First Black Woman Given Tenure at Yale
Sylvia A. Boone, a scholar of African and women's art and the first black woman to be granted a tenured professorship at Yale University, died on Tuesday at her home on campus.
She was 52.
The cause was heart failure, said a friend, Vera Wells.


No Headline
"It's going to change the psyche of everyone associated with the sport. We've had threats before and tried to take all possible precautions. Somehow it seemed remote until this moment. It's no longer a threat, it's a reality." -- GERRY SMITH, executive director of the Women's Tennis Association, on the stabbing of Monica Seles.  [ 35:3. ]


INVG Mortgage Securities Corp. reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Valentina S. Grizodubova, 83, A Pioneer Aviator for the Soviets
Valentina S. Grizodubova, a World War II air commander and pioneer aviator who was known as the Soviet Union's Amelia Earhart, died on Wednesday in Russia.
She was 83.
Itar-Tass news agency attributed her death to complications of a stomach ulcer.


Israel Land Development Co. reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Intertape Polymer Group reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Corrections
An article yesterday about a lawsuit by Coretta Scott King against Boston University over custody of the papers of her husband, the Rev.
Dr.
Martin Luther King Jr., referred incorrectly to a former adviser of his.
The adviser, Harold H. Wachtel, is still living.


Gottlieb Hammer, 81, Financial Consultant
Gottlieb Hammer, a financial consultant and active supporter of Jewish Palestine and of Israel, died on April 19 at the Miami Heart Institute in Florida.
He was 81 and lived in Bay Harbor Islands, Fla.
He died of post-operative complications, his family said.
Mr.
Hammer retired in 1974 as executive chairman of the United Israel Appeal in New York.
The agency is the principal beneficiary of annual campaigns on behalf of Jewish causes in Israel and elsewhere.


Buried Stumps Are Blamed For Sinkhole
Buried tree stumps and branches were blamed today for the ground collapse at the North Brunswick Manor Apartments that took the life of a 7-year-old boy last week.
But it is unlikely that anyone will have to answer for the death of Kwame M. Sharif because prosecutors cannot find any state law that was violated and in any case it is unclear who buried the debris here.


It's Good! Doty Gives Final Approval
A Federal judge gave final approval yesterday to the legal settlement that set up the National Football League's new free-agency system, rejecting complaints from dozens of players that the plan limits their earning power.


For Giants' Last Draft Pick, It's Kickoffs, Not Law School
The last Giant to pass up law school for football was Ray Handley, who in 1991 began a troubled two years as the head coach.
Now the Giants have a kicker, Todd Peterson, putting law school aside to play pro football, perhaps only to kick off.
Last Monday, in the last round of the National Football League draft, the Giants took Peterson.
Today, when they began a two-day minicamp for rookies, they got a look at this onetime prospective naval officer who changed directions.


Schroeder Will Put On the Stripes
JAY SCHROEDER, a starter for most of his 10 seasons in the N.F.L., has signed with the Cincinnati Bengals and will replace BOOMER ESIASON as the backup to DAVID KLINGLER.
Terms of the contract were not disclosed.
The 31-year-old Schroeder had been with the Los Angeles Raiders since 1988. (AP)


TRANSACTIONS
Football National Football League  CINCINNATI BENGALS -- Signed Jay Schroeder, quarterback.


Ryan Might Be Back Sooner Than Expected
NOLAN RYAN, who had knee surgery on April 15, hopes to return from the disabled list next weekend.
Ryan accelerated his rehabilitation program by 95 pitches in throwing batting practice Friday to Texas teammates BUTCH DAVIS, DAVID HULSE, JEFF HUSON and JEFF FRYE.


APRIL 25-MAY 1: Marching in Washington; Gay People Demonstrate, In Pride and in Fear
The last six months have been exhilarating and frightening for lesbian and gay Americans.
They literally danced in the streets with the election of Bill Clinton, who had campaigned as a supporter of gay rights.
Then they watched in anger and fear as the country began to debate allowing homosexuals in the military -- a debate that has portrayed them as sexual predators lurking in showers.
Last Sunday, the mix of emotions was evident in Washington as hundreds of thousands rallied to celebrate their homosexuality and demand protection from discrimination.


Declare Victory, Hand Off, Slip Out, Cross Fingers
WHEN former President Bush deployed American troops to assure the delivery of relief supplies in Somalia as his Presidency reached its end, he spoke much of moral imperatives and of taking a stand.
In those days, he meant to signal Washington's unwillingness to remain idle while a handful of marauding warlords kept food from 2 million people who risked starving to death.
It was language reminiscent of Desert Storm, in which Mr.
Bush vowed that United States forces would teach Saddam Hussein a thing or two about stealing the territory of a neighboring country.
But last year, Iran quietly took over four islands belonging to the United Arab Emirates and deported their people, with hardly a protest from the United States.
The lessons of Desert Storm appeared to have struck deeper in Washington than in the gulf.


Be It Ever So Humble: A Prime-Time Baedeker
MARY RICHARDS AND HER friends at WJM-TV may have lived and worked in Minneapolis, but you would scarcely have known it from the "Mary Tyler Moore Show" scripts.
Things have changed: Beginning, perhaps, with "Dallas" or "Miami Vice" a decade or so ago, the setting of a television series ceased to be an incidental matter.
These days, a show may be set not just in a particular city but sometimes in a neighborhood, even a high-status ZIP code, and scripts are saturated with site-specific details.
In fact, the location may be as important as the characters themselves.
And even if Cicely or Evening Shade are fictional places, they belong quite precisely to one of the 50 real states (although apparently no one would think of actually filming them there).


Smart Enough to Know Better, Funny Enough Not to Care
At the end, he was just looking for a hug.
He will be that way forever now, the brash young coach in the video age, zig-zagging across the floor of University Arena in Albuquerque, N.M., searching through the madness for a hug when all the partners had been taken.
Jim Valvano's team had won one of the most improbable national basketball championships of all, and although he could not have known it on the night of April 4, 1983 as he scrambled across the floor of the arena known as the Pit, he was already wrong about one thing.


Adding Touches From the Far East to Spice Up a Barbecue
AS warm weather and the grilling season approach, the trend toward giving barbecue a whiff of the Far East appears to be continuing.
Books about Asian grilling are in stores, and an increasing number of prepared barbecue sauces and marinades are flavored with ginger, sesame oil, peanuts and soy sauce.
Using these products with standard barbecue items like steaks, chicken breast and fresh tuna on the grill, along with corn on the cob and tomato salads, amounts to East-West cooking, often called Pacific Rim, the marriage of Asian and Western styles and flavors.
This kind of cooking has been in the news for some time, especially in restaurants.


A Word From the F.A.S.B. on Stock Options
To the Editor:
In "Leave Those Stock Options Alone" (Letters, April 18), George H. Sollman of the Centigram Communications Corporation was correct in implying that the Financial Accounting Standards Board's project about company stock options is not about executive pay and that options are "a valid and dynamic form of compensation."


Adding Touches From the Far East to Spice Up a Barbecue
AS warm weather and the grilling season approach, the trend toward giving barbecue a whiff of the Far East appears to be continuing.
Books about Asian grilling are in stores, and an increasing number of prepared barbecue sauces and marinades are flavored with ginger, sesame oil, peanuts and soy sauce.
Using these products with standard barbecue items like steaks, chicken breast and fresh tuna on the grill, along with corn on the cob and tomato salads, amounts to East-West cooking, often called Pacific Rim, the marriage of Asian and Western styles and flavors.
This kind of cooking has been in the news for some time, especially in restaurants.


olie Hammer, C. M. Kinsolving Jr.
Jolie B. Hammer, a government affairs consultant, was married on Monday to Charles M. Kinsolving Jr., a former Democratic district leader and a business executive in New York.
Former Judge Millard L. Midonick of New York County Surrogate Court performed the ceremony at the home of the bride's mother in New York.
The bride is employed by the New York law firm of Rosenman &amp; Colin.
She graduated from Brandeis University.
She was the Deputy Borough President of Manhattan from 1974 to 1978, and a special assistant to New York Deputy Mayor Robert F. Wagner Jr. in the Koch administration.


Anne Groton, C. R. Jacobs
Anne Stilson Groton, a daughter of Calvert C. Groton of Providence, R.I., and the late Mary Jane C. Groton, was married yesterday to Christopher Reid Jacobs, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Thomas D. Jacobs of Portland, Me.
The Rev.
Daniel Burke performed the ceremony at St.
Martin's Episcopal Church in Providence.
Mrs.
Jacobs is the vice president for taxation at D'Arcy Masius Benton &amp; Bowles, the New York advertising agency.
She graduated from Middlebury College and received an M.B.A. from New York University, as did her husband.
The bride also received a master's degree in taxation from Pace University.


Your Home: Reserves; Outrage At a Twist In Taxes
INCOME generated by reserve funds set aside by condominium and homeowner associations to cover future capital expenditures has always been taxable.
But monthly charges and other assessments being deposited into the fund were never taxed.
That, however, may no longer hold true.


CAPTURING THE BUTTERFLY
David McClintick's excellent article "Capturing the Butterfly" (April 4) was shocking beyond belief -- not because of Marlene Navarro and the Colombian drug cartel, but because of the way in which the United States Drug Enforcement Administration, the Internal Revenue Service and the members of the D.E.A. undercover team treated Robert Darias, who put his life on the line to help catch Navarro.
Have they no shame?
There is a lesson to be learned.
Never, never trust or cooperate with any Government authority, especially law enforcement.


Streetscapes: 950-952 Bergen Street; Semi-Preserving a Semi-Landmark
THERE is a vast middle ground of older buildings that are not capital-L Landmarks but that are good enough to appreciate.
Typically, their preservation rests almost exclusively on the inclination of the property owner, which varies erratically with cash and circumstance.
But the New York Landmarks Conservancy's City Ventures Fund is making a difference in this field, with grants like one to a lovable but non-Landmark pair of apartment houses at 950-952 Bergen Street in the Bedford-Stuyvesant section of Brooklyn.
The Conservancy gave $56,000 to a nonprofit developer specifically to preserve the very unusual projecting sheet-metal window bays.


Barbara Oif, Ronald Stack
Barbara Lee Oif, a lawyer, was married last evening to Ronald A. Stack, a filmmaker.
Cantor Debra Stein-Davidson performed the ceremony at the home of the bridegroom's mother on Shelter Island, L.I.
Mrs.
Oif Stack is the general counsel of the Applied Companies, a real estate development and management company in Hoboken, N.J.
She graduated from the University of Cincinnati and received a law degree from Fordham University.


Questioning Transvestism
To the Editor:
I was outraged to see that the entire front page of the Styles section was given over to a depiction of Angie Xtravaganza, a transvestite, wearing feminine garments.
Has everyone at The Times become so morally dead that not one mention that transvestitism is a psychological illness that causes people to engage in degenerate behavior was made in the article?


Editorial Notebook; The 'Ancient Hatreds' Trap
Not long ago, quite by accident, I came across a report on the two Balkan wars in 1912-13 prepared by a commission of inquiry sponsored by the Carnegie Endowment for International Peace.
The library card showed that the 400-page report had rarely been consulted since the book was shelved in early 1914.
Yet its pages evoked an instant shock of recognition:
"The Muslim population endured during the early weeks of the war a period of lawless vengeance and unmeasured suffering. In many districts the Muslim villages were systematically burned by their Christian neighbors. . . . The burning of villages and the exodus of defeated populations is a normal and traditional incident in all Balkan wars."


WESTCHESTER GUIDE
DESIGNER SHOWHOUSE
A house at 265 Hardscrabble Road in Briarcliff Manor, built by Ella Steinway Schmidt of the Steinway piano family, in 1914, has been transformed into a Designer Showhouse, opening next Sunday through May 31.
Visiting hours will be Mondays through Saturdays from 10 A.M. to 4 P.M., Sundays from noon to 6 P.M. and Thursdays until 8 P.M.
Tickets will be $15 in advance at any Peoples Bank or $20 at the door.
Proceeds will help build Science Port, the participatory science museum for children scheduled to open at Playland Park in late 1995.


Conversations/Angela Oh; Giving Voice to the Hurt And Betrayal of Korean-Americans
ONE year after the rioting that devastated the Korean community here, Angela Oh, a prominent Korean-American lawyer, has decided to learn to read and write the language of her parents.
She can speak Korean, said Miss Oh, a busy, no-nonsense professional who, as president of the Korean American Bar Association of Southern California, has emerged as a spokesman for her community.
Learning to read it would also allow her to read the documents of her clients.
It took her a while to confess: "Really, it's on a personal level. I want to read novels. You know that?  That's my goal. Yes, I want to read novels and I want to read the poetry of the people."


L.I.E. Walls and Balancing Interests
In response to Paul Briamonte's letter  [ March 14 ] , we wish to point out that the need for sound barriers along the Long Island Expressway would indeed be necessary if the State Transportation Department is allowed to expand the proposed project up to the rear areas of the residents who reside along the path of the L.I.E.
The Mayor's subcommittee on the proposed L.I.E. expansion represents Nassau County Village Officials Association -- the 64 incorporated villages in Nassau County and also includes the County Executive Gulotta, North Hempstead Supervisor Zwirn and Oyster Bay Supervisor Yevoli.
We have met regularly with Transportation Commissioner Franklin E. White and the regional director, Jim Kuzloski, and his staff to put forth our united position regarding this project.


It Keeps On Getting Away
To the Sports Editor:
While all fishermen realize that a fish is the only thing that grows after it is dead (or caught and released), Adam Clymer's story about Ernie Schweibert's "31-pound landlocked salmon" caught on the Traful River in Patagonia, Argentina ("Waking Up Early Isn't the Answer," The Times, April 18) several years ago needs some airing.


Republicans Too Have Campaign Reform Plan
To the Editor:
A more apt title for your April 25 editorial "Bob Dole Versus Political Reform" would have been "The New York Times Versus the Truth."
Nowhere in the editorial do you mention that Senate Republicans have introduced their own comprehensive campaign finance reform proposal -- one that bans political action committees, restricts both party and nonparty "soft money," prohibits the practice of bundling campaign contributions and improves political competition by allowing the political parties to give early "seed money" to viable challengers.
Our proposal accomplishes all of these reform goals without asking the taxpayers to contribute a single dime.


When Coaches Cross the Line
Female athletes and their parents are complaining in increasing numbers about sexual abuse and harassment from male coaches, prompting the coaches themselves to examine their own roles in a very delicate power relationship.
"From what we're hearing, there are a lot of these cases out there," said Kathryn Reith, assistant executive director of advocacy for the Women's Sports Foundation in East Meadow, L.I.
"They are often hard to document, and people often aren't willing to go on record. But this year we've gone from zero cases to at least two a month."


How Many Parts To a State?
Caesar's Gaul was divided into three parts, and three is good enough for Iowa too, with its 56,280 square miles.
Iowa's Division of Tourism austerely if mundanely labels the three slices Western, Central and Eastern.
But clarity and modesty do not appeal to all states.
Massachusetts, with 8,257 square miles, divides itself, for tourism purposes, into 13 parts.
Connecticut, with 5,009 square miles and eight counties, holds the apparent record, with 19 tourism districts, but this enables the state to label one district the Quiet Corner.
Rhode Island, at 1,214 square miles, has five regions, but they are simply its five counties.


MEN IN UNIFORM
Frank Rich's Endpaper "Men in Uniform" (Public Stages, April 11) notes that television coverage of the gays-in-the-military debate always includes "that ubiquitous, grainy film of naked soldiers filing into a shower," a shot that he says "could pass for soft-core gay porn." This suggests that gay males have a certain interest in viewing naked men, hardly a surprising thought.
Heterosexual men have exactly the same affection for female nudes.


State Health Bill Interests Clinton
On Wednesday, a few days after this state passed a universal health-care bill similiar to the plan favored by the Clinton Administration, the President called Gov.
Mike Lowry of Washington to the White House for advice on how he won approval for the plan.
All the elements that are shaping the President's health-care plan, to be released later this month, were in place here: an army of lobbyists that warned of dire consequences, radio talk-show hosts who orchestrated a flood of negative phone calls and a minority party that refused to budge.


Middle Schoolers Turn Film Makers
IN a darkened television-studio control room, two directors wearing headsets and microphones murmur rapid commands to the camera crew, who are swiftly executing tight shots and close-ups in the studio.
In a nearby videotape editing room, some editors are examining the finished footage of a fashion video, carefully making corrections and experimenting with different images.
Meanwhile, an outdoor camera crew struggles on an unseasonably blustery day to finish taking exterior shots of downtown White Plains for the closing credits of the fashion video.


Corrections
An essay by Terry Anderson in The Times Magazine on April 4 about the Freedom of Information Act overstated the rarity of such laws.
A number of countries -- including Canada, Australia and France -- have similar ones; the American law is not unique.


Relighting The Firesign
The last time the Firesign Theater performed, in 1981, it faced what seemed the insurmountable fact of its own obsolescence.
A decade earlier, the four Firesigns -- Philip Austin, Peter Bergman, David Ossman and Philip Proctor -- had ruled the world of underground radio and smoky all-night listening sessions around college dorm-room turntables.
Their densely textured, politically charged, pun-filled and omnivorously allusive "ear-plays" broke from conventional stand-up schtick the way "Sergeant Pepper's" transcended Top 40.
The four Firesigns (all fire signs, though the name also had nice subversive overtones) became comic seers to the generation that started attending college, smoking dope and questioning authority when Richard M. Nixon was President.
By the early 1980's, that generation had mutated into yuppiedom and the Firesign Theater seemed as dated as the media of its success: underground radio and vinyl records.
A different comedy was booming, blunt and visceral, filled with cocaine jokes instead of surreal stoned narratives.
The new crowds lacked the inclination, or maybe the attention span, to follow Firesign's long, loopy, literate audio labyrinths.


Nannygate for the Poor; The Underground Economy in Day Care for Children
For years, Gladys Cordero was pointed out by strangers as "the lady in the green house." She cared for as many as 16 children at once in her modest home on Staten Island -- illegally.
Neighbors knew her.
Cabdrivers directed customers to her.
Even the public elementary school across the street sent parents her way.
A loyal clientele trailed the 60-year-old woman three years ago, when she moved to a new neighborhood 40 blocks away.
Mrs.
Cordero charges $20 a day for babies in diapers and $15 for older children.
But the real currency is trust, she said, in a widespread commerce that has served struggling, low-income parents for decades in New York City.


Q and A
Carte Vermeil in France
Q.
Can you provide information about the Carte Vermeil, which entitles older travelers to discounts on the French National Railroad? -- Peter Sun, New York, N.Y.


Yugoslav Town's Stately Bridges May Be Bombed
The Drina River flows through the center of this handsome town, and residents have long been proud of the three stately bridges that connect one bank to the other.
Today, however, people here fear that the bridges may soon attract catastrophe.
If the United States and other foreign powers decide to launch a bombing campaign to cut military supply lines used by Serbian fighters in Bosnia and Herzegovina, these bridges would be likely targets.


Corrections
The At Work column last Sunday, about community internships offered to employees by United Parcel Service, misstated the role played by James E. Casey, the company's founder.
Though Mr.
Casey took an active interest in the program, it was other executives who came up with the idea.
The column also described Walter Hooke's job history incorrectly.
When he was approached for help in setting up the program, he was not yet working for U.P.S.


Norfolk House
To the Editor: Having visited Norfolk, I was surprised in reading "What's Doing in Norfolk" (March 21) to find no mention of one of the most beautiful homes in America, the Moses Myers House.
Built in 1792 by Moses Myers, a shipowner, merchant and bank superintendent, it is a classic example of Georgian architecture.
The dining room is considered one of the finest of its kind in the South, with examples of American Federal designs.
In the drawing room are Gilbert Stuart portraits of the progenitors of this early American Jewish family: Moses Myers and Eliza Judah.


Is It 60's Politics Or Gang Warfare?
A YEAR ago last month, 50 Latin Kings armed with guns, bats and knives stormed a housing project in Meriden intent on bringing a renegade faction into line.
Three defiant members of the organization were injured in the attack, which sent bystanders fleeing.
The incident drew more attention to the Latin Kings, an organization of Hispanic and Italian men and women founded four years ago within the state's prison system.
Over the last two years authorities have linked the band to scores of assaults and at least six homicides.
As reports of the group's activities surfaced in the news media, Beatrice Codianni of New Haven, a longtime supporter of grass roots politics, took note.
What she read and heard, she said, mirrored the days when she worked with the Black Panthers in the late 1960's and witnessed the Federal Bureau of Investigation discredit the organization by circulating distorted information to the public.
The same pattern was occurring with the Latin Kings, which was a relatively young organization in Connecticut having what Ms.
Codianni called positive goals.
Though she recognized that the group had a violent element, she said she had also seen how it had changed the lives of people like her 21-year-old son Andrew, by steering him away from drugs and giving him a strict moral code to live by.
In May of last year Ms.
Codianni began corresponding with Pedro Millan, one of the founders of the Latin Kings who is currently awaiting trial in a state prison on conspiracy charges stemming from the Meriden shootout.
She suggested to him that the Latin Kings begin a public campaign to change their image, and that they begin by offering AIDS education along with literacy and high school classes to its members.
Ms.
Codianni soon after joined the organization and now serves on the board of directors, making her one of the Latin Kings highest ranking members.


Car Careers Over Curb, Killing Boy, 4
For the third time in two weeks, a motorist with a long record of driver's license suspensions was arrested after striking and killing a child in Brooklyn, the police said yesterday.
In the latest crash, a car mounted a curb, careered into a pay telephone and struck four people yesterday, including a 4-year-old boy and a 2-year-old girl.
The police arrested the driver, saying that his license had been suspended 63 times and that he was speeding when the accident occurred.


Theresa Ward, William Mendrzycki
Mrs.
Mary Ward of Monroe, N.Y., has announced the engagement of her daughter, Theresa Ward, to William Mendrzycki, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Edward Mendrzycki of Bronxville, N.Y.
An August wedding is planned.
Ms.
Ward, 26, is a buyer with Bohbot Communications Inc., a media buying company in New York.
She graduated from Hartwick College.
She is the daughter of the late Michael Ward.
Her mother is an account representative with Troll Associates Inc., a book publishing company in Mahwah, N.J.


Corrections
An article on Thursday about Take Our Daughters to Work Day referred incorrectly to a staff member at the Xerox Palo Alto Research Center in California.
She is Karon Weber.


NOTES
Is Shelley Long's new CBS sitcom, "Good Advice," living up to its name?
In an episode on Monday, Ms.
Long's character, a psychiatrist, counseled a male patient contemplating suicide.
She joked that if he didn't kill himself, she had done her job.
And if he
did
, then, well, she had helped him achieve his goal.
"Trivializing suicide and sensationalizing it give the wrong impression," said Karen Dunne-Maxim, a family therapist who serves on the board of the American Suicide Foundation, "especially in a society where young kids are hearing about Dr. Kevorkian."


Corrections
The Mutual Funds column last Sunday, about qualifications of fund salespeople, misidentified a partner at the investment advisory firm Evensky &amp; Brown in Coral Gables, Fla.
He is Harold R. Evensky.


Survivors Get to Dance
THE notorious Nick Beavers, clean and sober at last, was fidgeting at a rear table in his new Minnesota nightclub, nursing what would be diagnosed back home on Broadway as a serious case of flop sweats.
Here in downtown Minneapolis, however, locals would simply say that the owner of the newly opened Rogue bar and restaurant was having a cow.
Nick Beavers . . . nervous?
It didn't seem possible.
Back in the decadent 1980's, when he helped run such hard-partying Manhattan night spots as the Surf Club and the Zulu Lounge, Mr.
Beavers was famous for his air of preppy bad-boy nonchalance.
But now, on the most important opening night of his life, the 28-year-old self-exiled child of Fifth Avenue was skittishly swilling Diet Cokes and chain-smoking Marlboros.


Danbury Composer Solos in Premiere
LAWRENCE DEMING recently returned to his hometown of Danbury after a seven-year stint as a violinist in the Hong Kong Symphony, ready to share his impressions in "An Asian Fantasy" for electric violin and orchestra, a work commissioned by the Danbury Music Center.
The composer will be his own soloist at today's 3 P.M. world premiere in the high school, with the group's music director, Richard Brooks, leading the 110-member Danbury Community Orchestra.
The program also lists Bach's Concerto for Two Violins, featuring concertmaster Lisa Nahley and Elizabeth Fodor, a Pawling High School senior.
The concert is free and open to the public.
Under the banner "Great Britain Comes to New Britain," the choir of St.
Paul's Cathedral in London is offering a 4 P.M. concert at South Church, the ensemble of men and boys allowing Bach, Buxtehude and a few other foreign composers into their program, but otherwise holding to English sacred music by Byrd, Purcell, Howells and half a dozen others.
Reservations are required; call 223-3691 for more details.


Some Radio Days 'With Les and Bess'
REMEMBER "Dorothy and Dick," Tex and Jinx and Ed and Pegeen Fitzgerald?
If you miss the on-the-air chitchat of couples who run off about last night's opening, the party after and assorted palaver, "Breakfast With Les and Bess" may prove that you don't.
In Lee Kalcheim's comedy, in revival at Stamford Theater Works, the trivial radio talk show is already endangered by 1961, the play's time frame.
That was way before the abrasive, abusive, ego-centered format ("Talk Radio," as Eric Bogosian called it) set in.


Grace Williams, Sandy Kaynor
Grace Helene Williams, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
James T. Williams of New Orleans, was married there yesterday to Sanford Bull Kaynor Jr., a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Kaynor of Darien, Conn.
The Very Rev.
Richard Rowland performed the Episcopal ceremony at Christ Church Cathedral.
Mrs.
Kaynor, 28, is a broker at William B. May &amp; Company, the real estate concern, in New York.
She graduated from Southern Methodist University and received a law degree from Tulane University.
Her father, an orthopedic surgeon in New Orleans, is an associate clinical professor of medicine at Tulane.


Deciding the Future of an Iona Campus
SINCE Iona College announced in January the closing of its 21-acre campus in northwest Yonkers, people have been wondering what will become of one of the choicest pieces of riverfront greenery left in lower Westchester County.
"We've received serious letters of interest from about 20 parties," said Brother John Driscoll, president of Iona.
"Often it's just a broker representing an unnamed client. About 20 of the letters were from educationally related clients."


Nancy Handler, Gregory Nikel
Nancy Handler, a financial analyst at the I.B.M.
Credit Corporation in Stamford, Conn., was married yesterday to Gregory L. Nikel, a financial analyst for the International Business Machines Corporation in Somers, N.Y.
William F. Banks, a retired judge of the Town Court of Bedford, N.Y., performed the ceremony at Le Chateau, a restaurant in South Salem, N.Y.
Mrs.
Nikel, 28, graduated magna cum laude from Wellesley College, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa.
She is the daughter of Sidney Handler of Bedford and the late Anna C. Handler.
Her father is a vice president and the chief financial officer of the Integrated Systems Solutions Corporation in Tarrytown, N.Y.


Miss Graebner, Mr. Hertz
Carole Caldwell Graebner of New York and Clark E. Graebner of Southport, Conn., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Cameron Clark Graebner, to Brian Seth Hertz, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Martin Hertz of Merrick, L.I.
A June wedding is planned.
Miss Graebner, 26, was until recently a personal assistant in New York to Lynn Manulis, the president of Martha Inc., fashion boutiques in Palm Beach and Bal Harbor, Fla.
Miss Graebner's father, a former professional tennis player, is the senior vice president of sales for the Corporate Printing Company in New York.
Her mother, also a former professional tennis player, is the vice president and national advertising director for Tennis Week in New York.
Miss Graebner is the stepdaughter of Patricia M. Graebner of Southport.


Computers Reviving The Home Game
PLAYING bridge at home was the norm half a century ago, with only a small percentage of players venturing into clubs and tournaments.
Home bridge now appears to be much rarer, though this trend may be reversed thanks to the computer.
But it will be a different kind of home bridge, less sociable but also less dependent on finding three other players.
To hook up with other players you need a computer, a modem and a software package.
One of these is O.K.
Bridge.
Access costs only the price of a local call, but is limited primarily to students and professors because it is on an academic network, Internet (Information from Matthew Clegg: (619) 558-3408).


Student Loans: a Longtime Irritation
For years, college and university officials, parents and students have complained about the system of Federal student aid -- a confusing welter of programs that can leave students indebted for years and that lose billions of dollars each year in defaulted loans.
"The current system of Federal student loans is altogether too complex, cumbersome and costly," said Eric S. Godfrey, the assistant vice president for student affairs at the University of Washington in Seattle.
"It is a program whose time has passed."


Commencements; First Lady Promotes Health-Care Plan at Michigan
Hillary Rodham Clinton opened the commencement season today with a rousing pitch for her health-care proposal, bluntly telling graduating students at the University of Michigan that their futures depended on the plan's enactment.
"At the root of our economic and human challenge," she said to an audience that filled nearly half the massive Michigan Stadium, "lies the fact that although we are the richest country in the world, we spend more money and take care of fewer people than many countries that are not as rich as we when it comes to health care."


INSIDE
Sea Hero Wins Derby
Sea Hero, a 13-1 long shot, captured the 119th Kentucky Derby.
The favorite, Prairie Bayou, finished second.
SportsSunday, Section 8.
Delicate Coaching Situation
The power and influence that male coaches hold over female athletes can sometimes lead to harassment and abuse.
SportsSunday.
School Vote and City Hall
The impact that Tuesday's community school board elections will have on the New York City mayoral race is a matter of intense debate.
Page 45.
Tactics in Tailhook Inquiry
Pentagon officials used lie detectors and undercover agents to uncover the details of the assaults against women at a convention of aviators.
Page 24.
Big Job in Congress
The fate of the President's tax plan rests with the House Ways and Means Committee chairman.
Page 34.


Buster Keaton's Final Exit
To the Editor:
Johnny Depp may have excellent comic timing  [ "Once Again the Clowning Gets Physical," April 11 ] , but his historical dating is a bit off.
He is quoted as saying, "In the late 1960's" Buster Keaton "was doing 'Beach Blanket Bingo.' " In the late 1960's Keaton wasn't doing much of anything: He died on Feb. 1, 1966.
The 1965 "Beach Blanket Bingo" (not Keaton's only teen-beach movie) was among his last filmed appearances.
Keaton also lived long enough to reap some of the acclaim he so deserves.
SCOTT ISLER Brooklyn


LONG ISLAND JOURNAL
Mall Marchers
THOSE who march also shop.
With batons in their hands, and credit cards in their pockets, Long Islanders paraded around a mall last weekend and then paraded inside looking for bargains.
"I wonder if they're having any opening-day-parade sales," one onlooker asked.


Christa Wolf's Politics
To the Editor:
So Christa Wolf, as a young Communist believer 30 years ago, met a few times with the slick comrades from the Stasi, who soon found her unfit for the job of informer and dropped her.
Into police files.
From these files, the righteous, the always uncontaminated and mere sensation seekers and readers of gossip columns have now fished her out and brought her to mob justice.


Clinton Tax Plan Will Rise or Fall With Fate of Ways and Means Chairman
The House Ways and Means Committee next week will begin drafting one of the biggest tax bills in years: the core of President Clinton's plan to reduce the Federal budget deficit.
What happens to this measure, which could make or break his Presidency, hinges on the answers to these questions:
*Will the chairman, Dan Rostenkowski, dominate the committee, probably the most important in Congress, as he has for the last 12 years, or will he be distracted by a criminal investigation of his finances?


Oyster Bay Facing Test On First Cluster Zoning
A PLAN to build a 40-unit development of town houses in Oyster Bay on an estate that belonged to the family of Mortimer L. Schiff, the financier, will be the first test of cluster zoning in the town.
Cluster development -- building homes closely together in one section of a parcel, leaving most of the land vacant -- has grown in popularity on Long Island.
But the Town of Oyster Bay prohibited such zoning until it passed a cluster-zoning ordinance in 1991.
The proposal for development on the Schiff estate is quite likely to set a precedent for similar projects in the town, said a deputy town supervisor, Chuck Johnson.


A la Carte; Sampling the Kitchen's Best Bets
ADVENTUROUS eaters consider the tasting meal the ultimate dining experience.
So do people who love Chinese food and enjoy sampling many dishes.
Tasting meals are very popular in Europe, especially in France, where they are called degustation meals.
They are also common in Manhattan.
Yet Long Island, despite its increasing culinary sophistication and diversification, has never been fertile ground for the multidish delight.
Last month, however, Panama Hattie's, an innovative restaurant in Huntington Station, reintroduced the tasting meal to the Island.


On Sunday For Giuliani, A Liberal Use Of Party Label
CANDIDATES for mayor of New York City met yesterday with state Liberal Party leaders at the Hotel Inter-Continental in mid-Manhattan, vying for the party endorsement in the fall election.
Though results will not be known for a few weeks, the favorite appears to be a Republican, Rudolph W. Giuliani, the former Federal prosecutor who was endorsed by the Liberals in the 1989 race and is the least liberal of the major candidates.
Awarding him the Liberal endorsement would invite ridicule if it happened anywhere else.
But New Yorkers are quite sophisticated and do not expect politics to make sense.


Amtrak Unveils Its Design To Transform Post Office
Under soaring, echoing vaults of glass, within a monumental forest of neo-classical columns designed by McKim, Mead &amp; White, railroad passengers in New York City stream through a gateway as colossal as the metropolis it serves.
That describes the Pennsylvania Station of 1910.
It does not describe the claustrophobic, overcrowded, underground space that replaced it almost three decades ago.


Gangs Go Public in New Fight for Respect
Jimel Barnes, a legendary gang member who made his name two decades ago by punching one of the founders of the Crips gang, was picking at his hors d'oeuvres the other day in the ballroom of the Westin Hotel here.
"Crips and Bloods aren't going to go away," he said, referring to the rival street gangs that have turned South-Central Los Angeles into a battleground.
"But now they've got to stand for positive things."


Israel Builds Ties to Ex-Soviet Muslim Lands
While it remains in a technical state of war with most of its Islamic neighbors, Israel has moved resolutely beyond its region to establish diplomatic and trade relations with the largely Muslim republics of the former Soviet Union.
The Jewish state's ties to the Islamic world have always been thin at best, aside from a few conspicuous exceptions like Egypt and Turkey, but it has met little resistance in the Central Asian republics since the breakup of
the Soviet empire two years ago.


The Freer Gallery to Reopen
One of the most delightful rooms in the Freer Gallery of Art is James McNeill Whistler's exciting (or outlandish, take your choice) Peacock Room.
It is only natural, then, that shortly after the museum reopens next Sunday, following a four-and-a-half-year $26 million renovation and expansion, two live peacocks will take up residence in its courtyard.
Visitors will also find a new gallery devoted to the Japanese tea ceremony and a South Asian Room, with a wealth of recent acquisitions, including a 15th-century brass incense burner from India and a 16th-century Mughal painting.
New thematic galleries, which display objects by subject rather than geography, include a Buddhist room with a 6th-century bodhisattva from China.
The Peacock Room, created by Whistler in 1876-77, has had decades of grime removed so that the original golds and blues of the peacock feathers can be seen.
Asian porcelain has been placed on shelves, as the owner had intended, and Whistler's painting "The Princess From the Land of Porcelain" has been brilliantly illuminated.


Correction
CORRECTION: Because of an editing error, the Letters column on April 11 omitted an essential phrase in a letter about a March 21 essay by Floyd Abrams on surveillance and privacy.
The letter writer, Edward Cline, wrote (with heavy italics indicating the omitted phrase): "If one is not a criminal, or intent on defrauding a private party, one has little to fear from the comparatively benign use of security and surveillance arrangements employed by private institutions. However, such practices
by modern government
treat all citizens as guilty (or
probably
guilty) until proven innocent."


Up the Tennis Ladder Via Great Neck Courts
TO understand how Michael Zimmerman has excelled so quickly in the tennis rankings is to look past his suburban roots, his days at Harvard and his expensive clothes and car.
"Mike's a pretty easy kid to motivate, he's very hungry, he works extremely hard, and that's unusual for kids in this area," said Robbie Wagner, Zimmerman's longtime coach in Great Neck.
"He's so unspoiled. You don't even have to ask him if he's worked out, lifted the weights. You already know he has."


In the Region: Westchester; Recent Sales
Pelham, N.Y.  $345,000
131 Jackson Avenue  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 50-year-old colonial; modern eat-in kitchen, den, terrace, detached 3-car garage; taxes $9,714.
New Castle, N.Y.  $150,000
23 Pheasant Run  1-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 7-year-old condominium; fireplace, patio, outdoor pool, security; common charges $268, taxes $4,129.
Yonkers, N.Y.  $285,000
2 Birch Brook Road  5-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 14-year-old contemporary; dining room, den, eat-in kitchen, attached 1-car garage; taxes $7,213.
Glastonbury, Conn.  $170,000
240 Tryon Street  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 71-year-old colonial; eat-in kitchen, formal dining room, first-floor family room, 1 acre; taxes $2,800.
Milford, Conn.  $136,500
45 Bilyard Street  3-bedroom, 1-bath, 50-year-old colonial; fenced-in yard, h/w floors, gas heat, 50- by 100-foot lot; taxes $2,316.
West Hartford, Conn.  $125,000
7 Edmund Place  2-bedroom, 1-bath, 34-year-old cape cod; living room with fireplace, expandable attic, 1-car attached garage.
OTHER AREAS Mahwah, N.J.  $322,000
57 Armour Street  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 22-year-old colonial; fireplace, central vacuum, full basement; taxes $3,581.
Medford, N.J.  $250,000
19 Elm Drive  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 35-year-old split level; totally remodeled, lakefront property, eat-in-kitchen; taxes $2,282.
Albertson, L.I.  $215,000
25 Evans Avenue  4-bedroom, 2-bath, 33-year-old Cape Cod; dining room, eat-in kitchen; taxes $4,000.


Alexandra Tierno, Francois Payard
MANY say that Francois Payard makes the best desserts in New York -- coffee parfait with seaweed, chocolate baked with tarragon and other concoctions that sound more like accidents in the kitchen than deliciously famous treats.
Formerly the pastry chef at Le Bernardin, he has just been hired at Restaurant Daniel, opening on May 17 on the Upper East Side.
A native of Nice, France, Mr.
Payard, who is 26, does not fit the stereotype of a pastry chef.
He is neither overweight nor hot-tempered.
Even his art collection is sweet: he owns a "painting" of an American Indian made entirely of sugar.


Women Pilots Proved Their Military Worth
To the Editor:
One of the planes developed for combat flight during World War II was the B-26, or Martin Bomber.
It quickly earned the cognomen "The Flying Coffin." Its aerodynamics was questionable.
Army Air Force pilots had many accidents in takeoffs and landings, and in-flight reliability was poor.
The plane was relegated to "safe" combat areas, and any surplus planes assigned stateside were used primarily for target towing.


The Business That a Brake Tester Built
ON the ground or in the air, Bernard Milano is preoccupied with safety and high technology.
As a corporate pilot for Primerica and most recently Dun &amp; Bradstreet, Mr.
Milano has flown around the world half a dozen times as captain of Gulfstream and Falcon jets.
And because of his flexible schedule as a corporate pilot, in which he flies only 8 to 11 days a month, he has had time to develop a business of his own, Ardsley Mobil Automotive Service Center, which he says is the only high-technology service station of its kind in Westchester.
"What gives us that distinction is a brake-testing machine I had installed after I bought the station seven years ago," Mr.
Milano said.
"It is an extremely sophisticated and expensive piece of equipment, which cost us $35,000, but technically it is the state of the art," he said.
"This level of equipment isn't for the average service station, but we wanted to attract demanding customers. We excel in Jaguar repairs, and I thought it would be a great marketing tool. There are only four machines of its kind in all of New York State, Connecticut, New Jersey and Pennsylvania."
For the mechanically ungifted, Mr.
Milano described the brake tester as "a computerized machine that literally gives customers an 'EKG' profile of their cars." The process is the same, he said.
"When the car goes up on the rack, the brake tester makes a diagnosis in as little as a minute. But in that time the car is weighed. The wheel alignment on all four wheels is checked; the brake-system performance is analyzed, and then all the information is cranked out in a computerized report."  Satisfaction and Profitability
The printouts, he said, which are given to the customer, enable them to monitor their car's performance.
"There are a lot of things that can go wrong with a car," he said.
"If a customer is driving to Florida, for instance, and has car trouble, the print-out contains valuable information that will be useful to a strange mechanic."
The brake tester, he said, is paying its way in customer satisfaction and profitability.
"It yields so much important information that even car dealers and other service stations bring in their cars to us for a testing."
Customers having work done on their cars are not charged extra for an inspection on the brake tester, Mr.
Milano said, but someone wanting only a checkup would be charged $40 plus tax.
The hourly labor rate varies from $65 to $75 depending on how "exotic" the car is.
Mr.
Milano, who is 35, said he has been working at the station in one guise or another more than half his life.
"When I was in school I had a part-time job there," he said.
"The station is a landmark in Ardsley. There has been a service station on the same corner since 1926. It was previously known as the F.H.L. Service station when it was owned by Floyd Lichtenberg, when I was a kid. Many years later I bought it from Mr. Lichtenberg."  A Changing Industry
But, he said, the station he worked in as a teen-ager bears little resemblance to the one today.
"Those 'Gasoline Alley' days are gone," Mr.
Milano added.
"I remember when I was in high school, everybody with even a slight mechanical bent used to tinker with their cars. But today, you can't monkey with a car. It's even impossible to change carburetors because high-tech computer microprocessors control their function."
A few years after he bought the station, Mr.
Milano said, he realized the best way to keep business growing was to upgrade the service.
"The industry was changing," he said.
"It was becoming so specialized that technicians were needed to service cars instead of mechanics. It was expand or die. We decided to expand."
Using their own money, Mr.
Milano and his wife, Isabel, who is his partner and takes care of the bookkeeping and business end of the business, invested about $750,000 to remodel the 5,000-square-foot building with five king-size bays.
"At the station we only do mechanical work," Mr.
Milano said.
"We're set up like a dealership in that every car we work on gets dealer parts, and every car we service is tested on the brake machine for free."  Jaguars a Specialty
Customers come from all over the county and include many Jaguar owners.
"Jaguars once had a bad rap for always being in the shop," Mr.
Milano said.
"But they have been vastly improved. We service both the brand-new models and the classics. We even find original parts for the classics, but like any other high-powered car, they both need periodic checkups. The way I started servicing Jaguars is that some of the executives I fly for brought their Jaguars in, and through word of mouth other Jaguar owners followed."
In addition to the equipment that he has installed, Mr.
Milano employs 21 technicians.
"They receive ongoing training weekly at an automotive facility," he said.
"They also have a library of service manuals, electronic technical service bulletins and access to a technical hot-line service."
He continued: "We're not talking about mechanics, but highly skilled, highly educated individuals who are looking not for jobs but careers here. They earn $35,000 at the beginning and can work up to $70,000 with full benefits included."  Fascination With Jet Engines
The connection between his own two careers, he said, is his mechanical ability.
"It was the mechanical aspects of flying more than the romantic idea that attracted me," he said.
After graduating from St.
John's University in Queens, with a bachelor's degree in administration, Mr.
Milano continued his studies at Embry-Riddle Aeronautical University in Daytona Beach, Fla.
"Embry-Riddle is known as the Harvard of the aeronautics industry," he said.
"I went there because I was fascinated with jet engines."
Two years later, Mr.
Milano graduated with an associate degree and received a license as a commercial pilot and flight instructor.
"My first job was with a Cessna dealer teaching classes of 10 students how to fly," he said.
Victims of the Recession
The planes he flies for corporate clients have all been based in hangars at Westchester County Airport.
"What isn't common knowledge is that the Westchester Airport is the largest corporate jetport in the world," he said.
"And when it comes to the travel activities of executives, corporations prefer to keep a low profile."
Recently, he said, more than one corporate jet had become a victim of the recession.
"When corporations have to cut back, the $30 million jet may be one of the first things to go," he said.
"A lot of corporations are using commercial airlines today, which is another reason I am very glad to have a business. We expect to do $1.5 million to $2 million in sales this year, which is up 20 percent from last year's figures."


Nancy Drew Owes Her Life to This Man
To the Editor:
Three cheers!
Nancy Drew has finally entered the annals of American children's literature ("Nancy Drew: 30's Sleuth, 90's Role Model," front page, April 19)!
Long ignored by librarians and critics, still her detective adventures have sold more than 80 million copies in 19 languages in the last 63 years.


'I Couldn't Have Handled It Worse'
LEAVING TOWN ALIVE
Confessions of an Arts Warrior.
By John Frohnmayer.
Illustrated. 360 pp.
Boston: Houghton Mifflin Company. $22.95.


Was Shakespeare Cashing In?
To the Editor:
I realize that in the excerpt from John Gross's book "Shylock: A Legend and Its Legacy"  [ "Shylock and Nazi Propaganda," April 4 ]  there was not enough room to include the Lopes incident, which Mr.
Gross does cover in his book.
But when he says that we have no way of knowing what was in Shakespeare's mind when he began writing "The Merchant of Venice" and concludes that Shylock was meant to be a villain, we might have a good idea if we examine that incident.


David Geffen, Still Hungry
David Geffen glances out the window of his black Lincoln Town Car, moving fitfully down Fifth Avenue toward SoHo.
He's on the phone with one of his closest friends, Sandy Gallin, who manages Michael Jackson and Dolly Parton.
There are messages to call Thomas F. McLarty 3d, the White House chief of staff; Arthur Liman, the lawyer; Leo Castelli, the art dealer; Ed Lampert, one of Geffen's financial advisers, and Jeffrey Katzenberg, the chairman of Walt Disney Studios.
Abruptly, Geffen hangs up the phone and points to a luxury condominium building on Union Square.
"That was Klein's, Klein's department store, remember?" he says.
"My mother used to buy bargains there, things that were dirty. She'd say, 'Americans are so crazy, you're going to have to wash it anyway.' " He laughs.


Greek Accent at a Hicksville Landmark
LIVELY bouzouki music now fills a historic old building on Nicholai Street in Hicksville.
Originally the home of a prominent dentist, it also housed the Jolly Swagman and, more recently, the Curtis House restaurant, which offered a multitude of Central European cuisines.
This spring the landmark became Macedonia, featuring copious platters of Greek food and infectious, live, pulsating music.
Long Islanders who crave Greek food either go to Astoria or settle for local storefront tavernas.
Serious Greek restaurants are uncommon in Nassau and Suffolk.
Macedonia, with its fresh flowers, white tablecloths and mellow wood-paneled walls, is a welcome addition.


Corrections
A picture caption on March 21 about a statue in the town of Eger, Hungary, misidentified the subject.
A reader's letter dated March 23 pointed out that it was Capt.
Istvan Dobo, the defender of the fortress of Eger. (The letter, addressed to another department, was delayed in reaching the travel editors.)


Profile/Mackie McLeod; Helping Lotus Do the Right Thing in South Africa
Last year, when the Lotus Development Corporation opened its first office in South Africa, some investors and anti-apartheid activists said they felt betrayed.
The American software maker had, after all, supported sanctions that barred trade with the white-led regime.
While the Bush Administration had lifted its sanctions in July 1991, many American states and cities had kept their restrictions in place.
The critics asked how a "politically correct" company like Lotus -- long known for its support of social causes -- could make such a dramatic about-face.
But Lotus had insisted it was still politically correct, arguing that foreign investment was needed to spur the country toward democracy.
And the company had come prepared to make its case by bringing along Mackie McLeod to run its social investment trust, one of the do-good programs that many companies operate here.


Lava Java: Vesuvio Is A Coffeepot
WHAT: Vesuvio, the coffee maker that is about to erupt in your kitchen.
Last week, at the Salone del Complemente d'Arredo, an accessories show that is an accessory to the Salone Internazionale del Mobile in Milan, the big trend-setting furniture show, Vesuvio stood dormant on a shelf, a stone's throw away from a gleaming array of elegantly hard-edge pots, pans and whisks, looking like something that could have been on the breakfast table at the Flintstones'.
Watch for it in this country later this year. ELEVATION: Vesuvio is 14 inches high.


Susan Ryan, Richard Kornutik
Mr. and Mrs.
Stephen M. Ryan Jr. of Fairfield, Conn., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Susan Elizabeth Ryan, to Richard Francis Kornutik, a son of Richard Kornutik of Wilton, Conn., and Elizabeth Weeber of Crown Point, N.Y.
An October wedding is planned.
Ms.
Ryan, 26, is an account executive in display advertising with Southern Connecticut Newspapers Inc. in Stamford, Conn.
She graduated from Providence College.
Her father is the president of National Hockey League Enterprises Inc. in New York, the league's licensing and marketing arm.


Olympus and Financial Ramifications
I am the Administrative Director of the Suffolk County Industrial Development Agency and I am writing in response to Peter Quinns's letter  [ Feb. 28 ]  in regard to the Olympus Corporation project.
Mr.
Quinns's letter contains a number of misstatements that need to be clarified with the following facts:


RECORD BRIEFS
'Beecham in Rehearsal'
EMI Classics CDM 7 64465 2; CD.


An 'Outsider' Offers Litany of Lament
THE facts of Royal Robertson's life are few.
He was born 57 years ago in Louisiana, and spent part of his early youth in the West before going home to look after an ailing mother.
Around the age of 19 he married and set about fathering 11 children; the marriage ended 20 years later, when his wife, Adell Brent, left him.
Soon after that, the man who in his own words "was born drawing," and who made his living as both a sign painter and a field hand, began a visual lament that continues to this day.
It has earned him both the contempt of his neighbors and the admiration of those interested in what has come to be called Outsider art: hence the drawings, lent by Warren and Sylvia Lowe and an anonymous collector, now on view in the Atrium Gallery, at the University of Connecticut in Storrs.
Mr.
Robertson is convinced that his wife is an adulterer and apparently does not let a day go by without proclaiming this in words and drawings that fairly quiver with wrath and anguish.
"I married a snake"; "Adell made me loose my auto, next loose my truck, last my house," and others more clinical or specific in their charges.
He also portrays a green space creature with a lemon-yellow face who wears a helmet and purple boots and is saying: "We do not have sex's; we command us form souls from soils of rocks."


Nations Join On Economy
For the last few years, the economic game plan of the major industrial nations has seemed to be every man for himself, an unhappy formula that helped push the world economy into its stubborn slump.
In recent weeks, however, the major countries have sharply changed tack.
Embracing stimulus plans, cutting interest rates and budget deficits, the countries have been taking steps that benefit other nations as well as themselves.
Indeed, if there was a theme at this week's meeting of the Group of Seven's finance ministers, it was that economic cooperation has come back from the dead.


POSTINGS: Who's on First?; The Joie de Vivre Of Beaux-Arts
In left field: McKim. With him in the outfield: Mead. And at shortshop: White.
It is surprising to see a baseball scorecard with the names of these legendary architects.
But its inclusion in the exhibition "Beaux-Arts New York" -- now at the New York School of Interior Design -- illustrates a crucial point about the American designers who were trained at or influenced by the Ecole des Beaux-Arts in Paris.


BOSNIA AIR STRIKES BACKED BY CLINTON, HIS OFFICIALS SAY
After long talks with his top advisers, President Clinton decided in principle today to commit American air power to help end the fighting in the Balkans, officials said.
But he sent Secretary of State Warren Christopher to Europe to try to persuade the United States' allies to go along with the American strategy before he makes a final decision on using force.
Mr.
Christopher, briefing reporters after a four-hour meeting at the White House of Mr.
Clinton's top national security advisers, declined to discuss the decision in detail, saying only that it included "military steps."


Karen J. Cuiffo, Nathaniel Booker
Karen Joy Cuiffo, the assistant editor at Travel Host Magazine in Fort Lauderdale, Fla., was married yesterday to Nathaniel Taylor Booker, a marketing specialist at Barnett Bank there.
The Rev.
William J. Boldt, a Roman Catholic priest, performed the ceremony at St.
Joseph's Church in Bronxville, N.Y.
Mrs.
Booker, 25, graduated from Colby College and received a master's degree in English literature from Simmons College.
She is a daughter of Frank W. and Barbara S. Cuiffo of Bronxville.
The bride's father is the managing partner of Carro, Spanbock, Kaster &amp; Cuiffo, a law firm in New York.
Her mother is a freelance writer in Bronxville.


Airport Safety vs. Quakers' Serenity
WITH its simple Colonial design, soft gray clapboard exterior and tranquil 300-year-old cemetery, the Society of Friends Meetinghouse in Purchase reflects the spiritual beliefs of its Quaker worshipers.
For the Quakers, who have conducted their silent worship services in this building for more than three centuries, a sylvan vista of more than 10 acres of forest glimpsed from their sanctuary windows adds to their weekly spiritual renewal.
And although the Westchester County Airport borders its property, the greenery that separated the Friends Meetinghouse from the runways had offered a buffer to the sights and sounds of the airport.


Timothy S. Root, Jody Danforth
Senator and Mrs.
John Claggett Danforth of Newburg, Mo., and Washington have announced the engagement of their daughter Johanna Claggett Danforth to Timothy Stuart Root, a son of Stuart D. Root of Bronxville, N.Y., and Jeanne D. Root of Princeton, N.J.
A September wedding is planned.
Miss Danforth, 24, is known as Jody.
She graduated cum laude from Princeton University and is a master's degree candidate in nursing at Yale University, where her fiance graduated from the physician associate program.


Lynch to Take Time Off
The reigning National Collegiate Athletic Association's 3,000-meter champion, NNENNA LYNCH, has voluntarily ended her track career at Villanova because of a host of health and scheduling-related problems.
Lynch, a senior who won the Rhodes Scholarship in December, consulted with Coach MARTY STERN Tuesday and reluctantly agreed to take time off from running until her health improves and her schedule is less crowded.


The Wrong Woman For the Glass Ceiling?
To the Editor:
Far from sharing any glee that a former A.F.L.-C.I.O. leader is now heading the Glass Ceiling Commission ("Labor's Return to Prominence," At Work, April 11), I challenge Joyce Miller's credentials for the job.
The purpose of the commission is to empower women and minorities who have been denied leadership positions in the workplace.
How can a labor leader, whose function is to act as an adversary of management, serve as an advocate for those who seek to manage?


Results Plus
TENNIS Sampras Is Defeated Dutchman Jacco Eltingh won a power serving duel with No. 1-ranked Pete Sampras last night, breaking the Floridian's 19-match winning streak with a 7-6 (7-5) 6-4 upset in the semifinals of the A.T.&amp;T.
Challenge in Duluth, Ga.
Eltingh will play Bryan Shelton in the first clay-court final for both.
Shelton reached the final with a 6-3, 5-7, 6-1 victory over Jared Palmer.
Eltingh, ranked No. 87 in singles, matched the top-seeded Sampras's serve-and-volley skills in the match at the Atlanta Athletic Club.
Sampras, who had won three consecutive tournaments, served three aces in the tie breaker, but with it tied at 5-5, Eltingh hit a deep lob that Sampras netted.
Eltingh then won the opening set when a Sampras lob landed long. (AP)


No. 1 Tennis Player Is Stabbed During Match


Backers of Perot Courted In New Jersey Campaign
Will the real Ross Perot supporters please stand up?
With New Jersey's primary race for the Republican nomination for governor heating up, everybody seems to be claiming the support of whatever remnants of the Texas billionaire's organization remain alive in the state.
Both Christine Todd Whitman and Cary Edwards, who are regarded as the front-runners, have maintained that the Perot people prefer them.
Jim Wallwork, a former State Senator and latecomer to the race who is mounting a spirited come-from-behind conservative challenge, this week said that two former Perot organizers in the state had endorsed him.


Fitness That Blooms in the Spring
AT Tiger Schulmann's Karate and Fitness Center in Yonkers, the focus is on the total body -- the mind as well as the muscles.
"No machines, no racquetball courts, no swimming here," said Toni L. Caserta, program director.
"Just self-discipline and self-defense."
In Scarsdale, at East Coast Fitness Center, yet another approach is taken.
The free weights, Nautilus circuit, Stairmasters and tanning beds serve a mostly male clientele, average age 18 to 24.
There, pumping iron is the order of the day, the manager, Michael Lewandowski said.


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
LETTERS OF A VICTORIAN MADWOMAN Edited by John S. Hughes.
University of South Carolina, $24.95.


Still Awash in the Wake of Hurricane Andrew
MORE than eight months have now elapsed since Hurricane Andrew ripped through the suburbs south of Miami, but a drive through Homestead, the town hardest hit by the most costly natural disaster in American history, leaves the disheartening impression that the devastation occurred just yesterday.
Entire neighborhoods have been abandoned, mountains of debris still clog residential streets and homeless people continue to roam the desolate landscape.


RECORD BRIEF
Porno for Pyros: 'Porno for Pyros'
Warner Brothers 9-45228; CD and cassette.


Mr. McCall for State Comptroller
The New York Legislature elects a new State Comptroller this week to succeed the Republican, Edward Regan, who has resigned after 13 years.
A Democrat will win because a majority of the legislators are Democrats, and the outcome will almost certainly hang on the endorsement of the Assembly's powerful Speaker, Saul Weprin.
On the merits, the vote should go to Carl McCall, president of New York City's Board of Education.
He has performed sensibly and responsibly in that difficult role, and that performance argues for the challenge of higher office.
Gov.
Mario Cuomo's backing for Mr.
McCall raises the issue of independence.
A Democratic comptroller must be just as independent from Democratic governors and legislators as Mr.
Regan was in auditing state accounts and investing pension funds.
Again, Mr.
McCall's experience as a banker and elected official recommends him as someone who can watch the money while avoiding needless political bickering and personal conflicts.


David Koresh &amp; Co. Deserve the Blame
To the Editor:
Re "Apocalypse in Waco" (editorial, April 20): While it is easy to second-guess the Justice Department and the law enforcement agents who put their lives at risk to resolve the standoff, the true culprits are David Koresh and his followers.


Data Bank/May 2, 1993


Breast Cancer: Patients See Employer Bias
THERESA TEODORI is a nurse, Jennifer Johnson is a music teacher, Virginia Kaluzny is a secretary, and Asha Gurunathan is a bookkeeper.
All four have been treated for breast cancer within the last two years.
Ms.
Teodori and Ms.
Kaluzny have lost their jobs since their cancer diagnoses.
Mrs.
Gurunathan and Dr.
Johnson are on sick leave, and both say they face the prospect of losing their jobs.
All of the women say their employment problems are direct results of their illness.


Timeless Purity From the Soul Of Bluegrass
Of all the threads that together form the fabric of country music, none have held more proudly to their origins than bluegrass.
Several generations have passed since the groundbreaking 1940's recordings by such pioneers as Bill Monroe and the Blue Grass Boys, Lester Flatt and Earl Scruggs, and Carter and Ralph Stanley and the Clinch Mountain Boys.
Such recordings set in motion the revolution that gave Southeastern hillbilly string band music a bold new shape and, ultimately, a trademark name.
Nearly half a century later, the genre's parameters remain virtually unchanged.
Whether made in 1947 or 1993, good bluegrass has the same pristine sound: of acoustic stringed instruments played with precision -- often at blinding speeds -- and high-harmonied voices singing plaintive tales of home and hearth.


Judith Spector, Steven Robbins
Judith Anne Spector, a daughter of Lorelei and Rowland Spector of Cherry Hill, N.J., was married there last evening to Dr.
Steven Eric Robbins, a son of Lynn and Norman Robbins of Great Neck, L.I.
Rabbi Jerome P. David performed the ceremony at Temple Emanuel.


Out and About In the Capital
On the eve of last Sunday's gay-rights march, at a festive cocktail party given by Peter Pappas, a White House lawyer and native New Yorker, a young aide who'd worked in the press department of the Clinton campaign was reminiscing.
"The night after the election," he said, "I took everybody to the gay bar in Little Rock. The whole staff was very open and they were happy to just go with the flow. Of course, that was the
only
good bar in town."


In the Region: New Jersey; Recent Sales
Franklin Lakes  $960,000
719 Butternut Road  5-bedroom, 4 1/2-bath, 12-year-old colonial; all brick, deck, fireplace; taxes $12,818.
Mahwah  $322,000
57 Armour Street  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 22-year-old colonial; fireplace, central vacuum, full basement; taxes $3,581.
Medford  $250,000
19 Elm Drive  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 35-year-old split level; totally remodeled, lakefront property, eat-in-kitchen; taxes $2,282.
Morristown  $185,000
16 Spring View Drive  3-bedroom, 1-bath, 66-year-old colonial; brick fireplace, oak floors, patio; taxes $2,486.
Morris Township  $352,000
5 Sunderland Drive  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 20-year-old colonial; brick patio, family room, updated kitchen; taxes $4,807.
Upper Saddle River  $365,000
3 Yeoman Road  5-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 25-year-old colonial; fireplace, deck, eat-in-kitchen with second fireplace; taxes $6,886.
OTHER AREAS Great River, L.I.  $260,000
16 Teal Crescent  4-bedroom, 2-bath, 16-year-old ranch; dining room, eat-in kitchen, 2 fireplaces, basement, 2-car attached garage; taxes $8,000.
Yonkers, N.Y.  $285,000
2 Birch Brook Road  5-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 14-year-old contemporary; dining room, den, eat-in kitchen, attached 1-car garage; taxes $7,213.
Glastonbury, Conn.  $170,000
240 Tryon Street  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 71-year-old colonial; eat-in kitchen, formal dining room, first-floor family room, 1 acre; taxes $2,800.


Woman, 64, Killed In Robbery in Bronx
A woman was shot to death yesterday afternoon just after she walked into a Bronx bodega when two men trying to rob the store sprayed the shop with bullets, the police said.
The woman, Ida Steward, 64 years, of Willett Avenue in the Bronx, was struck in the head and was killed instantly, said Sgt.
Anthony Barlanti, a police spokesman.


A Brownout Of Star Power
Where was Hollywood?
Compared with President Clinton's inauguration, last weekend's gay-rights march in Washington was quite lacking in star power.
While such celebrities as Cybill Shepherd, below, Phil Donahue, Mary Wilson and Eartha Kitt lent their support, many participants were wondering what happened to all the stars who have previously spoken out in favor of lesbian and gay rights.


Wall Street; Forstmann Little's Next Coup?
MAKING golf clubs and marketing ceramic villages are decidedly obscure slivers of the economy.
But if you have not been thinking about them, maybe you should.
One person in the latter line of work picked up $25 million last year, and would put an extra $10 million in his pocket soon if all goes well with an initial public offering of Department 56.
The company, which is based in Eden Prairie, Minn., sells sweet little illuminated villages that have found their way under Christmas trees and onto mantles.


Weprin Ponders Hardest Decision
Saul Weprin, the Speaker of the New York State Assembly, is about to make the toughest decision of his political career.
But before going to the trouble of picking either H. Carl McCall or Carol Bellamy as the next State Comptroller, Mr.
Weprin called Edward V. Regan last Tuesday to make sure Mr.
Regan still planned to leave the job on Friday.
"Ned, you create a real problem for me," Mr.
Weprin said impishly.
"Won't you reconsider resigning?"


A 19th-Century Designer With 20th-Century Flair
The audacious handles on Christopher Dresser's designs are among the trademarks his fans admire.
One of the boldest is a black handle that arcs between the body and spout on a red tinned-iron watering can, which can be held firmly while pouring out every drop.
And that's exactly what Dresser, Britain's first industrial designer, intended in 1876 when he designed the watering can, one of 80 works in "Christopher Dresser: The Power of Design," an exhibition at the Kurland-Zabar gallery on the Upper East Side, through May 29.


Flooding Damages Homes in Central New York
Laurie Roche looked down at the flood water rising in her home and could not believe what she saw.
"These little minnows were swimming in my house," said Mrs.
Roche, who lives on Oneida Lake in Bridgeport, northeast of Syracuse.


Donna Wharton, Walter L. Fields Jr.
Donna M. Wharton, the finance director of the New York City Housing Partnership, was married yesterday to Walter L. Fields Jr., the director of public affairs for the New York State Trial Lawyers Association in Manhattan.
The Rev.
Dr.
John W. Smith performed the ceremony at the Varick A.M.E.
Zion Memorial Church in Hackensack, N.J.
Mrs.
Wharton-Fields, 32, graduated from Williams College and received a master's degree in city planning from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology.
The Housing Partnership is a nonprofit collaboration of officials, builders, bankers and others to develop homes for moderate-income buyers.


At Work; Making a Case for Family Programs
It is hard-shell gospel among advocates of "family friendly" or "family supportive" corporate policies that helping employees helps the bottom line.
But gospel doesn't crunch as well as numbers, and the unsentimental, lynx-eyed financial types who prowl the balance sheets of corporate America in these lean times tend to be non-believers.
Researchers are beginning to accumulate the systematic, hard evidence that advocates need to make their case.
According to two studies reported last week, companies that make it easier for employees to juggle their work and family responsibilities do reap gains in greater loyalty, increased job satisfaction and lower turnover.
The benefits of the policies also seem to reverberate beyond the companies' human resources departments.


From Bagels To Acting, And Back
Jose Evelio Alvarez likes to talk about movie stars.
Mr.
Alvarez, 54, the Cuban behind the counter at the Bagel, a six-table restaurant at 170 West 4th Street, still talks about how Ellen Barkin used to work there as a waitress.
He likes to tell customers how he has served eggs and French toast to Lauren Hutton, Robert De Niro, and Matthew Broderick.
Now, Mr.
Alvarez, dancing at right, is talking about his own role in a movie.
He has a cameo in "The Night We Never Met," which stars Annabella Sciorra and Mr.
Broderick.
Of course, Mr.
Alvarez, got his part through connections.
Both Warren Leight, the film's writer and director, and Michael Peyser, its producer, are loyal customers.


BEST SELLERS: May 2, 1993
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Fiction
1
1
38
THE BRIDGES OF MADISON COUNTY, by Robert James Waller. (Warner, $14.95.) A photographer and a lonely farmer's wife in Iowa.
2
2
7
THE CLIENT, by John Grisham. (Doubleday, $23.50.) A deadly secret presents serious problems for an 11-year-old boy.
3
3
2
THE LAST COMMAND, by Timothy Zahn. (Spectra/Bantam, $21.95.) The final volume of a "Star Wars" trilogy.
4
4
3
"J" IS FOR JUDGMENT, by Sue Grafton. (Holt, $21.95.) Kinsey Millhone investigates the case of a man who apparently committed suicide -- but may have returned to life to reap benefits.
5
1
A SEASON IN PURGATORY, by Dominick Dunne. (Crown, $22.) The political and social machinations of a wealthy Irish Catholic family.
6
1
PERFECT, by Judith McNaught. (Pocket, $22.) A model young woman is abducted by a onetime award-winning film maker who has been serving time for murdering his wife.
7
10
3
LIKE WATER FOR CHOCOLATE, by Laura Esquivel. (Doubleday, $17.50.) Frustration, love, hope -- and recipes -- sampled by a woman coming of age on a Mexican ranch.
8
5
5
AMERICAN STAR, by Jackie Collins. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $23.) The romance of two teen-agers, one who grows up to be a movie star, the other a model.
9
1
FOR LOVE, by Sue Miller. (HarperCollins, $23.) An affair is renewed and the past and future are reconsidered by people returning to their Massachusetts hometown.
10
7
11
EINSTEIN'S DREAMS, by Alan Lightman. (Pantheon, $17.) Fantasies said to be dreamed by Albert Einstein in 1905, when he was a patent clerk.
11
1
CHARMS FOR THE EASY LIFE, by Kaye Gibbons. (Putnam, $19.95.) The fortunes of three indomitable North Carolina women who have to cope with men who disappoint, disappear and die.
12 *
11
3
WINTER PREY, by John Sandford. (Putnam, $21.95.) Lucas Davenport in pursuit of a new kind of criminal in Wisconsin's cold woods.
13
6
2
WHERE THERE'S SMOKE, by Sandra Brown. (Warner, $19.95.) A physician moves to a Texas town and tries to live down her bad reputation.
14
9
10
THE TALISMANS OF SHANNARA, by Terry Brooks. (Del Rey/Ballantine, $22.) The fourth and concluding volume in a series about a fantasy land.
15
12
35
GRIFFIN &amp; SABINE, by Nick Bantock. (Chronicle Books, $17.95.) The romance of an artist and a secret admirer, told through cards and letters.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Nonfiction
1
1
38
WOMEN WHO RUN WITH THE WOLVES, by Clarissa Pinkola Estes. (Ballantine, $20.) A Jungian analyst reinterprets myths and folk tales to enable women to understand their psyches.
2
2
11
HEALING AND THE MIND, by Bill Moyers. (Doubleday, $25.) Conversations with physicians, scientists, therapists and patients about the relationship of sickness to thoughts and emotions.
3
3
33
THE WAY THINGS OUGHT TO BE, by Rush H. Limbaugh 3d. (Pocket, $22.) Anecdotes and opinions offered by the talk show host.
4
5
3
A WORLD WAITING TO BE BORN, by M. Scott Peck. (Bantam, $22.95.) A call for individuals and institutions to make civility part of their lives and functions.
5
4
20
CARE OF THE SOUL, by Thomas Moore. (HarperCollins, $22.50.) A psychotherapist's discussion of spirituality and everyday life.
6
1
REMEMBERING DENNY, by Calvin Trillin. (Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux, $19.) A memoir of a bright young man of the 1950's -- Yale Phi Beta Kappa, Rhodes scholar, esteemed professor -- who ended his career by committing suicide.
7
7
7
PREPARING FOR THE TWENTY-FIRST CENTURY, by Paul Kennedy. (Random House, $25.) A historian assays social and political forces.
8 *
12
2
THINKING OUT LOUD, by Anna Quindlen. (Random House, $22.) Essays on current topics by the New York Times columnist.
9
13
2
AMY FISHER: My Story, by Amy Fisher with Sheila Weller. (Pocket, $22.) The memoirs of the Long Island teen-ager who is now serving time for shooting the wife of a man she says was her lover.
10
6
24
BANKRUPTCY 1995, by Harry E. Figgie Jr. with Gerald J. Swanson. (Little, Brown, $19.95.) The collapse of America under Government debt.
11
9
8
ASSEMBLING CALIFORNIA, by John McPhee. (Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux, $21.) Investigations into the geological history of California.
12
15
3
MARILYN MONROE, by Donald Spoto. (HarperCollins, $25.) A biography of the movie star.
13 *
42
TRUMAN, by David McCullough. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $30.) A biography of the 33d President.
14
8
32
THE TE OF PIGLET, by Benjamin Hoff. (Dutton, $16.) Aspects of Taoist philosophy explained through the actions of an A. A. Milne character.
15
11
9
OFFICIAL AND CONFIDENTIAL, by Anthony Summers. (Putnam, $25.95.) The life of J. Edgar Hoover, head of the F.B.I. from 1924 to 1972.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous
1
1
7
BEATING THE STREET, by Peter Lynch with John Rothchild. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $23.) Investing.
2
2
42
HARVEY PENICK'S LITTLE RED BOOK, by Harvey Penick with Bud Shrake. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $19.) Tips on playing golf.
3
3
3
MEN ARE FROM MARS, WOMEN ARE FROM VENUS, by John Gray. (HarperCollins, $20.) Ways to improve communication between the sexes.
4
4
59
MORE WEALTH WITHOUT RISK, by Charles J. Givens. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $23.) Financial advice.
5
5
60
HOW TO SATISFY A WOMAN EVERY TIME, by Naura Hayden. (Bibli O'Phile/Dutton, $15.95.) Sexual counsel for married couples.
6 *
1
A WOMAN'S WORTH, by Marianne Williamson. (Random House, $17.) Advice for women.
These listings are based on computer-processed sales figures from 2,997 bookstores and from representative wholesalers with more than 28,000 other retail outlets, including variety stores and supermarkets.
The figures are statistically adjusted to represent sales in all such outlets across the United States.
Rankings reflect sales for the week ending April 17. *An asterisk before a book's title indicates that its sales, weighted to reflect the book-selling industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
LP indicates that a book is available in large print.
And Bear in Mind
(Editors' choices of other recent books of particular interest)
THE ROAD TO WELLVILLE, by T. Coraghessan Boyle. (Viking, $22.50.) There are major characters but no heroes in this antiromance of 1907 in Battle Creek, Mich., where Dr.
John Harvey Kellogg, the Edison of clean living, presides over pilgrims who hope to escape the ills and smells that flesh is heir to.
SHAME AND NECESSITY, by Bernard Williams. (Centennial/ University of California, $25.) A clever, agile professor of philosophy argues that the Homeric Greeks may have been wiser than the great thinkers of Athens and possibly even wiser than we.
CLEOPATRA'S SISTER, by Penelope Lively. (HarperCollins, $20.) Ms.
Lively's charming and intellectually resonant novel concerns an English couple whom fate, or Fate, conspires to place on a plane bound for just the wrong North African destination.
GENIE: An Abused Child's Flight From Silence, by Russ Rymer. (HarperCollins, $20.) Raised speechless and in isolation for her first 13 years, Genie inspired heroic efforts to rehabilitate her and to study important principles of language -- mostly in vain.
THE VIRGIN SUICIDES, by Jeffrey Eugenides. (Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux, $18.) An evocative, disarming novel with unlikely premises: five suburban sisters take turns at suicide, and a gang of curious boys grow into their 30's trying to figure out why.
JUDGE ON TRIAL, by Ivan Klima. (Knopf, $25.) Mr.
Klima's novel describes the crisis of conscience of a jurist in Czechoslovakia as the sureties of his personal life and the Marxist state crumble.
THE PATH TO GENOCIDE: Essays on Launching the Final Solution, by Christopher R. Browning. (Cambridge University, cloth, $39.95; paper, $10.95.) A magisterial, rigorously meditated study of how the industrialized murder of millions got under way.


Jennifer S. Nachajski, Jordan Lewis
Jennifer Sandra Nachajski, the daughter of Richard and JoAnn Nachajski of Springfield, Va., was married yesterday to Jordan MacLachlan Lewis, a son of Brenda Talbot Lewis of Metuchen, N.J., and L. Bertram Lewis of St.
Augustine, Fla.
The Rev.
Michael Duesterhaus performed the ceremony at the Holy Spirit Roman Catholic Church in Annandale, Va.
Mrs.
Lewis, 24, is the public-affairs coordinator for TV Answer Inc. in Reston, Va., which produces software and operates a satellite network for interactive television.
She graduated from the University of Richmond, as did her husband.


Brown Revs It Up a Notch, Then Cruises
Brown turned to its vast supply of power at the 1,000-meter mark and rowed away from Yale and Princeton today for another easy victory.
The Bears' men's varsity remained undefeated this season and will go into the Eastern Sprints regatta at Worcester, Mass., next Sunday as the top-seeded eight.


Pontiac's More Insurable Pony Car
OVER the past 40 years, I have owned a lot of automobiles.
Somehow, though, there have been surprising gaps in that history.
There has been no Corvette, for example, and I would love to have a Corvette.
I have never owned a Mustang, Ford's original pony car.
Nor have I sallied forth to fly home in a Camaro or Firebird.


Miss Eberstadt and Mr. Bruton
Mr. and Mrs.
Frederick Eberstadt of New York have announced the engagement of their daughter, Fernanda Eberstadt, to Alastair Meddon Oswald Bruton, a son of Mrs.
D.
C.
Bruton of Hockworthy, Devon, England, and the late Mr.
Bruton.
A June wedding is planned.
Miss Eberstadt graduated from Magdalen College, Oxford University.
She is a novelist whose most recent work, "Isaac and His Devils," was published by Warner Books.
Her mother, Isabel Nash Eberstadt, is a writer.
Her father is a freelance journalist and photographer.
Miss Eberstadt is a granddaughter of Mrs.
Ogden Nash of Baltimore and North Hampton, N.H., and the late Mr.
Nash, the writer of humorous verse.


APRIL 25-MAY 1: A Sinkhole Kills; Boy's Death Reveals Underground Peril
When a 7-year-old boy's step broke through a thin clay crust in his front yard and he plunged to his death in a muddy sinkhole last week, it made parents in New Jersey view every ground depression as a possible trap, and woke up the state to a potential peril buried two decades ago because of efforts to clean the air.
Officials now need to calm fears while insuring that the tragedy won't be repeated.
Engineers who dug up the apartment complex lawn in North Brunswick where Kwame Mahir Sharif suffocated in mud found a vein of tree debris capped by four feet of soil.
The debris had been dumped in a way that formed air pockets into which the clay soil gradually seeped, leaving a thinning surface that appeared deceptively solid.


Bank Robbers Are Turning More Violent
BANK robbers in New Jersey are becoming more violent, more brazen and better organized, Federal law-enforcement officials say.
And despite increasingly sophisticated security measures, the number of robberies has been growing.
In 1992, officials of the Federal Bureau of Investigation said, there were 121 bank robberies in the state, as compared with 109 in 1991 and 94 in 1990.


All Right, Fess Up: What Have You Bought on Television?
PENNY ARCADE, performance artist: I ignored TV shopping till the great Jack Smith said, "Tonight I address the nation on Home Shoppers Network." Hair in a can and make millions in the classifieds are my latest purchases.
MARIO BUATTA, interior designer: I've been tempted.
I watch before I go to sleep.
I flip between the shopping networks and Letterman.


Silver Is the Death of a Mexican Town
The silver that built great colonial cities across the center of Mexico endowed this dusty small town with a grand name, a beautiful old church and dreams of a new bonanza.
The bonanza of Real de Angeles -- "Mining Place of Angels" in 16th-century Spanish -- was finally discovered about 15 years ago.
The only problem was that it lay directly beneath the town.


New Balkan Talks Open At a Resort Near Athens
A new round of peace talks on the Balkans began today at this resort south of Athens amid hopes that the Bosnian Serbs would agree to an international plan to end the yearlong civil war in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Arriving at Athens airport today, Radovan Karadzic, the Bosnian Serb leader, said peace could come "within two weeks" if minor modifications were made to the plan.
On Friday, Dr.
Karadzic said he hoped to bring back a modified version of the original peace plan put forward by the United Nations and European Community that the Bosnian Serb assembly would accept when it meets in Pale, Bosnia, on Wednesday.
Both the Croatian leadership in Bosnia and the Muslim-led Bosnian Government have already accepted the plan.


Spring Sales
Interesting plants and advice from experts can be found this week at plant sales in Brooklyn and the Bronx.
The Brooklyn Botanic Garden will hold its annual spring sale, featuring fuchsias, orchids, miniature roses, old roses, perennials, trees, shrubs and more.
The sale, in the Magnolia Plaza at 1000 Washington Avenue (Eastern Parkway), Brooklyn, will be held on Wednesday, from 9 A.M. to 7 P.M., and Thursday, from 9 A.M. to 3 P.M.
Telephone: (718) 622-4433.


Bonilla's View Is Bonilla's Fault
To the Sports Editor:
I've had it up to my eyes with the likes of Bobby Bonilla.
This is a man who earns about $6 million for less than a year's work.
Ten sets of my parents (and Bonilla's, too, no doubt) wouldn't earn in 10 lifetimes what Bonilla earns in one month of playing baseball.


APRIL 25-MAY 1: Hints of Spying; U.S. Backs Out Of France's Air Show
American-French relations on trade and military questions have suffered a number of minor irritants in recent years, and now there is another: It seems that no American military aircraft will be at the prestigious Paris air show at the Le Bourget airfield in June.
The absence, which follows accusations of French industrial spying, is a considerable blow to the biennial international show, which has traditionally attracted the latest in American aerospace technology and helped sell jets.
It was not immediately clear what mix of administrative confusion, budgetary constraints and concern over espionage led the Pentagon to decide on April 19 to tell the American aerospace industry that the Defense Department would send no planes and allow no official presence of armed forces personnel.
Aerospace companies can still lease aircraft from the Pentagon, but the cost seems prohibitive.


Huntington Hotel
To the Editor: Readers should know, contrary to the statement in Hilary de Vries's article about the Huntington Hotel in Pasadena, that all "guest rooms and suites are oversized," we stayed in a decidedly undersized room on a New Year's visit this year.
Our travel agent had reserved an oversized room to accommodate us and a rollaway bed for our son.
The room we were assigned was elegant but completely filled with a king-sized bed, an armoire, an overstuffed chair and a desk.
When the rollaway bed was squeezed in, the room was cramped and awkward.
The management told us there was little variance in the size of the rooms -- just in the location and view.
We decided against a room-service dinner one night because we couldn't imagine where the table would fit and there was only one suitable chair.


New Tallest Hotel In New York
A new Four Seasons hotel is scheduled to open in Manhattan on June 1.
Designed by I. M. Pei and Frank Williams, the Four Seasons Hotel New York, 57 East 57th Street, between Park and Madison Avenues, (212) 758-5700 or (800) 332-3442, will be the tallest hotel in the city, rising 682 feet.
Rooms in the 52-story building, which is clad in French limestone (the same limestone used in Pei's addition to the Louvre), will have ceilings more than 10 feet high.
Facilities include one restaurant, a 5,000-square-foot fitness center and a business center with computer terminals and fax machines.


Monticello Looks Lived-In Again
MONTICELLO, the Roman temple Thomas Jefferson built over 40 years on a frontier mountaintop near Charlottesville, Va., looks more like it did when he lived there than it has at any time since his death on July 4, 1826.
The mansion's interiors were painted, plastered and redecorated for "The Worlds of Thomas Jefferson at Monticello," an exhibition marking the 250th anniversary of the third President's birth on April 13, 1743.
For the occasion, Monticello's leaky roof was restored to approximate one Jefferson had designed and to shelter, temporarily, 150 of his treasures lent to the show.
Financed by the National Endowment for the Humanities, it remains through December.


Q and A
Co-op Sublease Deposits Question: I have a co-op apartment that I would like to rent.
Am I allowed to ask the sublease tenant to give me one month's rent and one month's security and also the last month's rent in order to avoid many cases in which tenants don't pay the last month's rent, stay for the last month of the lease and then move out, leaving damages to the apartment for which the landlord pays? . . .
Nam Ng, Queens Answer: Yes.
According to Stuart Saft, chairman of the Council of New York Cooperatives, co-op subleases do not fall under the city's rent-regulation or rent-stabilization laws.


Men In Uniform
Frank Rich's clever ram blings about generals in drag and soldiers in the shower gloss right over key fears many in-service supporters of the ban on homosexuals in the military have.
At a time when our society is so aware of the pervasiveness of sexual harassment in the workplace, is it really fair to dismiss the naive misgivings of sheltered straights as "homophobic," a word that has acquired such an aspect of vigilante violence?
JANET M. SHECHTMAN
Franklin, N.J.


Trouble Is Her Middle Name
SWIMMING IN THE VOLCANO
By Bob Shacochis. 519 pp. New York: Charles Scribner's Sons.


Deja Views
At a time when the Great Leveler of style -- the Gap look -- is eclipsing designer fashion, the reappearance of swaggering dandies and extravagant coquettes (circa 1900) introduces a dash of eccentricity to the fashion scene.
Trouser suits and long skirts are giving women Edwardian silhouettes.
The suits are most striking when accented with dashing hats and walking sticks.
One man, upper left, added spats.
Mixing new clothes (like leather jackets) with antique feather scarves and hats suggests a late-Victorian look.


Real Prostitution Has No 'Perks'
To the Editor:
Elibabeth Kaye's column  [ "The Sexes: This Proposal Is for Status Quo," April 18 ] , interpreting the latest of Hollywood's sexist pop iconography, "Indecent Proposal," makes an interesting but misguided interpretation.
Her conclusion is that the future progress of the women's movement depends on women disliking their current position enough to work to change it.
She writes that movies like this one and "Pretty Woman" can subvert feminism because they raise "the possibility that there are perks in being infantalized and in victimization" and the "degree to which women enjoy being victims" is an impediment to woman's progress and, therefore, the women's movement must deny this enjoyment in order to continue.


'This Incredible Gift You Give'
"I remember the first time I stuck my toes in the bottom of a pond. I said, 'What is under there?' I was used to concrete pools. I heard little country bugs instead of being rocked to sleep by city noises. Most of all, I experienced another side of life. This is an incredible gift you give."
That's how John Wright, a native New Yorker who now works with homeless youths in the Times Square area, recalls his two weeks as a Fresh Air Fund child years ago.
Mr.
Wright is not alone in his memories.
Since 1877, more than 1.6 million inner-city youngsters have enjoyed summer vacations in the country provided by the Fresh Air Fund.


Summer Festival Benefit
IT may be a little early to think about a summer festival, but not if one has to pay the bill.
Accordingly, the members of the Emelin Trio -- Efrem Briskin, David Krieger and Kerry McDermott -- are holding a benefit gala this afternoon for the Summit Music Festival, which they founded and direct.
The festival will take place at Marymount College in Tarrytown from June 27 through July 25.
Today's concert at 4 P.M. at the Marymount College Auditorium, will provide a showcase for some of the outstanding student artists who participated in the workshops last summer and will also raise money for future scholarships.
The festival this year includes intensive chamber music studies, master classes and orchestral rehearsals, plus a dozen or more public concerts.
At today's recital, the violinist Billie Leong, the cellist Scott Brady and the pianist Robert Markham will each play short solo works.
The Emelin Trio will then take the stage for the C major Trio (Op. 87) of Brahms.


Jail Sentences for Sex Crimes Are Rarely Very Harsh
WHEN sentences were meted out to three former high school football players who sexually assaulted a retarded schoolmate with a baseball bat, stick and broomstick in a Glen Ridge, N.J., basement, those who had assumed the defendants would serve some hard time got a shock.
The three young men, convicted of first-degree aggravated sexual assault, received sentences last month of up to 15 years to be served in a youth facility -- meaning they will probably serve no more than 22 months.
And to many trial observers, including jurors who were interviewed, the sentences are slaps on the wrist, a reflection not of what the defendants did but who they are: white, middle-class and from the suburbs.


Business Diary/April 25-30
THE ECONOMY


Adding Touches From the Far East to Spice Up a Barbecue
AS warm weather and the grilling season approach, the trend toward giving barbecue a whiff of the Far East appears to be continuing.
Books about Asian grilling are in stores, and an increasing number of prepared barbecue sauces and marinades are flavored with ginger, sesame oil, peanuts and soy sauce.
Using these products with standard barbecue items like steaks, chicken breast and fresh tuna on the grill, along with corn on the cob and tomato salads, amounts to East-West cooking, often called Pacific Rim, the marriage of Asian and Western styles and flavors.
This kind of cooking has been in the news for some time, especially in restaurants.


Lori Ann Dixon, Mark M. Stephens
Lori Ann Dixon, a daughter of the Rev. and Mrs.
Richard H. Dixon Jr. of Mount Vernon, N.Y., was married there yesterday to Mark Mizel Stephens, a son of Deloris Stephens, also of Mount Vernon.
The bride's father performed the ceremony at the Macedonia Baptist Church, where he is the pastor.
Mrs.
Dixon-Stephens, 28, is a revenue agent in White Plains for the Internal Revenue Service.
She graduated from Virginia State University.


Defending Italian Language And Culture
RICHARD BASSO can cook an Italian meal, discuss differences between ancient Roman and contemporary American architecture and converse with his grandfather in the language of the old country.
A senior at Lakeland High School here, Mr.
Basso says that much of his appreciation of his Italian ancestry has come from his four years of language study with Rita Anthony, a teacher of Italian who is as likely to discuss Michelangelo as to parse sentence structure.
Sitting in Mrs.
Anthony's classroom one recent afternoon, Mr.
Basso looked around at the pictures and stories tacked to a bulletin board and at the colorful map of Italy made by students several years ago.
"She teaches us everything about the country," he said of Mrs.
Anthony, who grew up near Milan.
"This room is like being in Italy."


Your Home: Reserves; Outrage At a Twist In Taxes
INCOME generated by reserve funds set aside by condominium and homeowner associations to cover future capital expenditures has always been taxable.
But monthly charges and other assessments being deposited into the fund were never taxed.
That, however, may no longer hold true.


Chip Beck, Charlie Brown?
To the Sports Editor:
While I agree with Jaime Diaz's sound defense of Chip Beck's reasons for laying up on the 15th at the Master's ("Beck's Reasoning Was Sound, So Stop the Second-Guessing," The Times, April 18), Diaz shouldn't criticize the fans for wanting to see Beck go for the green in two.
It's the classic Charlie Brown debate: Would Beck be the hero or the goat?
As a spectator, one can't be blamed for wanting to see the gutsy play, and laud the hero or hate the goat.
JAMES NOLL  Chevy Chase, Md.


APRIL 25-MAY 1: Just a Mistake?; Narrowing Theories on How An Islamic Cleric Migrated
The World Trade Center bombing on Feb. 26, followed by the arrest of several followers of the fiery Sheik Omar Abdel Rahman, has focused attention on a puzzling question: Just how did this Egyptian Islamic preacher with known associations with terrorism get into the United States?
Last week, one theory -- that American intelligence agencies were responsible -- seemed less plausible after initial inquiries by the State Department inspector general found no evidence to support it.
This gave credence to the view that it was American sloppiness, not contrivance, that allowed the sheik to get a visa from the American Embassy in the Sudan.


APRIL 25-MAY 1: Aiding Students; For a New Generation, Clinton Proposes National Service
Americans who lived through the 1940's and 50's remember the social impact of the G.I.
Bill, which opened the door to college for returning veterans.
Their children remember the idealism that the Peace Corps helped set loose.
On Friday, President Clinton unveiled a twinned program of national service and student loan financing designed to combine the appeal -- financial, emotional and political -- of both those earlier programs.
Under the National Service Trust Act, students would be hired (at least at the minimum wage, about $8,500 a year) to work in human services, education, the environment, public safety or other areas.
Each would also get up to $10,000 in grants for school, at $5,000 per year of service.
If Congress approves, $400 million could be available for about 25,000 participants in 1994, and $3.4 billion for 150,000 in 1997.


Seeing Tibet By Bicycle
Organizers of a bicycle rally on the Tibetan plateau are looking for Americans and other foreigners interested in cycling for 1,250 miles on the "roof of the world." The rally, from Aug. 6 to 25, will not be a race, and participants need not have special experience.
The Chinese authorities restrict visitors to Tibet, so the bicycle rally is an unusual and relatively inexpensive way to see areas of the Tibetan countryside that tourists rarely visit.


CURRENCY
Last
Prior
Year
Week
Week
Ago
Japanese Yen
110.10
110.50
132.58
per Dollar
German Mark
1.5850
1.5840
1.6405
per Dollar
Canadian Dollar
1.2735
1.2617
1.1888
per U.S. Dollar
British Pound1.5735
1.5745
1.6405
U.S. Dollar
per British Pound
Gold
$355.80
$346.50
$338.25
Republic National Bank
Currency: Friday NY Close


Coleman Seizes The Game For Nets
At one point tonight, the Cleveland Cavaliers sent everything at Nets forward Derrick Coleman except a very large pit bull.
They tried the All-Star forward Larry Nance, Hot Rod Williams, and then, late in the third quarter, the All-Star center Brad Daugherty.
It was at this point that Coleman took his game from astronomical to metaphysical.
He was playing so well it was hard to believe the eyes, hard to believe that even he was capable of leading a broken and battered team over Cleveland in a playoff game on the Cavaliers' home turf.


Amid Many Sighs, the Russians Submit to Democracy
RUSSIA'S painful grappling with reform revives an old doubt: is this enormous country governable?
Again and again, the country seems to reach a decisive moment, only to plunge into another cycle of confusion and struggle.
President Boris N. Yeltsin and the Congress seem locked in unending series of inconclusive crises -- he threatens emergency rule, they come within a hair's breadth of impeaching him, the Constitutional Court sits all night, a national referendum is held.
Mr.
Yeltsin wins with 58 percent of the voters giving him their confidence and, more surprisingly, 53 percent supporting his economic reform.
Now another battle looms, this one over the next constitution.
Mr.
Yeltsin produces a draft that would entrench a powerful presidency, scrap the unwieldly Congress for a trimmer two-chamber parliament and guarantee property rights.
The legislators prepare to field their own constitution, with power going their way.


PBS Extends An Invitation To the Dance
Whether we are what we eat is arguable, but a new and wonderfully ambitious series on public television is absolutely convinced that we are how we dance.
Persuasive evidence is compiled in the eight-hour patchwork leotard that is called "Dancing." It will be shown in two-hour segments over four consecutive Monday nights, beginning tomorrow at 9 on Channel 13 in New York.
Rhoda Grauer, the creator and executive producer, has extensive experience in dance administration, having held posts with American Ballet Theater and the Twyla Tharp Dance Foundation.
Some of her accrued biases are obvious here, especially in the generous time given to Ms.
Tharp while other major figures on the American dance scene are mentioned only briefly, if at all.
Ms.
Grauer is candid: "Recognizing that there was no objective way to choose among all the important dance-makers of today," she says in promotional material for the series, I concentrated on the ones who have fascinated me the most." Listen for the unpleasantly squishy sounds of egos being bruised.


This Lobbying Reform Really Isn't
The 100 members of the U.S.
Senate will have to take a stand on government ethics any day now.
A flawed piece of legislation called the Lobbyist Disclosure Act of 1993 is speeding toward the Senate floor, where it will force the senators to confront whether they are serious about curbing the undue influence of monied lobbyists.
The chief sponsor, Senator Carl Levin, Democrat of Michigan, wants to get the measure passed quickly and claim it as a victory for reform.
As it now stands, the bill's real beneficiaries would be Washington's lobbying industry and the Congressional life style it supports with free vacations, expensive meals, tickets to sold-out sporting events and other legal bribes to lawmakers.


Not Necessarily for White, Middle-Class Girls Only
I TOOK my daughter to work on Wednesday for Take Our Daughters to Work Day.
It was a nice, feel-good, female-bonding experience.
My 12-year-old son shrugged off the day.
No girls he knew missed school, so he did not feel excluded.
But other parents had more troubling experiences.
One woman, taking her son to his private school in Manhattan, noticed that just four fourth-grade girls were there.
All were minorities on scholarship whose parents may not have been able to take them to work.
And the resentful fourth-grade boys had a wasted day, with teachers reluctant to teach because so many girls were absent.


C. M. Van Cook, Philip S. Chivily
Christina Margaret Van Cook, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
William M. Van Cook of Shrub Oak, N.Y., was married yesterday to Philip S. Chivily, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
J.
Alexander Chivily of Putnam Valley, N.Y.
The Rev.
John Baptist Riordan performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at the Monastery Church of the Sacred Heart in Yonkers.


Vikram Seth's Big Book
At the Austrian Embassy in New Delhi, members of the Indian capital's foreign diplomatic corps and local cultural elite have assembled on a balmy February evening for a recital of Schubert's "Die Schone Mullerin." Ambling through the French doors from patio to drawing room, they trade greetings with the Austrian Ambassador, piano accompanist for this special event.
The magnet for the gathering, however, is the unfamiliar baritone, a more remote and dapper figure, so slight he seems to bob below the surface of the crowd.
In this layer of New Delhi society, where the circuit of embassy parties is part of the daily grind, the public singing debut of the Indian writer, Vikram Seth, offers something even more attractive than European wine or American whisky.
Along with a burgundy vest, gray slacks and a paisley silk scarf curled around his neck, Seth wears an aura of youthful fame into the room.
The week before the 40-year-old had appeared on the cover of Sunday magazine, which dubbed him "The Golden Boy" because of the $1.1 million advance he has received from Indian, British and American publishers for "A Suitable Boy," his native epic of post-independence.
And in the weeks to come there will be no avoiding his handsomely moody face on Indian newstands. (Few journalists had read the 1,366-page book and concentrated instead on the money, an unprecedented sum for an Indian writer.) Despite the hoopla, orchestrated by Seth and Penguin Books India with a time-released series of interviews, he appears at the embassy without fanfare.
His entourage consists of his parents in the front row.


Rationing Care Among The Rich and Profligate?
To the Editor:
I was glad to see Stephen J. Sullivan point out that the Clintons' health program will lead to rationing that would probably prevent ordinary citizens from getting the sort of care the President's father-in-law received after his recent stroke ("When the Patient Is a Clinton In-Law," Viewpoints, April 18).


Zen and the Art of Shopping
IN Manhattan, selling is a loud, visceral experience.
At Bloomingdale's, employees spritz perfume to the beat of reggae music.
Macy's tosses celebrities and their table settings at its customers like so much confetti.
But Takashimaya New York, a branch of the largest department-store chain in Japan, sells by not selling -- a Zen riddle of retailing.
The store, with wares that are a mix of East and West -- a vest made from an obi sash, a pillow made of hand-embroidered kimono fabric -- opened on April 23 at 693 Fifth Avenue, near 54th Street.


Suicide Bomber Kills President of Sri Lanka
The President of Sri Lanka, a country that has been swept by violence for more than a decade, was killed today by a man who detonated explosives strapped to his body during a May Day political rally.
At least 10 other people were believed killed in the explosion in Colombo, the capital, including most of the President's bodyguards and several close aides.
Dozens were wounded.
The assassination of President Ranasinghe Premadasa came just a week after the country's leading opposition politician, Lalith Athulathmudali, was gunned down.


Eavesdropping at the Guggenheim
The Museum Presents a Conversation Among Sculptors of Iron, and the Public Listens In


BENEFITS
Dance and Song
TODAY -- Urban Bush Women, a dance troupe, will benefit from an evening of dance and song at the Kitchen, 512 West 19th Street.
A 3 P.M. dance performance will precede the 5 P.M. party, which will feature the jazz saxophones of Steve Coleman and Robby Coltrane and the Jamaican folk music of Ancient Vibrations.
Tickets, $25, from (212) 777-4425.
Honoring Bobby Short
MONDAY -- Bobby Short will be honored for his work on behalf of the Third Street Music School Settlement with a dinner and musicale at the Carlyle.
The event, which benefits the 99-year-old music and art school, will begin with a 7:30 P.M. champagne reception and feature performances by Barbara Carroll, Joya Sherrill and five other cabaret singers.
Black tie.
Tickets, $250, from (212) 777-3240.
McDonald House Benefit
MONDAY -- Katherine Couric of NBC's "Today" show will be the host of a dinner-dance at the Plaza.
The event will be a benefit for the new Ronald McDonald House, at 405 East 73d Street, which provides lodging for the families of children undergoing cancer treatment.
The event will begin with a 6:30 P.M. cocktail reception.
Dustin Hoffman, Jimmy Webb and Al Roker ar to be among those participating.
Tickets, $500, from (212) 997-0100.
Manhattan Theater Gala
MONDAY -- The Manhattan Theater Club's 21st annual spring gala at the New York Hilton will feature performances by Broadway performers, among them Larry Gatlin, the star of "The Will Rogers Follies" and the company of "The Who's Tommy." Zoe Caldwell and Lynn Redgrave will serve as hosts for the evening, which will begin with cocktails at 7 P.M., followed by dinner at 8 and the 9:15 show.
Black tie optional.
Tickets, $250, or $50 for the show alone, from (212) 645-5590, ext. 147.
Trail Blazers Benefit
MONDAY -- Trail Blazers, a 106-year-old organization that provides a summer camp for low-income youths from New York City and New Jersey, will benefit from an evening that includes a buffet, a screening of short films and an auction of airline tickets and restaurant visits.
The event will begin at 6:30 P.M. at Planet Hollywood, 140 West 57th Street.
Tickets, $75, from (212) 691-2720.
Providing Eye Care
TUESDAY -- Liza Minnelli will be honored at a dinner and cabaret to benefit the Optometric Center of New York, a foundation that supports eye care for those who otherwise might not be able to afford it and provides scholarships to the State University's College of Optometry.
The evening will begin at 6:30 P.M. with cocktails and dinner at the Hotel Macklowe, 145 West 44th Street, followed by the performance at the adjoining Hudson Theater.
Lauren Bacall and Ann Hampton-Calloway will perform, and Corbett Monica will serve as host.
Tickets, $300, or $135 for those 35 and under, from (212) 780-5060.
Avedon to Be Honored
TUESDAY -- Richard Avedon will be among those honored and Charles Kuralt of CBS News will be the host at the International Center of Photography's ninth annual awards dinner, which raises money for the museum's exhibition and educational programs.
A 6:30 P.M. cocktail reception will be followed by dinner at the New York Hilton.
Tickets, $400, from (212) 860-1763.
A Tribute to Audrey Hepburn
TUESDAY -- The New York Metropolitan Committee for Unicef is sponsoring a tribute to Audrey Hepburn, on the late actress's birthday, a benefit for Unicef's Hepburn Memorial Fund.
A 5:45 P.M. cocktail reception in the penthouse of the architectural firm of Swanke Hayden Connell at 4 Columbus Circle (Eighth Avenue at 58th Street), will be followed by a 7:30 P.M. screening of "My Fair Lady" at Angelika 57, 225 West 57th Street.
The screening, with champagne at intermission, will conclude a daylong series of memorial activities.
Tickets, $75, or $35 for the film alone, from (212) 759-0760.
Thirteen Friends at '21'
TUESDAY -- WNET, the public television station, will be the beneficiary of a Friends of Thirteen dinner-dance that will begin with a 6:30 P.M. cocktail reception at the "21" Club, 21 West 52d Street, with the talk-show host Charlie Rose.
Black tie.
Tickets, $250, from (212) 560-2800.
For Holocaust Rescuers
TUESDAY -- The Jewish Foundation for Christian Rescuers, which provides financial support to individuals who aided Jews during Holocaust, will honor E. Robert Goodkind, the foundation's chairman, and the people of Denmark, with a dinner at the Pierre.
The evening will begin at 6:30 P.M. with cocktail reception.
A film about the Danish rescue efforts will be screened.
Black tie.
Tickets, $500, from (212) 490-2525, ext. 429.
Matchmaker, Matchmaker
WEDNESDAY -- The Volunteer Referral Center, which matches volunteers with charitable organizations in New York City, will benefit from a dinner and a performance of Chicago City Limits, the improvisational troupe.
A 6 P.M. buffet at Jim McMullen's Restaurant, 1341 Third Avenue (77th Street), will precede the 8:30 perfomance at the Chicago City Limits theater, 351 East 74th Street.
A 10 P.M. dance at Live Psychic, a nightclub at 209 East 84th Street, will follow.
Tickets, $125, or $50 for those 35 and under for the performance and dance only, from (212) 889-4805.
A Restoration Celebration
WEDNESDAY -- The writer Brendan Gill will offer a salute to the Morris-Jumel Mansion, Manhattan's oldest surviving house, in honor of the completion of exterior renovations.
His remarks follow a 6 P.M. champagne reception at the mansion, 1765 Jumel Terrace at 160th Street.
The West Side Chamber Brass Trio will perform.
Buses to the mansion depart at 5:30 P.M. from the Seventh Regiment Armory, Park Avenue at 66th Street.
Tickets, $50, from (212) 923-8008.
Benefit for Cancer
WEDNESDAY -- A performance of "Kiss of the Spider Woman" at the Broadhurst Theater will benefit the Cancer Research Institute, which finances immunology research.
Before the 8 P.M. show there will be a cocktail reception and buffet at 5:30 P.M. at the Hudson Theater, 141 West 44th Street.
Tickets, $300, or $150 for the performance alone, from (212) 688-7515.
A.D.L.
Gala
WEDNESDAY -- Two 1960's musical groups, the Tokens and the Shangri-Las, will headline the fifth annual Anti-Defamation League dinner-dance at the Supper Club, 240 West 47th Street.
The event will benefit the group's efforts against anti-Semitism in the New York area.
Dinner, a raffle of vacations and restaurant meals and the performance will follow a 6 P.M. cocktail reception.
Black tie.
Tickets, $350, from (212) 490-2525, ext. 232.
Cancer Care Fiesta
WEDNESDAY -- The junior committee of Cancer Care, which assists cancer patients and their families, will sponsor a Cinco de Mayo fiesta at the Tequila Sunrise restaurant, 99 Park Avenue South at 39th Street.
There will be an open bar, hors d'oeuvres and a raffle featuring a vacation in Mexico.
Tickets, $35, from (212) 221-3300, ext. 468.
A Crystal Ball
THURSDAY -- The eighth annual Crystal Ball will raise funds for medical research at the Mount Sinai School of Medicine.
A cocktail reception at 7:30 P.M. in the Guggenheim Pavilion of the Mount Sinai Medical Center, 1190 Fifth Avenue at 101st Street, will be followed by dinner and dancing in the Nathan Cummings Atrium at Fifth Avenue and 100th Street.
Black tie.
Tickets, $750, from (212) 241-5762.
American Ireland Fund
THURSDAY -- A dinner-dance at the Waldorf-Astoria will benefit the American Ireland Fund, an organization that supports employment, educational and social-service programs in the Republic of Ireland and in Northern Ireland.
The 7 P.M. cocktail reception and dinner-dance will honor Lewis L. Glucksman, a vice chairman of Smith Barney, Harris Upham &amp; Company, and his wife, Loretta Brennan Glucksman, for their establishment of Ireland House, an Irish studies center at New York University.
Black tie.
Tickets, $400, from (212) 735-0755.
A Ball for Love Heals
THURSDAY -- Love Heals, the Alison Gertz Foundation for AIDS education, will benefit from a ball from 9 P.M. to 1 A.M. at the Supper Club, 240 West 47th Street.
There will be an open bar and hors d'oeuvres and the music of Tracy Brian and Whole Earth Mamas.
Tickets, $100, from (212) 371-1335, or $125 at the door.
Salvation Army Dance
THURSDAY -- The singer Melissa Manchester will headline the 14th annual Salvation Army of Greater New York dinner-dance, which begins with a 6:30 P.M. cocktail reception at the Marriott Marquis.
The Jerry Kravit Orchestra will play.
Black tie.
Tickets, $500, from (212) 337-7359.
For the World's Women
THURSDAY -- A dinner-dance at the Hungarian Mission to the United Nations, 227 East 52d Street, will benefit the New York committee of Unifem, a United Nations Association group that aids impoverished women and finances economic-development projects worldwide.
Hungary's Ambassador to the United Nations, Andre Erdos, and his wife will be hosts for the 7 P.M. cocktail reception and a Hungarian dinner, followed by dancing and an auction featuring a trip to Budapest.
Black tie.
Tickets, $300, from (212) 288-5367.
Americares Dance
THURSDAY -- Americares, a private medical relief agency, will benefit from a 6:30 P.M. dance party at the Puck Building, 295 Lafayette Street at Houston Street, featuring an open bar, a light supper and dancing.
There will be a photojournalism exhibit featuring scenes from Americare's worldwide efforts.
Tickets, $75, from Christy Powers at (800) 486-4357, or $85 at the door.
For Green Design
THURSDAY -- Housing Works, an organization that provides housing for homeless people with AIDS in Manhattan and Brooklyn, will benefit from a dinner-dance whose theme is the role of ecology in design.
It will be held at the Cathedral of St.
John the Divine, 1047 Amsterdam Avenue at 112th Street.
A 6 P.M. cocktail reception will precede a panel discussion.
A vegetarian meal and dancing to John Malino and the Swing Society will follow at 8 P.M.
The event is part of a monthlong celebration of environmentally sensitive design.
Tickets, $125, from (212) 741-2409.
Camp Benefit
THURSDAY -- A preview performance of "Time on Fire," a play at the McGinn/Cazale Theater, 2162 Broadway at 76th Street, will benefit the Hole in the Wall Gang Camp in Ashford, Conn.
The camp, for children with cancer or blood diseases, was established in 1985 by a group led by Paul Newman.
The 8 P.M. performance will be followed by dinner at the Mackinac Bar and Grill, 384 Columbus Avenue at 78th Street.
Tickets, $100, from (212) 787-8302.
For Teatro dell'Opera
THURSDAY -- Kitty Carlisle Hart, chairwoman of the New York State Council on the Arts, will be honored at a benefit performance of "The Rape of Lucretia" at the Majestic Theater of the Brooklyn Academy of Music, 651 Fulton Street at Ashland Street.
The event will raise funds for Il Piccolo Teatro dell'Opera, the Brooklyn-based opera company that is performing.
Mrs.
Hart had played the title role in the 1948 Broadway premiere of the Benjamin Britten opera.
A cocktail reception will follow in the theater's lobby.
Black tie optional.
Tickets, $35, from (718) 643-7775.  'Broadway in Brooklyn'
THURSDAY -- The building fund of the New York Congregational Home for the Aged, a nonprofit nursing home in Brooklyn, will benefit from a dinner and cabaret performance.
A 6 P.M. cocktail reception and buffet will be held in a tent on the Metrotech Center common, 1 Metrotech Center at Myrtle Avenue.
A review of Broadway show tunes performed by members of the New York Grand Opera begins at 7:30 P.M. in the Dibner Library of the Polytechnic Institute, 333 Jay Street at Johnson Street.
Eugene H. Luntey, chairman of Long Island University, will be honored.
Tickets, $100, from (718) 284-8256 or at the door.
Dancing for Health
FRIDAY -- The third annual dance of the Associates Council of the Children's Aid Society is to benefit "Big Blue," the society's mobile health-services unit serving New York's poorest neighborhoods.
The dance, at the Pierre, begins at 9 P.M. and features an open bar, hors d'oeuvres and the music of E.T.A., a band.
Black tie.
Tickets, $75, from (212) 949-4934, or $90 at the door.
Visiting-Nurse Centennial
FRIDAY -- The Visiting Nurse Service of New York celebrates its centennial year with a dinner-dance at the St.
Regis Roof.
The event, which begins with a 7:30 P.M. cocktail reception, benefits the free-care programs of the home-health organization.
The Lester Lanin Orchestra will play.
Black tie.
Tickets, $175, from (212) 794-9200, ext. 4820.
Boys Harbor Gala
SATURDAY -- The junior commitee of Boys Harbor Inc. is sponsoring a spring dance at the New York Prop Gallery, 481 West 54th Street at Ninth Avenue, beginning at 9 P.M.
The event, which benefits the nonprofit organization's after-school tutoring and sports programs in Harlem and the Bronx, features an open bar and hors d'oeurves.
Tickets, $50, from (212) 427-2244, or $65 at the door.
King Scholarship Fund
SATURDAY -- The jazz pianist Marian McPartland will headline a jazz benefit for the Martin Luther King Jr.
Scholarship Fund of the Manhattan Country School.
The event, at the school, 7 East 96th Street at Fifth Avenue, begins with cocktails and a buffet, followed by the performance.
The entertainer Bobby Short will present Ms.
McPartland with an award.
Tickets, $100, from (212) 348-0952.
AIDS Coalition Benefit
MAY 9 -- Performances by the singers Nell Carter, Phyllis Hyman, LaVerne Butler and others at Webster Hall, 119-125 East 11th Street, will raise funds for the People with AIDS Coalition, which provides emergency assistance, education and housing.
The 8 P.M. performance follows a 6:30 P.M. cocktail reception, and the actress Stockard Channing is to be the host of a 9:30 P.M. champagne and dessert reception.
Dennis de Leon, the New York City Human Rights Commissioner, and others will be honored.
Tickets, $100, or $50 for the show and post-concert reception alone, from (212) 532-0290.
Whitney Award Gala
MAY 10 -- The Second Annual American Art Award Dinner at the Whitney Museum will honor Joseph E. Seagram &amp; Sons Inc. for the company's support of American art and architecture.
Dinner and dancing will follow a 7 P.M. cocktail reception, which benefits the museum's general fund.
The Mike Carney Orchestra will perform.
Black tie.
Tickets, $1,000, from (212) 570-3672.


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
BABY INSANE AND THE BUDDHA By Bob Sipchen.  Doubleday, $20.


RECORD BRIEFS
'An English Ladymass'
Anonymous 4. Harmonia Mundi France HMU 907080; CD.


POSTINGS: 2 New Court Rulings; Roommates and Subtenants
A warning to co-op owners and rent-regulated tenants who circumvent subleasing rules by claiming that their subtenants are really roommates: Two rulings last month in cases before the New York City Housing Court gutted the year-old Lincoln Guild decision that has made such situations possible.
"They modify it tremendously," said Stuart Saft, chairman of the Council of New York Cooperatives.


Fears and Death on Eastern Parkway
The accident that killed a 2-year-old toddler in Brooklyn last week reflected two community concerns -- a roadway disrupted by a seemingly endless construction project and reckless driving, often by unlicensed drivers.
It was the fourth fatal accident at the intersection of Eastern Parkway and Nostrand Avenue in Crown Heights since November 1989 and the 20th along the parkway since 1988.


When the Risks of Wall Street Affect Us All
The days of guaranteed returns have ended.
And that will have major effects on millions of Americans and also on the financial system.
It was not too many years ago that the average American had no real reason to be concerned with the financial markets.
Much of his or her money was in the bank, or perhaps in Treasury bills, providing a guaranteed yield with no principal risk.
The pension awaited at retirement was a fixed amount each month.
If the pension fund investments did not make enough money, that was a problem for the employer, not the employee.


Jenny Awaits a Little Risk
On the 13th anniversary of her victory in the Kentucky Derby, the grand old mare Genuine Risk dozed serenely in her private paddock at Three Chimneys Farm in nearby Midway while her doctor and handlers waited patiently for the arrival of her first foal.
In the years since she became only the second filly to win the Derby, the 16-year-old Genuine Risk, known as Jenny, has never delivered a live foal.
But last spring she was bred to the onetime European miler Rahy, and she has carried her pregnancy to the edge of its full term.


Cara L. Grabel, Andrew S. Case
August wedding plans have been announced for Cara Leslie Grabel and Andrew Stewart Case, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard A. Case of Simsbury, Conn., by her parents, Mr. and Mrs.
William N. Grabel of New Rochelle, N.Y.
Ms.
Grabel, 27, is an associate director in the development department of the New York City Ballet.
She graduated from the University of Michigan.
Her father is the president of Grabel's Pharmacy Inc. in New Rochelle.
Her mother, Linda L. Grabel, teaches history at New Rochelle High School.


Official to Have Surgery
BILLY PAYNE, president and chief executive officer of the Atlanta Committee for the Olympic Games, will undergo coronary bypass surgery tomorrow.
Payne, 45, was in stable condition yesterday at Saint Joseph's Hospital in Atlanta.
He was admitted Thursday night after complaining of chest pains.
"There is no damage to his heart; it remains totally normal in strength," Dr.
DOUGLAS MURPHY said yesterday.
"He has not had a heart attack."


For Kevin McKenzie, an Uphill Battle
When Kevin McKenzie was named artistic director of American Ballet Theater in October, he was in danger of presiding over the company's demise.
Engulfed in a financial crisis, one of the world's most prestigious ballet troupes seemed also to be losing its artistic compass.
But as Ballet Theater begins its annual season at the Metropolitan Opera House tomorrow, there are signs that the company has turned a corner.
"Ballet Theater is not going to be a touring troupe performing to tape," Mr.
McKenzie said emphatically.
Instead, there are major projects in the works -- among them a new "Nutcracker," with a libretto by the playwright Wendy Wasserstein.


Beth Ausborn, Barry Seeman
Jane Elizabeth Ausborn, the hospitality coordinator for the United States Tennis Association in White Plains, was married yesterday to Barry Stuart Seeman, a vice president in the global derivatives group of Citibank in New York.
The Rev.
Roy Francis Falgout performed the ceremony at the First United Methodist Church in Henderson, N.C.
Mrs.
Seeman, 29, who is known as Beth, graduated from the University of North Carolina.
She is the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Alton Watkins Ausborn of Henderson.


Sports of The Times; A Popular Victory by Old Guard
YOU see it at the Oscars sometimes, when a Hollywood insider finally wins the Academy Award.
You can see the hometown crowd sigh and smile while bursting into applause.
You see it at the Super Bowl when Wellington Mara of the New York Giants or Art Rooney of the Pittsburgh Steelers finally wins it.
They have paid their dues.


Caitlin Nammack, Robert Weissman
Mr. and Mrs.
William J. Nammack of Mill Neck, L.I., have announced August wedding plans for their daughter, Caitlin Ann Nammack, and Robert Thomas Weissman, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Ralph Weissman of Chappaqua, N.Y.
Miss Nammack is a freelance artist and an owner of Scribbling Ink, a stationery supply company in New York.
She graduated from Randolph-Macon Woman's College.
Her father, a former governor of the New York Stock Exchange, is a partner in the brokerage firm of Murphey, Marseilles, Smith &amp; Nammack in New York.
Her paternal grandfather, the late Jerome W. Nammack, was a vice chairman of the exchange.


Dismissing Conflict as 'Tribal' Evades the Search for a Solution
To the Editor:
Let's stop this misleading practice of referring to problems in various parts of the world as "tribal" conflicts.
Use of the term "tribe" has declined even in anthropology -- where once, at least, it had a relatively precise meaning -- because many feel that the concept misrepresents the social complexity and diversity of small, non-state societies.
The media application of "tribalism" to complex political strife ranging from South Africa to Somalia to the former Yugoslavia is far worse, however.
It conjures an archaic, 19th-century ethnocentrism depicting irrational, even savage behavior generated by mindless tradition rather than by thinking, strategizing (and rational, if sometimes malevolent) 20th-century human beings.
It offers a license to dismiss the search for realistic solutions.
If the people involved are driven by ancient, ingrained hatreds bordering on superstition, why pursue rational argument with them?


Correction
An article on March 14 about documentaries and the Academy Awards referred incorrectly to "Music for the Movies: Bernard Herrmann." The film was a nominee for the 1992 International Documentary Association Award, not a winner.
A reader's letter, dated April 13, noted the error; this correction was delayed by an editor's absence from the office.


In Brooklyn's District 15, Divisions of the City Are Reflected in the Campaign
Six months ago, the board of School District 15 in Brooklyn so angered some parents by approving a modified version of the Rainbow Curriculum that the police had to escort board members out when their meeting ended.
On Tuesday, still angry but better organized, those parents and their allies hope to take control of the board.
On the surface, the emotional campaign reflects a debate raging all over New York City over the extent to which youngsters should be exposed to homosexual life styles when schools teach tolerance.
Nowhere does there seem to be a more dramatic clash between the conservative Christian groups seeking to make inroads in the school system and those on the other end of the spectrum who have organized to beat them back.


Avant-Garde Poet of the Russian Revolution
IN his "Shock of the New," a history of Modernism, Robert Hughes takes note of those who, he says, lent the Russian Revolution "its esthetic voice."
He lists writers like Vladimir Mayakovsky, artists like Alexander Rodchenko and Vladimir Tatlin and film makers on the order of Eisenstein, adding that, together, they "created an art of expectation."


Nancy Drew Owes Her Life to This Man
To the Editor:
As the editor of the Nancy Drew series at Archway Paperbacks-Minstrel Books (Pocket Books), I note that your April 19 article fails to give credit to the true creator of Nancy Drew, Edward Stratemeyer.


Where Mona Lisa Slept, Shakespeare Romps
SET ABOVE A LONG ROW of cypresses in the midst of an English-style garden, the Villa Vignamaggio lords over a hilly Tuscan landscape largely unchanged since the Gherardini family first began making wine here in 1405.
A century later, the landscape reputedly served as background for the "Mona Lisa." Indeed, Lisa Gherardini Giocondo, the subject of Leonardo's legendary portrait, was born and lived in one of the villa's downstairs chambers.
Now the villa is the setting and sometime actor in Kenneth Branagh's film version of Shakespeare's "Much Ado About Nothing," which opens on Friday.
The villa, whose stucco walls are tinted a hematite color, has nearly 60 rooms over more than 3,600 square feet.
It is the most important edifice in Greve, the heart of Tuscany's Chianti region and an obligatory stop on any wine connoisseur's itinerary.
Today, the Villa Vignamaggio is a working vineyard, farm and hotel.


Moneylender, By Decree
To the Editor:
John Gross mentions that Christians as well as Jews were moneylenders and that it would have been historically accurate for Shylock to have been Christian.
To add a note: In 1430, a decree by the Priori, or governors, of Florence invited the Jews to become moneylenders because it had become necessary to save the poor from the cruelty and usuriousness of Christian bankers.
This decree was supposed to guarantee Jewish immigrants the right to live peacefully despite the hostility of the clergy.


ENERGY DEPT. SHIFT IN SAFETY FAULTED
A former Energy Secretary has warned Congress that the current secretary is returning control of crucial safety issues to the "old guard" that operated reactors and processing plants in the nuclear weapons complex unsafely and in violation of environmental laws.
James D. Watkins, who headed the Energy Department in the Bush Administration, said in a letter last week that a reorganization of the department by the new secretary, Hazel R. O'Leary, had created the "potential for rapid degradation" in nuclear safety.


Fresh Air Fund Drive Seeks Hosts and Help
Eleven-year-old Henry Pimentel has always enjoyed riding his bicycle on the sidewalks and in the parks of his Chelsea neighborhood in Manhattan.
Last summer, when he went to New Hampshire, he discovered a whole new way of riding: wheeling up and down the streets, something he could never do in congested New York City.
The family Henry was staying with also had a treehouse and a dog, and there were long walks in the woods during the day and nights of playing hide-and-seek.


The Worst of All Possible Banks
THE OUTLAW BANK
A Wild Ride Into the Secret Heart of BCCI.
By Jonathan Beaty and S. C. Gwynne. 399 pp.
New York: Random House. $25.


Karen M. Murphy, R. M. Freeman Jr.
Karen Marie Murphy, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Thomas J. Murphy of Rockville Centre, L.I., was married there yesterday to Robert Matthew Freeman Jr., the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Freeman Sr. of Winter Park, Fla.
Msgr.
James Lisante performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at Saint Agnes Cathedral.
Mrs.
Freeman, 28, graduated from the State University of New York at Oneonta.
Her father is a retired vice president of Merrill Lynch &amp; Company in New York.


Sex and the 'Singles' Symphony
Time was, it was easy to tell the difference between classical music and pop.
The cover art on a classical album, for example, was usually a dignified photograph of the performer or perhaps a somber-hued Baroque painting.
Pop music, on the other hand, used any commercial ploy -- colorful, sexy covers, far-fetched promotions, commercial tie-ins -- that might entice a buyer.
In contrast to the bedlam of a rock concert, the atmosphere at a classical concert was tranquil and civilized.
Year after year, concert halls mailed out tasteful, boring brochures, and subscribers dutifully mailed back their checks.
Classical-music executives were stuffy little men in dark suits who kept their jobs for life; the moguls of the pop world went to work wearing T-shirts and sneakers, although when their products fell to the bottom of the charts, they were out of work.


Unexpected Problems Stall Bill to Regulate Nightclubs
While the City Council appears likely to pass an ordinance limiting the placement of adult video stores and topless bars near residential neighborhoods, a similar measure to limit locations of large nightclubs has met unanticipated opposition and delays.
For months, angry residents in several neighborhoods have campaigned for a cabaret bill that would create a 200-foot buffer zone between large clubs and residential buildings and would give the Consumer Affairs Department the power to shut down problem clubs.


How to Make A Pinhole Camera
IF you would like teach a youngster the principles of photography, muster all the patience you have and say, "Let's build a pinhole camera and make pictures with it."
But be prepared to answer questions about photography you have not faced before.
Bone up by reading about pinhole photography.


The Right to Speak Out, Responsibly
The March 7 article "Students Speak Out on Racial Discord in Their Lives" reported on an assembly at White Plains High School in which students spoke on the theme "Martin Luther King 25 Years Later: What Happened to the Dream?"
The article said, "The two-hour program, organized by the White Plains Y.W.C.A. and co-sponsored by the White Plains Youth Bureau and the high school, gave a disquieting view of the effect of racial trouble on young lives here."


Young Critics Say 'Bravo!'
Party for Mark di Suvero's sculpture, Gagosian Gallery, SoHo.


Peace Corps Workers: Older and Businesslike
Two years ago, at age 63, Jane Becker joined the Peace Corps and went to Poland.
She was not the oldest volunteer.
As the Peace Corps expands the range and depth of its services to emerging countries, newly required skills are reshaping the image of the traditional volunteer.
With the demand for entrepreneurial experience in Eastern Europe and an increasing number of volunteers deciding to stay in, the profile of a typical Peace Corps worker has changed.
In 1963 the average age of Peace Corps volunteers was 22.
Now the average volunteer is 30.


On Fire Island, Chaos Amid Devastation
"WHEN they go, they scream," said Jack Gellatly, looking out at a Fire Island house dangling like a piece of meat before a hungry ocean.
"It's an eerie sound. The ocean is taking it, pulling it, and the house doesn't want to go. You hear the timbers straining to hold on. It becomes human when it's dying. It screams."
Land goes more quietly.
When dunes die there is silence.
Billions of grains of molded sand vanish into churning waters, and only stillness marks their demise.


Into Africa
To the Editor: "Putting Together a Custom Safari" by Jane Perlez (March 28) was interesting, but isn't it about time Americans got out of their rut of seeing Africa through camera lenses and binoculars?
A book published recently by our group, Global Exchange, "Beyond Safaris: A Guide to Building People-to-People Ties with Africa," introduces the reader to United States organizations working to link Americans to the many grassroots development groups that are transforming Africa in the face of incredible odds.


Mets Send Thompson Down
The Mets, with professional common sense prevailing over personal pride, sent center fielder Ryan Thompson to the minors Friday night.
The Mets, who had enormous hopes for the 25-year-old outfielder they acquired as part of the David Cone trade with Toronto in August, conceded that Thompson was currently overmatched in the majors and reassigned him to Class AAA Norfolk with the aim of restoring his confidence.
The roster move -- outfielder Wayne Housie was promoted to replace Thompson -- came at the price of some organizational embarrassment and personal sadness.


Waiting for Act 2 Around Times Square
THE three buildings certainly look impressive.
There's 1585 Broadway, a silvery, 1.3 million-square-foot behemoth, towering over 47th and 48th Streets.
A couple of blocks south, between 45th and 46th Streets, there's 1540 Broadway, its green tint and striking prow highlighting its million square feet of bulk.


A Growing Islamic Presence: Balancing Sacred and Secular
About 100 miles north of here in the cornucopia of the San Joaquin Valley, Ali Huzaibe, who was born in Yemen, runs a Frosty King where the familiar meets the new.
Kids in sneakers and baseball caps mingle with men in skullcaps and desert robes, eating hamburgers and tacos.
At the end of the day, the men go to a mosque in a converted warehouse where they read frayed copies of the Koran and say the evening prayers.
Here in Los Angeles, Abdul Karim Hasan, who was born in New Jersey and converted to Islam after hearing Malcolm X preach, is the imam of the Masjid Felix Bilal.
This major mosque, with a growing congregation in the heart of the city's biggest black neighborhood, is building a larger edifice with money provided by Saudi Arabia.


Commercial Property: Training; It's Class Time For Brokers, Agents and Managers
TRAINING at Edward S. Gordon Company used to be "The Marty and Marty Show." Martin Turchin and Martin Sloane, two very senior brokers, would hold 12 Monday night sessions to teach tyros the basics of real estate.
They held more-sophisticated programs from time to time, but by invitation only, for senior people on the fast track.
Today, the advanced sessions are open to any first-line manager or above.
There are periodic courses to teach building agents about marketing and financing.


Foes of Yeltsin Riot in Moscow; Dozens Injured
Barred from marking May Day in Red Square, hundreds of Communists and their supporters battled the riot police with staves, spears and stones today, leaving dozens of people injured and promising more demonstrations to come.
The clash on Gagarin Square, under a tall monument to the first man in space, was the first outbreak of political violence in Moscow since the coup attempt in August 1991.
At least 80 policemen and as many rioters were injured, including one policeman who was reported in critical condition after he was crushed between two moving trucks.
Several news photographers and television cameramen were roughed up.


30-Somethings Make Music, Too
To the Editor:
I strongly disagree with Bernard Holland's assessment that recent concert music lacks "Americanness"  [ "If Miniver Could Carry a Tune . . .," April 11 ] .
The American musical and cultural influences he seeks in the works of our composers over 40 is currently present in the music of a large number of composers now finding success in their 30's.
To name a few: David Lang, Michael Torke, Steven Mackey, Todd Levin, Eve Beglarian, Michael Daugherty, Lois V. Vierk, Michael Gordon, John Zorn and myself.


NEW YORK REPORT
When fall clothes finally arrive in the nation's stores, customers will discover what the fashion professionals found out five weeks ago: nothing beats the best.
The fall '93 New York showings produced four world-class collections, each the work of a seasoned, established, confident designer.
To be sure, there were also spurts of creativity here and there, several lapses, some new stirrings and seemingly endless parades of perfectly nice clothes with a modicum of newness.
But what Ralph Lauren, Donna Karan, Calvin Klein and Geoffrey Beene achieved this season were collections very much in their well-known styles, now rendered with such quality, high standards and polished execution that they are on a par with the work of such towering European talents as Giorgio Armani and Karl Lagerfeld.
Geoffrey Beene's designs are further extensions of his singular point of view, based on a knowledgeable, often complex cut.
Calvin Klein's offerings are a perfectionist's rendition of the totally unadorned.
Donna Karan creates the season's fluid silhouettes in a sensual, highly sophisticated manner.
And Ralph Lauren -- with a romantic backward glance at things Russian -- assembled a collection of deliciously feminine clothes loosely based on men's wear that women will yearn to own.


Christa Wolf's Politics
To the Editor:
Your two articles about Christa Wolf, by Peter Demetz and Todd Gitlin, seem unduly charitable.
Ms.
Wolf did criticize East Germany for its excesses.
But she never truly censured its Marxist-Leninist foundations.
East Germany never ceased to glorify Lenin and his doctrines of revolutionary vigilance and terror.
Memories now cloud; eyes glaze over in East Germany when the past is mentioned.
The fact remains: from its very beginnings East Germany rested on naked force.
Jails were full.
Countless people lost their property and their jobs.
Many lost their lives.
There was distrust as friends informed on friends, pastors on parishioners, colleagues on colleagues.
Before the border closed, nearly 3 million people voted with their feet to escape from East Germany.
It was as if 40 million people had departed from the United States.


CHINESE ADOPTIONS
Bruce Porter says that he prefers a daughter because "only with difficulty could I see myself 10 years hence chasing a boy around some Little League diamond." Someone should tell him that, in the 1990's, adolescent girls are just as likely to participate in organized sports as are adolescent boys.
ROBERT J. RARRICK
Endwell, N.Y.


Enjoy the Greenery
Spring arrives and the foragers are out stalking wild asparagus.
They ramble the woods for morels and fiddlehead ferns, and cruise the river bank for the first cress of the season.
But gardeners and farmers have a different barometer.
Once the frost thaws, and the earth's been turned, and the rain succumbs to a few sunny days, peas begin to sprout.
Until recently, these small, pale greens were simply a promise of things to come: an eventual pea pod for the taking.
But as the global table has expanded, so have our appetites.
And recently, American growers have begun to harvest the succulent shoots of both the sweet and the snow pea.


Manager's Profile; Mark A. Tincher
Fund: Vista Growth and Income, top performer of all funds for the five years ended March 31, up 31.8 percent, annualized; $390 million in assets.
Manager since 1991.  (Sponsor: Chase Manhattan Bank, New York.)
Born: Oct. 1, 1955; Toledo, Ohio.


The Idiosyncrasies of Shopping for and Storing Lumber
TO say that shopping for lumber can be intimidating understates the case for many homeowners and would-be amateur carpenters who freeze at the thought of visiting a lumberyard.
Here are some basic explanations and tips that may help.
Lumber derived chiefly from evergreen trees like pine, hemlock, spruce and fir is termed softwood.
Lumber from deciduous trees like oak and maple is called hardwood.


Amanda Rauch, Mitchell Thaw
Barbara and Peter Rauch of New York have announced August wedding plans for their daughter, Amanda Felice Rauch, and Mitchell David Thaw, a son of Sandra Mason-Thaw of Ridgewood, N.J. and Stanley Thaw of Pembroke Pines, Fla.
Miss Rauch is an account executive in New York at the Karen Kane Company, a women's sportswear manufacturer.
She graduated from Tufts University.
Her father is a senior vice president and associate creative director at Ammirati &amp; Puris Inc., the advertising agency in New York.
Her mother is a psychotherapist in New York.


California's Prized Wild Mushrooms
ONE November afternoon, when I was working for a small newspaper in northern California, a photographer walked in, dropped a pile of huge chanterelles and a few boletes on a counter and invited the staff to take some home.
Exactly where he had collected the mushrooms he wasn't saying -- somewhere on the Point Reyes peninsula.
The chanterelles I had encountered previously were golden fluted fungi the size of fingers.
These California mushrooms had the color and fluted edges, but they were the size of fists.
Although I took the two or three chanterelles that were offered and listened to the discourse on how to clean and cook them, I was afraid to, and they sat on my desk until they dried.
Only later, in my neighborhood market in San Francisco, when I saw them labeled Cantharellus cibarius and priced from $16 to $24 a pound, did I buy some, cook them and begin to realize what I had missed.


Death Is Resurrected As an Art Form
The specter of death -- or more precisely its image, its portrait, its many guises -- turns up often these days where photography makes its bid for an art audience.
In the past six months both the Pace-MacGill and Janet Borden Galleries have had exhibitions of the works of Weegee, whose photographs of gangsters' bodies growing cold on the sidewalk set a standard for tabloid murders.
Pace-MacGill continued with Diana Michener's sober images of fetuses in specimen jars, immediately followed by a show of images by Joel-Peter Witkin, who has a penchant for severed heads on platters of fruit and decapitated bodies on chairs.
Andres Serrano's close-up color shots (at Paula Cooper Gallery) of people who had died horribly gave the morgue an air of artistic glamour.
And now Barbara P. Norfleet, a senior lecturer and curator at Harvard, has assembled an outline history of photographs of the subject, "Looking at Death" (published by Godine), to accompany a recent show at the university.
The images, culled from Harvard's archives, are little known and shed some light on a dark corner.


Bookshelf
Additional titles of interest:
THE 13th CLUE.
Written and illustrated by Ann Jonas.
Greenwillow. $14. (Ages 4 and up) No one's at home, and there's no sign of a birthday celebration.
The narrator starts writing in her diary in the attic, when the light pops on with a sign saying "Find more clues." The last of the clever clues leads to a very satisfying party in the woods.


HOSPITAL IN HAITI MIRRORS COUNTRY
The sparsely shaded grounds of this country's only major public hospital have long doubled as the hot and dusty waiting room of a poor population accustomed to odds that weigh heavily against them.
The sparsely shaded grounds of this country's only major public hospital have long doubled as the hot and dusty waiting room of a poor population accustomed to odds that weigh heavily against them.


Soprano Excites the World's Opera Stages
A LITTLE yellow cottage at the edge of a long winding street in Sound Beach was bursting at the seams with a voice of a soprano, Eileen Strempel.
Inside, Ms.
Strempel, 25, scurried to make last-minute arrangements for an afternoon flight to San Francisco to perform the premier of a cantata, "Song of the Magdalene," which Richy Aldag wrote for her.


Mutual Funds; Testing Your Fund Knowledge
Could you sell mutual funds?
To do so requires passing the Series Six examination given by the National Association of Securities Dealers.
Those who pass (66 percent do) may sell fund shares and variable annuities, but not stocks, bonds or other securities (which require taking the Series Seven exam).


Bryant Park Says 'Thank You'
Parks Council awards dinner, Bryant Park, April 27.


Long Vigil of Grief and Hope for Husband of Brooklyn Officer Shot in Head
Detective Paul Capotosto was on the job, locking up the suspects from an undercover drug operation in Jamaica, Queens, that warm spring afternoon when his sergeant's beeper went off three times.
In the police world the beeper usually means trouble, since routine messages are usually passed on by radio.
He watched as the sergeant called in, and then Detective Capotosto's heart sank when he saw the stricken expression on his supervisor's face.


Virgilia Pancoast, Walter C. Klein
Virgilia Heimsath Pancoast of New York was married yesterday to Walter Charles Klein of Short Hills, N.J.
The Rev.
Winston B. Charles performed the ceremony at St.
James' Episcopal Church in New York.
The bride was until recently the director of the authentication service at the International Foundation for Art Research in New York, a nonprofit organization that tracks stolen works of art and identifies forgeries.
She graduated from Sarah Lawrence College.
She is the daughter of the late Charles and Star Heimsath.
The bride's first marriage ended in divorce.


In School Vote, Clues for Mayoral Contest
On Tuesday, New Yorkers -- perhaps just a sliver, perhaps many more -- will go to the polls to stake their political claims on a range of raw issues, from sex education to nepotism to lessons in tolerance for homosexuals, all in arcane elections for the city's 32 local school boards.
This fall, hundreds of thousands more voters will pass judgment on the administration of Mayor David N. Dinkins, who may well be held accountable for the schools, even though he does not control them.
While many of the school races may turn on local questions, their potential impact on the mayoral contest is a matter of intense interest and debate among the candidates and their seconds.


Israeli Concessions Said to Revive Peace Talks
A series of Israeli concessions has stirred optimism among Palestinian delegates after the first week of resuscitated Middle East peace talks.
Among the concessions, which the Israelis prefer to call confidence-building measures, were decisions to allow a leading Palestinian from East Jerusalem to join the Palestinian delegation and to let a group of Palestinians banned from the occupied territories come home.


The Idiosyncrasies of Shopping for and Storing Lumber
TO say that shopping for lumber can be intimidating understates the case for many homeowners and would-be amateur carpenters who freeze at the thought of visiting a lumberyard.
Here are some basic explanations and tips that may help.
Lumber derived chiefly from evergreen trees like pine, hemlock, spruce and fir is termed softwood.
Lumber from deciduous trees like oak and maple is called hardwood.


Proposal to Use A Man's Property
To the Editor:
The offensive thing about "Indecent Proposal" is not that the woman is willing to prostitute herself for a million dollars, nor the fact that the offer is made in the first place.
The offensive thing about the movie is not even the question of whether or not she enjoys being used in this way.


Public &amp; Private; What About The Boys?
The eighth grade boys were not happy campers the day I came to call.
"Why don't you ever write about the sexual harassment of men?" one of them asked darkly.
"Why don't you ever write about men being raped?" Well, I said, one answer is obvious: men have plenty of troubles, but they are not always identical to those of women.
Looking back on Take Our Daughters to Work Day, and the inevitable and considerable backlash on the subject of boys, the same thought crosses my mind.
The women who cooked up this idea believed there was something important we needed to communicate to our daughters about their worth in the world.
Boys need to learn many things about themselves, too.
But they are different things than girls need, addressed in a different fashion.


NEWS SUMMARY
International 3-21  CLINTON BACKS USE OF AIRPOWER


This Time, Eisenman Goes Conventional
For once, you don't need advanced training in French philosophy to decipher a building by Peter Eisenman.
To understand it is not necessarily to love it.
Still, as the work of an architect who has labored long, and with notable success, to pitch his ideas beyond mortal understanding, the viewer-friendly Greater Columbus Convention Center comes as a pleasant surprise.
Visitors familiar with Eisenman's past enigmas -- staircases stuck to the ceiling or leading to a blank wall -- may find themselves bowled over by waves of gratitude.
Fortunately, legibility isn't all this building has going for it.
It brings a brash, poetic order to a chaotic urban landscape, shaping a middle ground between a city and the forces that threaten it.
Plus, it's got snazzy looks.
Ten years ago, opacity was Eisenman's pure delight.
His exercises in abstract form did not just ignore the usual conventions of function, context and meaning.
They deliberately thwarted those conventions.
Their function was to have no function; their meaning was to be meaningless; they arose within the context of no context.
Eisenman has not abandoned his fascination with abstract forms.
The Convention Center is a formally exuberant building.
What he has abandoned, at least for now, is the adolescent idea that conventions are the enemy of architecture.
He's discovered that conventions can be played with.


No Headline
People are just getting older and wiser.
Last year I went to 12 funerals.
I'm not going any more.
It's time to make a change for the next generation.
DAMON HALL, a 10-year veteran of a Philadelphia gang.  [ 20:4. ]


Artist's Homestead Restored With Care
"LIKE a person, a house evolves," said Deborah Johnson, as she strolled through the home of William Sidney Mount (1807-68), the American-genre painter who honed his skills in a third-floor studio there.
Ms.
Johnson, former chief curator of the Museums at Stony Brook and now their new chief executive and president, has directed restoration at the landmark, formally known as the Hawkins-Mount Homestead, since 1989.
The house, at the intersection of Route 25A and Stony Brook Road, and which dates from 1725, is being restored in accordance with Mount's renderings.


Brandywine Valley
The Brandywine Valley has inspired generations of artists.
The Friends meeting houses and stone farmsteads of northern Delaware and southeastern Pennsylvania are still as removed in spirit from the real estate development of the 1980's as they were when Andrew Wyeth first set up his easel in the 1930's and caught the countryside's muted beauty in egg tempera.
To experience that beauty, how ever, visitors have to exit the main highways for the two-lane back roads.
This countryside is punctuated by the grand estates created by the vast fortunes of the du Pont family, which traces its beginnings to a powder company on the banks of the Brandywine River in Wilmington, Del.


Elise Corcoran, T. J. Cavanaugh
Elise Spence Corcoran, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John W. Corcoran of New York, was married there yesterday to Timothy James Cavanaugh, a son of John F. Cavanaugh of Bayside, Queens, and the late Helen B. Cavanaugh.
The Rev.
Stan Moseley performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at the Church of St.
Thomas More.
Mrs.
Corcoran-Cavanaugh, 23, is a student at Marymount Manhattan College.
Her father, who is retired, was the vice chairman and chief investment officer at Donaldson, Lufkin &amp; Jenrette, the investment bank, in New York.
Her mother, Susan E. Corcoran, is a psychotherapist in private practice in Manhattan and with the 5th Avenue Center, a psychotherapy clinic there.


Mightier Yen Makes Japan Very Edgy
RARELY has an issue as abstract as exchange rate policy gripped a country as it has Japan over the past few weeks.
When the yen soared to a postwar high against the dollar in response to Clinton's remark two weeks ago that a stronger yen would help reduce Japan's trade surplus, Government officials here were enraged, arguing that this policy would weaken their economy.
But when Treasury Secretary Lloyd Bentsen indicated on Tuesday that the yen's swift appreciation may have been excessive, the exchange rate settled down and the Japanese breathed a collective sigh.


In Peru, a 'Second Coup' Reveals the Upper Hand
THE episode is being called Peru's "second coup" army tanks rolling into the streets of Lima a week and a half ago in a furious reaction to attempts by the Peruvian Congress to investigate human rights abuses by the military.
It was the most graphic illustration to date of the precarious power equation that has existed in Peru since what is widely known as the first coup under President Alberto K. Fujimori: On April 5, 1992, with the military's support, he suspended constitutional rule to seize near-dictatorial authority, asserting that he needed greater powers to combat a debilitating guerrilla insurgency, rampant corruption and drug trafficking.


Prince of Pieces
In a sterile art gallery on the Avenue Montaigne, not far from the Plaza Athenee -- a hotel Nancy Reagan favors -- Lamine Kouyate, the designer behind the clothing line he calls Xuly-Bet, was fending off buyers from Paris, New York and Milan and thinking of Mali, his homeland.
His raggedy, wraithlike clothes hung limply from thin wire hangers, a homesick chorus line longing for hot dusty streets and sunshine.
"Mali was really a cultural cradle," he said.
"The ancestory is strong, but people are very open to foreign influences. I knew more about rock and funk in the 70's than any of the kids in Paris when I got here."


Updating Air Travel Security
ALTHOUGH the air traveler might as well try to influence the weather as to affect airline and airport security, there is something to be said for keeping informed about the risks of crime and terrorism while traveling.
Big corporations, after all, try to protect their employees who must sometimes travel in risky places; so isn't there something that passengers can do along the same lines?


The March of History, As Seen on an Envelope
FOR Eastern Europeans, the rapid roll of political change can yield interesting philatelic artifacts.
A friend in Prague, the capital of the Czech Republic, recently passed along a quite ordinary envelope that encapsulated a large swath of post-war history.


The Idiosyncrasies of Shopping for and Storing Lumber
TO say that shopping for lumber can be intimidating understates the case for many homeowners and would-be amateur carpenters who freeze at the thought of visiting a lumberyard.
Here are some basic explanations and tips that may help.
Lumber derived chiefly from evergreen trees like pine, hemlock, spruce and fir is termed softwood.
Lumber from deciduous trees like oak and maple is called hardwood.


Smilin' Thru?
Congress is trying to pull a fast one on tax policy.
No, this is not a diatribe about VAT -- for "value added tax," wrongly called the "VAT tax" by the Redundance Kids -- but a shot across the bow of Senator Dale Bumpers and Representative Robert T. Matsui, authors of a tax bill that would enshrine in law the informal spelling of
through
as
thru
.
Comes now (a fine legal archaism) Anne Heausler of the firm of Fulbright &amp; Jaworski, L.L.P. (short for Limited Liability Partnership, which I assume combines the protection of a corporation with the camaraderie of a partnership) with a fax of a bill to amend the Internal Revenue Code.
Our linguistically swinging legislators hope to provide capital gains savings for investors "who make high-risk, long-term, growth-oriented venture and seed capital investments in start-up and other small enterprises," a practice known on the Street as taking a flier on little cats and dogs.


New Momentum for Electronic Patient Records
Dr.
Barry G. Zallen, a pediatrician at the Harvard Community Health Plan center here, turns to the Apple Macintosh on his desk, steers the cursor to a patient's name and clicks, and a 5-year-old girl's record appears.
Dr.
Zallen, who has no computer background, instantly gets a detailed account of the girl's chronic cough, the medication he prescribed, her medical history and a list of her previous visits.
Through a central computer, Dr.
Zallen's colleagues also have access to these records, so they all share up-to-date data on each of the center's 7,300 patients.
Cumbersome, often illegible paper records stuffed into file folders have been banished.


'The Me Nobody Knows,' an Updated Musical
"THE ME NOBODY KNOWS," a musical of 1970, was inspired by the anthologized writings of nearly 200 New York City students, aged 7 through 18.
Stephen M. Joseph, a teacher, edited the collection, which was subtitled "Children's Voices From the Ghetto."
In his introduction, written in 1968, Mr.
Joseph explained how youngsters had written openly about their feelings (loneliness, mostly) and their neighborhoods (ridden with "dirt, drugs and violence").
According to Mr.
Joseph, they wrote "for keeps" and "like it is."


Tamara Lockett, Courtney Jenkins
Tamara Brandt Lockett, a manager, was married yesterday to Thomas Courtney Jenkins, a business executive.
The Rev.
Frederick S. Baldwin performed the ceremony at St.
Bernard's Episcopal Church in Bernardsville, N.J.
Mrs.
Jenkins is a manager of premium sales at Simon &amp; Schuster in New York.
She graduated from Smith College.
She is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
William Lockett Jr. of Basking Ridge, N.J.
Her father is president and chief executive of Encon Associates Inc., an engineering consulting firm in Far Hills, N.J.


PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: May 2, 1993
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Fiction
1
11
THE PELICAN BRIEF, by John Grisham. (Island/Dell, $6.99.) A woman law student probes the murder of two Supreme Court justices.
2
2
"I" IS FOR INNOCENT, by Sue Grafton. (Fawcett, $5.99.) Kinsey Millhone investigates a man once charged with murdering his rich wife.
3
66
THE FIRM, by John Grisham. (Island/Dell, $5.99.) A young lawyer learns that his firm is engaged in secret, possibly illegal activities.
4
41
JURASSIC PARK, by Michael Crichton. (Ballantine, $5.99.) A biotechnician clones dinosaurs for use in a theme park.
5
55
A TIME TO KILL, by John Grisham. (Island/Dell, $5.99.) Racial tensions surface during the trial of a man charged with murder in rural Mississippi.
6
2
DANGEROUS, by Amanda Quick. (Bantam, $5.99.) Romance and danger in the ballrooms and country houses of Regency England.
7
1
WAITING TO EXHALE, by Terry McMillan. (Pocket, $5.99.) The friendships and romances of four black women in Phoenix.
8
1
SWEET LIAR, by Jude Deveraux. (Pocket, $5.99.) In New York, a Kentucky woman copes with a mystery dating back to the Roaring Twenties.
9
1
JEWELS, by Danielle Steel. (Dell, $6.99.) The life of a woman who becomes rich by dealing in precious stones.
10
2
THE WITCHING HOUR, by Anne Rice. (Ballantine, $6.99.) A woman descended from witches brings a drowned man back to life.
11
2
THE ASSASSIN, by W. E. B. Griffin. (Jove, $5.99.) The Philadelphia police contend with a plot to kill the visiting Vice President.
12
1
FRENCH SILK, by Sandra Brown. (Warner, $5.99.) The ordeal of a New Orleans woman suspected of killing a television evangelist.
13
1
THE ROMULAN PRIZE, by Simon Hawke. (Pocket, $5.50.) The U.S.S.
Enterprise to the rescue of the Federation in a "Star Trek" novel.
14
8
ON THE PULSE OF MORNING, by Maya Angelou. (Random House, $5.) The poem read at President Clinton's inauguration.
15
19
RISING SUN, by Michael Crichton. (Ballantine, $5.99.) A woman's death leads to an investigation involving the American-Japanese rivalry.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
NonFiction
1
1
THE SILENT PASSAGE, by Gail Sheehy. (Pocket, $5.50.) The psychological and social significance of menopause for today's women.
2
495
THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $10.95.) Inspiration. (LP)
3
102
YOU JUST DON'T UNDERSTAND, by Deborah Tannen. (Ballantine, $10.) The different languages men and women speak.
4
81
A YEAR IN PROVENCE, by Peter Mayle. (Vintage, $10.) A sojourn in the south of France.
5 *
11
I KNOW WHY THE CAGED BIRD SINGS, by Maya Angelou. (Bantam, $4.99.) The poet's account of her childhood and adolescence.
6
3
BARBARIANS AT THE GATE, by Bryan Burrough and John Helyar. (Harper Perennial, $12.) The 1988 battle for control of RJR Nabisco.
7 *
27
BACKLASH, by Susan Faludi. (Anchor/ Doubleday, $12.50.) A journalist describes a war against women's rights.
8 *
18
EARTH IN THE BALANCE, by Al Gore. (Plume, $13.) The Vice President discusses factors affecting the environment.
9 *
10
ROGUE WARRIOR, by Richard Marcinko with John Weisman. (Pocket, $5.99.) The memoirs of the retired commander of a counterterrorist unit.
10 *
16
REVOLUTION FROM WITHIN, by Gloria Steinem. (Little, Brown, $11.95.) The reflections of a feminist on the struggle to achieve self-esteem.
11 *
1
THE SENATOR, by Richard E. Burke with William Hoffer and Marilyn Hoffer. (St. Martin's, $5.99.) The recollections of a man who served as an aide to Edward M. Kennedy for 10 years.
12 *
11
WOMEN ON TOP, by Nancy Friday. (Pocket, $5.99.) The changes in social life that have affected the sexual fantasies of women.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Advice, How-To and Miscellaneous
1
4
LIFE'S LITTLE INSTRUCTION BOOK: Volume Two, by H. Jackson Brown Jr. (Rutledge Hill, $5.95.) More tips for achieving a self-fulfilling life.
2
132
THE T-FACTOR FAT GRAM COUNTER, by Jamie Pope-Cordle and Martin Katahn. (Norton, $2.99.) How to reduce fat in one's diet.
3
115
THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE, by Stephen R. Covey. (Fireside/S&amp;S, $9.95.) Principles for success.
4
90
LIFE'S LITTLE INSTRUCTION BOOK, by H. Jackson Brown Jr. (Rutledge Hill, $5.95.) Some 500 tips for achieving a self-fulfilling life.
5
7
RAND MCNALLY ROAD ATLAS. (Rand McNally, $7.95.) The 1993 edition.
These listings are based on computer-processed sales figures from 3,000 bookstores and from representative wholesalers with more than 38,000 other retail outlets, including variety stores and supermarkets.
The figures are statistically adjusted to represent sales in all such outlets across the United States. *An asterisk before a book's title indicates that its sales, weighted to reflect the book-selling industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
LP indicates that a book is available in large print.


Teri Robinson, Lawrence Jaffee
Teri Ann Robinson and Lawrence Scott Jaffee, both editors in New York, were married yesterday.
The Rev.
Randall C. Peyton, a Presbyterian minister and a cousin of the bride, performed the ceremony at the Grolier Club in New York.
Ms.
Robinson, 35, is keeping her name.
She is the senior features editor at PC Sources magazine.
She graduated from Louisiana State University, from which she received a master's degree in journalism.
She is the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
James C. Robinson of Shreveport, La.
Her father, now retired, was the president of Conco Food Service, an institutional food distributor in Shreveport.


A Schooner Aims East, Toward the Past
In a sport where setting records is the last frontier, sailing across the Atlantic Ocean still tends to be one of yachting's most coveted adventures.
Waiting in the wings to better a 1905 record for three-masted schooners is the sailing vessel ADIX.
The 184-foot schooner wants to topple the eastbound trans-Atlantic record set 88 years ago by Atlantic.
Made of steel and rigged with three masts, ADIX is strikingly similar in size and shape to the Atlantic, a 185-foot yacht that made the 1905 voyage in 12 days 4 hours.


JACKKNIFED!
Perhaps transporters of goods should consider railways for long-distance shipping -- which would address environmental concerns as well as safety.
You have only to sit on the Brooklyn Promenade on a spring afternoon and smell the fumes and smoke from trucks on the Brooklyn-Queens Expressway below to realize that alternative means must be found.
REBECCA NANOVIC
Brooklyn


When Coaches Cross the Line
Female athletes and their parents are complaining in increasing numbers about sexual abuse and harassment from male coaches, prompting the coaches themselves to examine their own roles in a very delicate power relationship.
"From what we're hearing, there are a lot of these cases out there," said Kathryn Reith, assistant executive director of advocacy for the Women's Sports Foundation in East Meadow, L.I.
"They are often hard to document, and people often aren't willing to go on record. But this year we've gone from zero cases to at least two a month."


Can This Guy Skate With Lemieux?
Thanks to Dale Hunter of the Washington Capitals, a potentially intriguing round of Stanley Cup playoffs opens Sunday on a downbeat, with an apparent mismatch in the pivotal, marquee confrontation.
Instead of Pierre Turgeon of the Islanders opposing Mario Lemieux of the Penguins on the center position of the top lines, the Islanders will start Greg Parks in Turgeon's place for Game 1 of the Patrick Division finals at the Civic Arena.


World Markets; London Flirts With a Gold Flurry
IT would be an exaggeration to say there is a new bull market in gold.
But a deal last week in which two well-known financiers increased their gold-related holdings created more excitement than traders have seen in years.
Gold prices climbed to a nine-month high and there was talk that the 13-year bear market may have ended.
By the close of trading in London on Friday, gold was at $355.05 an ounce, up nearly $11, or 3.2 percent on the week.


Third Indian Spot Joins New Haven Block
DEVOTEES of spicy food know there can never be too many Indian restaurants.
While Indian cuisine has been slow to catch on in Connecticut, there are now three Indian restaurants on a single block in New Haven.
Gandhi Ji is just over two months old and is ensconced in space previously occupied by an Italian restaurant called Hot Tomatoes.
Indian artifacts now adorn pink walls, the tablecloths are lavender, chairs are lacquered black, fresh carnations are on each table, and taped Indian music wafts in the background.


CHINESE ADOPTIONS
For your author to assume that his little girl will not be interested in team sports is to prove that American parents also limit their daughters' horizons, however benignly.
While little Li Sha certainly will have more doors open to her in America, we can't help think how many doors her adoptive father already is closing.
HOLLIS ROBBINS, MICHAEL ROTHMAN
Denver


From Teleteaching to Teleoffices
To the Editor:
I was in the Phoenix airport when I read "Working at Home, for Better or Worse" (April 18) about telecommuting.
It was delicious, because I was waiting to fly back from a 10-day trip that my students were not aware I had taken.


Correction
A review on April 18 about "The Path to Genocide: Essays on Launching the Final Solution," by Christopher R. Browning, and the Bear in Mind column on April 25, misstated the paperback price.
It is $10.95.


A Day to Clean Up Jones Beach Before the Dog Days of Summer


Small Spaces With Grand Designs
EVEN if you don't have a patch of ground, there is plenty of beauty to be had in a few deep window boxes or a group of pots on a terrace or by the front door.
As boxes of geraniums pop up all over the city (and I love geraniums because I grew up with them), I'd like to put in a plug for more biodiversity in a pot.
On a recent visit to the spring flower show "Glories of a Manor Garden," which runs through May 16 at the Enid A. Haupt Conservaory of the New York Botanical Garden, I was struck by the little potted gardens punctuating the fantasy landscape, where roses bloom so impossibly among tulips.
You can't do this, of course, in the real world, but you can create a cottage-garden effect with just a few pots -- by thinking about the different textures, sculptural forms and colors of shrubs, perennials and annuals.
And don't forget herbs and vegetables.


Women In Combat: How Other Nations Rank
The walls restricting women to non-fighting roles in the United States military cracked last week when Defense Secretary Les Aspin lifted bans against women in aerial combat and said the Administration wants the law forbidding women on warshops repealed.
The United States is not blazing the trail; other countriles have women in combat jobs.
Below are examples of military policies.


The Spring Flowers That Grow on Trees
THE parade of flowering trees has begun.
Every landscape deserves at least one.
The problem is, which one?
The best way to choose is to be alert as to what is blooming in the neighborhood.
Some trees give fleeting performances, lasting but a day or two.
If there is a heavy rainfall when these trees are in full bloom, alas, the rain pulls off the blossoms until the next spring.


Adding a Personal Touch to Medicine
HE stood behind the podium and appeared to look into the audience, but he could not see.
He listened to the questions as hard as he could, but because of his hearing impairment, some slipped by.
And as he spoke, some turned away.
For them, the scars left from burns over 75 percent of his body were too much to bear.
But for those medical students who did listen, the exchange was memorable.


Uniting Sacred And Secular: 14 Centuries of Islamic Tradition
In Arabic, Islam means "submission," and a Muslim is "one who submits," surrendering to the will of an awesome God whose righteousness and mercy permeate the universe.
Muslims believe that the will of God, or Allah, was revealed in a series of visions from A.D. 610 to 632 to Muhammed, the last of the prophets.
Muslims memorize, recite and study the text of these revelations, the Koran, which they believe is perfect and unchangeable.
They see the Koran as the correct version of the divine message that God tried to convey to earlier Jewish and Christian prophets from Abraham and Moses to Jesus.


SURFACING
SPORTS --
Wade Watch:
Boston Red Sox fans loved to hate Wade Boggs, the star third baseman, when he was on their team.
Imagine how they feel about him now that he's a Yankee.
Sports radio WEEI in Boston even runs a daily feature called "Wade Watch," offering "statistics, updates and razzing." TELEVISION --
The Fish Channel:
It began when Cablevision in Columbia, S.C., filled a time slot by broadcasting fish swimming in a tank.
Then, the fish were replaced by a sci-fi channel and viewers fumed.
So now they've returned, sharing a channel with Bravo, an arts network, from 6 A.M. to 8 P.M.
IRRITATION --
CD seals:
They're those silver suture-like stickers that won't peal off without leaving some sort of sticky silver residue on the jewel box.
Argh!
According to the Recording Industry Association of America, the labels exist as a sort of safety seal, to alert consumers that they are buying new products.


Sound Bytes; Writer With Opinions to Burn
Guy Kawasaki joined Apple Computer Inc. in 1983 as a Macintosh software evangelist, selling software developers on the idea of writing programs for the new computer.
In 1987, Apple promoted him to director of software product management.
Two weeks later, he quit -- to jump at the opportunity to help start a software company, Acius Inc.
Two years after that, he left Acius and began a career as a writer.
His irreverent books -- "The Macintosh Way" and "Selling the Dream" -- although ostensibly about marketing and management in the computer industry, found a cult audience among general business readers.


Vermont Passes Sweeping No-Smoking Law
Taking one of the nation's toughest stands against smoking, the Vermont Legislature has approved a ban on smoking in all restaurants, motels and hotels starting in 1995.
Gov.
Howard Dean, a Democrat who is also a doctor, has promised to sign the bill after the legislative session ends.


Michele Crames, Daniel Zenkel
Michele Lynn Crames, a marketing consultant, was married last evening to Daniel Robert Zenkel, a lawyer and a real estate developer.
Rabbi Robert Lennick performed the ceremony at the Old Oaks Country Club in Purchase, N.Y.
Mrs.
Zenkel works at Alcone Sims O'Brien, a marketing and promotion firm in Elmsford, N.Y.
She graduated from Amherst College.


Kathryn Ettington and Reed Wells
Kathryn Lynn Ettington, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard M. Ettington of Palos Verdes, Calif., was married there yesterday to Reed Wells, a son of Marianne May of Honolulu and Crosby Wells of Salisbury, Conn.
The Rev.
Karl A. Johnson performed the Congregational ceremony at the Neighborhood Church.


Lisa Goodrich, Harlan Swift Jr.
Lisa D. Goodrich, an account executive for the Vail Daily News, and Harlan J. Swift Jr., an account representative for Western Slope Supplies, a restaurant-supply company, both in Vail, Colo., were married yesterday.
The Rev.
Dr.
James A. Christopher performed the ceremony at the First Congregational Church in Bloomfield, Conn.
Mrs.
Swift graduated from Lake Forest College and received a master's degree in public relations from Emerson College in Boston.
She is the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Hoyt J. Goodrich of Bloomfield.
Her father is a founding partner and the managing director of BCI Advisors, an investment-management firm in Teaneck, N.J.
Her mother, Sara K. Goodrich, is the athletic and alumnae coordinator at the Ethel Walker School in Simsbury, Conn.


Mild-Mannered Quilters Pursue Quarry
NEW YORK is a mecca for quilt makers from overseas and from the heartland, and that includes Connecticut.
The Phabric Phantoms shopping tour last Monday, led by Marilyn Henrion and Diane Rode Schneck, included Hiroko Matsuda from Kagoshima, Japan; Leslie Granbeck from Minneapolis and five women from Connecticut towns where most fabrics are tiny flower prints.
"We don't do calicoes," said Paula Nadelstern of the Bronx, speaking for those who consider their quilt-making an art.
The group assaulted seven fabric shops in Manhattan, seeking nontraditional materials.
Stops included Handloom Batik on Mulberry Street, which sells Indonesian and Indian imports, and Paron Fabrics on West 57th Street, where, for $4.50 a yard, they bought French cottons.


Huntington Hotel
To the Editor: I was pleased to see that the article, "Restored Elegance at Huntington Hotel" (Jan. 24), notes that Pasadena's Huntington Hotel is a new building -- not the restored landmark that the public has often been led to believe it is.
Here is a fuller account.
The original Huntington Hotel was razed in March 1989, despite the considerable efforts of such preservationists as the group Pasadena Heritage.
When the replacement was opened in 1991, however, its promoters chose coyly to gloss over this destruction.
A press release from their architect glowingly described the hotel as "newly restored" and "vintage," a project that lent "new vitality to a historic landmark." The historic landmark, however, was long gone, a fact the release did not mention.


American Voices: On a Role in Bosnia/A special report.; In American Voices, a Sense of Concern Over Bosnia Role
When Nancy Brier talks about the shooting and killing in Bosnia, there is anger in her voice.
And frustration.
And confusion.
Only one thing seems clear to her.


'Kiss of the Spider Woman' Is Part of Harold Prince's Web
When the musical "Kiss of the Spider Woman" opens tomorrow on Broadway, its director, Harold Prince, will already be immersed in his next project: a new production of "Show Boat" scheduled to open in Toronto in October.
At 65, Mr.
Prince has become a one-man musical theater development unit, who as a producer and director has helped create 33 Broadway musicals.
And still he worries.
"There are a lot of things wrong with Broadway right now, but one of them is not lack of material," he said the other day.
"There are wonderful composers and librettists out there. It's the lack of creative producers that is troubling.


Where's Judge Landis When You Need Him?
Because the baseball owners are dragging their spikes, I've decided to begin my own search for a new commissioner.
Not that a new commissioner will necessarily solve all of the national pastime's problems, but the grass roots do need hope.
Who really believes that baseball is in economic pain and that either the owners or the players are potential victims?
Isn't the crisis about the public's attitude?
Will baseball survive as a "national pastime," a game that reveals the soul of a country, or as just another circus?
I began my search with Richard Ravitch, real estate developer, former New York mayoral candidate and currently major league baseball's chief labor executive, and Jim Bouton, the former Yankee 20-game winner, sports newscaster and author of the best book on baseball ever, "Ball Four".


Lola Franco, Kevin Seaman
Lola Louise Franco, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Anthony A. Franco of Briarcliff Manor, N.Y., was married there yesterday to Kevin Brien Seaman, a son of Norman Seaman of Tonawanda, N.Y., and the late Patricia Seaman.
Msgr.
Francis Bellew performed the ceremony at St.
Theresa's Church.


Keeping Indian Tradition Is a Family's Passion
GLADYS TANTAQUIDGEON is a gentle woman, barely five feet tall, who talks so softly that a visitor has to lean close to catch every word.
"Some people who write stories about us don't bother to read, don't know what happened to us, don't understand and respect us," she said.
Coming from such a serene person who bears her age so well -- she is 93 -- the words seem harsh, and indeed they are for her.
But she is reflecting the passion of a lifetime.
She wants other people to know that her people, American Indians, have a proud heritage and one with lessons that can still be taught.


Corrections
An article on Wednesday about the trial of Robert A. Altman on charges of bribery and fraud referred incorrectly to Faisal Saud al-Fulaij.
He is a Kuwaiti businessman and the former chairman of Kuwait Airlines.


A Different Equation at SUNY Purchase
THINK "SUNY Purchase" and what comes to mind: performing arts, dance, theater and music?
A sizable number of people on that campus would prefer that their school's name had a different set of connotations.
Try SUNY Purchase for chemistry, biology, mathematics, psychology, physics and environmental science.
Students in all those disciplines put on their own performance last week at the school's Natural Sciences Student Symposium, an event in which about 40 students introduced their senior theses in the form of research presentations.


The Executive Computer; The Lingo, From 'Client' to 'Kludge'
First, a little quiz for all you executives: Everyone who uses a personal computer, raise one hand.
Good.


Recalling Artistry Of the Drag World
To the Editor:
Jesse Green's story about the untimely death of Angie Xtravaganza and the decline of the drag balls  [ "Paris Has Burned," April 18 ]  was thoughtful and incisive.
A photo used with the article was a group picture shot by Michel Comte that became the key art for the "Paris Is Burning" poster.
The miscaptioning of the photo as "a scene from 'Paris Is Burning' " prompted me to recount a quick impression of that shoot.


Soiree With a Cause
American Cancer Society's Sloan Memorial awards dinner, the Plaza, April 26.


60 Are Chosen for National Academy of Sciences
The National Academy of Sciences, a private organization established by Congress in 1863 to advise the Federal Government, has elected 60 new members.
The election brings the number of active members to 1,683.
The academy also named 15 nonvoting foreign associates, bringing their total to 298.


Crime
Nobody appreciates that wacky social institution known as the American family more than Sue Grafton.
In "J" IS FOR JUDGMENT (Holt, $21.95), the 10th mystery in her witty alphabet series, the author uses a cleverly executed fraud as yet another illustration of the ingenious crimes and misdemeanors that people will commit in the cause of domestic tranquillity.
Kinsey Millhone has seen it all in this series.
But the cheeky private investigator who operates out of southern California is still pretty impressed with crafty Wendell Jaffe, who may have faked his own suicide and run off to Mexico with a chippy when his fraudulent business empire collapsed.
"I'm not trying to defend the man, but he's not all bad," Kinsey finds herself explaining to one of the two bratty sons Jaffe abandoned.
The kid isn't any more convinced than Jaffe's financial partner, who went to prison for him, or Jaffe's brittle wife, who has to surrender the insurance money if Kinsey can prove that her husband is still alive.


The Spring Flowers That Grow on Trees
THE parade of flowering trees has begun.
Every landscape deserves at least one.
The problem is, which one?
The best way to choose is to be alert as to what is blooming in the neighborhood.
Some trees give fleeting performances, lasting but a day or two.
If there is a heavy rainfall when these trees are in full bloom, alas, the rain pulls off the blossoms until the next spring.


K. R. McNamara, T. J. Montgomery
Mr. and Mrs.
James A. McNamara of Stamford, Conn., have announced July wedding plans for their daughter, Kathleen Roberta McNamara, and Thomas John Montgomery, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Joseph West Montgomery of Pittsburgh.
Ms.
McNamara, 31, is a doctoral candidate in political science at Columbia University in New York.
She graduated from McGill University and received a master's degree in international affairs from Columbia.
Her father, a former foreign service officer and an assistant United States trade representative, retired as the director of government relations at Texaco Inc. in Harrison, N.Y.


Data Update
*4*VALUE OF CONSTRUCTION CONTRACTS
*4*(Residential in millions of dollars)
Mar. 93
Mar. 92
Change
New York
259.3
326.5
- 21%
New Jersey
148.4
127.5
+ 16%
Connecticut
74.7
83.3
- 10%
*4*Source: F.W. Dodge Division, McGraw-Hill Information
*4*MORTGAGE INTEREST RATES (Averages)
Last Week
Previous Week
Year Ago
New York
Conventional (30-yr)
7.55
7.62
9.05
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
4.76
4.79
6.18
New Jersey
Conventional (30-yr)
7.43
7.49
8.91
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
4.58
4.66
5.94
Connecticut
Conventional (30-yr)
7.45
7.52
8.99
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
4.46
4.45
6.02
Co-ops (N.Y.)
Conventional (30-yr)
7.61
7.73
9.15
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
5.37
5.36
6.61
*4*Indexes for Adjustable-Rate Mortgages*
1-yr. Treasury security
3.18
3.21
4.32
National Mortgage Contract Rate
7.28
7.28
8.15
*Rates on most adjustable mortgages are set 1 to 3 percentage points above these indexes. (Source: HSH Associates)


CATALAN EXPECTS VICTORY IN SPAIN
With Spain's incumbent Socialists and their conservative opponents running neck and neck as the June 6 general election approaches, the Catalan nationalist leader, Jordi Pujol, has good reason to feel relaxed as he watches them scramble frantically for votes.
Polls say that neither the Socialist Party nor the People's Party has any hope of winning an absolute majority in the 350-member Parliament.
So Mr.
Pujol, who is 63 years old, expects a telephone call on the morning of June 7 from the leader of the party that takes the most seats, seeking his help in forming a government.


A Kiss Before Suing
That quintessentially romantic image of Paris -- Robert Doisneau's much-reproduced photograph "Le Baiser de l'Hotel de Ville" ("The Kiss at City Hall") -- is now the center of a sordid battle for cash.
Court proceedings opened last week on two rival claims from people who say it is their image that appears in the 1950 photograph.
Jean-Louis and Denise Lavergne say their privacy was violated as they strolled just before their marriage, and they want over $18,000 in damages.
An actress, Francoise Bornet, says she and a man then her lover, Jacques Cartaud, were hired to pose.
She wants over $3,500 and future royalties.


Right Label, Wrong Addressee
To the Editor:
Trust a Times Styles writer to conclude with a revelatory cliche ("nothing is more difficult to become than the person you always claimed to be") that is no less banal than those in the latest Hollywood moneymaker she demeans.
Truly disturbing about "Indecent Proposal" is not the trite premise of money for sex (whether one has sex for $100 or $1 million, the appropriate label remains prostitution), but that John addresses his offer with smarmy persistence to Diana's husband, David, as though a wife were a husband's property to barter away.


Your Home: Reserves; Outrage At a Twist In Taxes
INCOME generated by reserve funds set aside by condominium and homeowner associations to cover future capital expenditures has always been taxable.
But monthly charges and other assessments being deposited into the fund were never taxed.
That, however, may no longer hold true.


John C. Shepherd Is Dead at 67; Was a Bar Association President
John C. Shepherd, a former president of the American Bar Association, died on Friday at home in St.
Louis.
He was 67.
He died in his sleep, his family said.


A Sudden Letter Leaves Doubts About Milosevic's Sincerity
LAST weekend in the remote Bosnian town of Bijeljina, the ragtag group of politicians and militia leaders that calls itself the Bosnian Serb Parliament met to consider the peace proposal drafted by the international mediators Cyrus Vance and Lord Owen.
The plan had already been grudgingly accepted by Croatian and Muslim leaders, and a positive vote from the Serbs might have meant at least a temporary halt to the war in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Such a vote might also have prevented the tightening of economic sanctions scheduled to take effect just hours later, and it might have halted talk in Western capitals of military intervention.
The delegates, most of whom are militant Serb nationalists, were in no mood to approve the peace plan.
Then an extraordinary letter, signed by the three principal leaders of what remains of Yugoslavia, arrived by messenger from Belgrade.


CHINESE ADOPTIONS
The title on your April 11 cover, "China's Market in Orphan Girls," and the photo casting Hanna Li Sha Porter as exotic Chinese cargo are denigrating to Hanna, disrespectful of the Chinese people who gave Bruce Porter and his wife a precious gift of a daughter and irresponsible from the point of view of all in China and the United States who are helping to find loving homes for children who need them.
I know you will receive many such letters of protest.
I hope that these letters will demonstrate to the Chinese people that Porter and The New York Times do not accurately represent the attitudes of most Americans toward China and international adoption.
JUDY HILKEY
Brooklyn


Men's Style; Turning Blue
Rejoin the Navy in the fall.
This summer, Aegean hues can get you more attention than holding your breath.


Whence That Bizet Work?
To the Editor:
In her article "How Balanchine Speaks to the Future Via the Past"  [ April 18 ] , Anna Kisselgoff writes that George Balanchine "rescued" Bizet's Symphony in C "from oblivion" in 1947.
In fact, the symphony had earlier not been "neglected" but lost, the manuscript being discovered in the Paris Conservatory by the conductor Felix Weingartner in the mid-1930's.
It was immediately performed and shortly thereafter recorded in 1936 by Walter Goehr and was widely available in this country on RCA.


In the Region: Long Island; Recent Sales
Albertson  $215,000
25 Evans Avenue  4-bedroom, 2-bath, 33-year-old Cape Cod; dining room, eat-in kitchen; taxes $4,000.
East Islip  $125,000
13 Gerhardy Street  2-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 60-year-old colonial; eat-in kitchen, finished basement, 1 car detached garage, 0.5 acre; taxes $4,000.
Great River  $260,000
16 Teal Crescent  4-bedroom, 2-bath, 16-year-old ranch; dining room, eat-in kitchen, 2 fireplaces, basement, 2-car attached garage; taxes $8,000.
Manhasset Hills  $325,000
156 South Drive  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 28-year-old splanch; dining room, eat-in kitchen, den,; taxes $7,700.
West Islip  $171,000
178 Driftwood Drive  5-bedroom, 3-bath, 23-year-old farm ranch; dining room, eat-in kitchen, fireplace, 1-car attached garage; taxes $6,700.
Westbury  $122,000
10 Carlton Street  4-bedroom, 2-bath, 38-year-old Cape Cod; dining room, eat-in kitchen, fireplace, detached 1-car garage; taxes $2,800.
OTHER AREAS Yonkers, N.Y.  $285,000
2 Birch Brook Road  5-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 14-year-old contemporary; dining room, den, eat-in kitchen, attached 1-car garage; taxes $7,213.
Glastonbury, Conn.  $170,000
240 Tryon Street  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 71-year-old colonial; eat-in kitchen, formal dining room, first-floor family room, 1 acre; taxes $2,800.
Mahwah  $322,000
57 Armour Street  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 22-year-old colonial; fireplace, central vacuum, full basement; taxes $3,581.


In the Superstore Age, the New Age Still Keeps a Bookstore Going
When new customers come into the Pymander Book Shop here, it doesn't take them long to realize they're in for something a little different.
The soft meditative music, the smell of burning incense, crystals on the shelves along with Egyptian and American Indian artifacts and a bulletin board covered with business cards advertising dream workshops, yoga classes and tarot-card readings tells them this place has found a niche in the the superstore age.


Pinball Wizard Scores High On Visuals
At this late date, the arrival on Broadway of "Tommy," the rock opera by the Who, would hardly seem revolutionary.
After all, the work originated as a concept album in 1969, was performed in concert at the Metropolitan Opera House the following year and, by 1975, had been made into a movie for the young, the restless and the hallucinogenically predisposed.
Broadway is the Tommy-come-lately in all of this.


A French Master's Way With Words
IT has been a scintillating time for Moliere, according to the definitive Richard Wilbur verse translations.
In the beginning of the season, there was Hartford Stage's "Tartuffe." Now, near the end, Long Wharf's "Misanthrope" is running through next Sunday in New Haven.
In contrast to the Hartford production, in which Mark Lamos loosed a veritable circus full of directorial ingenuity on a sublime world playwright, the Long Wharf staging, even though it is moved forward some 150 years, is a stately thing, more in awe by Moliere's majestic art than in command of it.
Yet, it satisfies as though the director Edward Gilbert, held to Wilbur's credo: "Trust the words."


Lisa M. Gallo, John J. Ying
Lisa Marie Gallo, a product manager, was married yesterday to John Jeffrey Ying, an investment banker.
The Rev.
Walter F. Modrys, a Roman Catholic priest, performed the ceremony at the Church of St.
Ignatius Loyola in New York.
Mrs.
Ying, 29, works in the desserts division of Kraft General Foods in White Plains, N.Y.
She graduated from Northwestern University, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa and from which she also received a master's degree in management.


Astronauts Become Research Subjects in a Dehydration Experiment


Ex-French Premier Kills Himself, Police Say
Pierre Beregovoy, who stepped down as Prime Minister in March after his Socialist Party was defeated in elections, died today of a gunshot wound to the head.
The French police described his death as a suicide.
The police said Mr.
Beregovoy, 67, had shot himself on a path beside a canal in his hometown, at Nevers, where he served as Mayor.


The Mets' Local Stays On the Losing Track
There was no need to track what there was of a flight.
Gary Sheffield had demolished the baseball.
Crushed underneath again were the Mets, who thereby came closer to being extinguished from relevance in 1993.
Sheffield's two-run mauling of a 1-1 pitch from Mike Maddux lifted the Padres to a 5-3 triumph tonight.
The defeat for the Mets, their seventh in succession, sunk them to 8-14, another game back of the Marlins in the National League East, and exiled them to another 24 hours of abject uncertainty about what has happened or what might.


The Spring Flowers That Grow on Trees
THE parade of flowering trees has begun.
Every landscape deserves at least one.
The problem is, which one?
The best way to choose is to be alert as to what is blooming in the neighborhood.
Some trees give fleeting performances, lasting but a day or two.
If there is a heavy rainfall when these trees are in full bloom, alas, the rain pulls off the blossoms until the next spring.


Today's Ways Color an Old-Fashioned Movie
You have to love a movie that casts Jeanne Moreau so convincingly as a nun.
That kind of skewed but astute thinking is typical of the New Zealand director Vincent Ward, and it makes "Map of the Human Heart" a lively new version of a laughable genre.
In its soul, the movie is a big, old-fashioned World War II melodrama: Will the war-torn lovers get together?
Will the hero, ace bomber pilot that he is, survive his most dangerous raid?
Will the heroine be waiting for him?
They don't make movies like that anymore, for a good reason.
Today, who would take such a cockeyed story seriously?


Changes at Ford Model Agency
NAME: Katie Ford.
IDENTITY: One of three newly appointed co-presidents of Ford Models, above right.
She is 37.
The other co-presidents are Joseph Hunter, above left, and Marion Smith, center.


Witt Ices Mariners And Then His Elbow
The egg timer beeped twice at 20 minutes, so Mike Witt pulled off the ice wrap in the middle of the Yankee clubhouse and declared that the right elbow felt fine, painless, never better.
How could it not?
The 32-year-old pitcher had just won his first major league game since Sept. 23, 1990.
On a luscious May Day at Yankee Stadium filled with the promise of a fourth or fifth starter for an unfinished rotation, Witt used his reconstructed right elbow yesterday to baffle Seattle with sinking fastballs and defeat the Mariners, 6-2.


U.S.C. Signs Center
AVONDRE JONES, a 6-foot-11-inch center who helped Lakewood Artesia High in Los Angeles win three State Division II championships the last four seasons, will attend Southern California.


JACKKNIFED!
Not one fact or anecdote in Nash's article supports your use of the supposedly related six-column photograph of a Roadway vehicle to illustrate it.
The accident shown was independently verified to have been caused by the drive wheels of the tractor hydroplaning on wet pavement,
not
by any of the issues that were discussed in the article.


This Week's Numbers
Last
Consensus
Period
Estimates
(I.D.E.A. Inc.)
Monday
April purchasing managers' index
53.4
54.0
Mar. construction spending, pct change
0.1
-0.6
Tuesday
March leading indicators, percent change
0.5
-0.7
Late-April car sales, millions, annual rate
6.6
6.6
Thursday
1st-qtr nonfarm productivity, pct change
4.8
1.9
Weekly jobless claims, thousands
349
325
Friday
April unemployment rate, percent
7.0
7.0
April nonfarm payrolls, change in thousands
-22
95
Wednesday: Federal Reserve beige book released  Thursday: Chain-store sales released Bundesbank Council meeting


It Doesn't Come Naturally
MOTHER-INFANT BONDING
A Scientific Fiction. By Diane E. Eyer. 237 pp. New Haven: Yale University Press. $25.


CHINESE ADOPTIONS
I was born in Korea in 1960 and was adopted into a white family in the United States in 1966, when I was 5, at a time when the international adoption industry was just beginning.
I, too, was told by my adoptive parents that my birth mother gave me up because she loved me so much, and for years I feared that if my adoptive parents loved me so much, they also might give me up.
This well-meaning explanation only perpetuates and confuses the issues of love, guilt and abandonment.
It isn't the birth mother who is "abandoning" her child; it is the country of origin and its policies, social intolerance and cultural values that are abandoning these children.
MI OK SONG BRUINING
Bronx


Residential Resales
Closings in the week ended April 17  MANHATTAN  Gramercy Park Area  $206,500
242 East 19th Street  2-bedroom, 2-bath, 1,020-sq.-ft. co-op in a prewar building; manned elevator, windowed kitchen, fireplace, 2 exposures; maintenance $1,260, 50% tax-deductible (Broker: Herbert H. Kliegerman Associates)  Greenwich Village  $1.85 million
12 East 12th Street  5-bedroom, 4-bath, 6,000-sq.-ft. loft condo; elevator, dining room, library, study, eat-in kitchen, 3 exposures; common charge $1,200, taxes $9,228 (Brokers: Ambrose Mar-Elia-Kanelba &amp; Robilotti)  Murray Hill  $290,000
155 East 38th Street  2-bedroom, 2-bath, 1,100-sq.-ft. postwar condo; 24-hr. doorman, terrace, new windows, 3 exposures; common charge $686, taxes $7,079 (Broker: Belmarc Realty)  SoHo  $280,000
424 Broome Street  1-bedroom, 1-bath, 2,200-sq.-ft. loft-co-op; elevator, 10 1/2-ft. ceilings, artist studio, 4 exposures; maintenance $680, 50% tax-deductible (Broker: Sinvin/Fields-J.G. Realty)  West Village  $770,000
163 Charles Street  4-bedroom, 3-bath, one-family 4-story town house; 4 fireplaces, 2 skylights, 22- by 60-ft. rear extention, 16-ft. ceilings, 2 entrances; 22- by 101-ft. lot; taxes $6,600 (Broker: Eychner Associates)  BRONX  Allerton Avenue Area  $160,000
2918 Holland Avenue  2-family, semi-attached brick house; 3 bedrooms in primary unit; 2 bedrooms in other; dining room, eat-in kitchen, 1 bath in each; finished basement, 2-car garage, 25- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $1,200 (Brokers: Century 21/Metro Star Realty-ERA/ Bes Match Real Estate)  Wakefield  $62,500
4732 Carpenter Avenue  3-bedroom, 1-bath, one-family detached frame house; dining room, semi-finished basement, 1-car garage, needs work; 50- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $1,430 (Broker: Charles G. Brophy &amp; Associates)  BROOKLYN  Brooklyn College Area  $175,000
688 East 22d Street  6-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, one-family center-hall colonial; dining room, eat-in kitchen, double parlor, semi-finished basement, needs renovation, 50- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $1,450 (Broker: Wilk Real Estate)  Park Slope  $222,000
309 Garfield Place  2-bedroom, 2-bath, 1,400-sq.-ft. co-op in a brownstone; eat-in kitchen, sunroom extension off bedroom, recreation room, private garden; maintenance $594, 62% tax-deductible (Broker: Brooklyn Properties of 7th Avenue)  Sheepshead Bay  $225,000
2609 Avenue X  2-family attached brick house; 2 bedrooms in primary unit; 1 bedroom in other; dining area, eat-in kitchen in each; 1-car garage, new windows and doors, 22- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $2,000 (Broker: Jacob Gold Realty)  QUEENS  Bayside  $116,000
220-55 46th Avenue  (Lakeside Towers)  2-bedroom, 1-bath, 950-sq.-ft. postwar co-op; 24-hr. doorman, dining area, pool; maintenance $545, 55% tax-deductible (Broker: Value Lane Realty)  Woodhaven  $130,000
85-67 80th Street  2-family semi-attached frame house; 3 bedrooms in primary unit; 2 bedrooms in other; dining room, eat-in kitchen, 1 bath in each; 20- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $1,000 (Broker: Kingdom Realty)  STATEN ISLAND  Annadale  $231,000
90 Bennett Avenue  4-bedroom, 2-bath, one-family detached hi-ranch; dining room, recreation room, 1-car garage, 42- by 106-ft. lot; taxes $1,600 (Broker: Kingsley Real Estate)  Tottenville  $118,000
264 Brehaut Avenue  3-bedroom, 1-bath, one-family detached ranch; dining room, eat-in kitchen, full basement, 41- by 110-ft. lot; taxes $987 (Broker: Salmon Real Estate)


Karen Steinberg, Alan Kennedy
Karen Elizabeth Steinberg, a lawyer, was married last evening to Alan Sloan Kennedy, a record promotions coordinator.
Judge Miriam Goldman Cedarbaum of the Federal District Court in Manhattan officiated at the Boathouse in Central Park.
Mrs.
Kennedy, 27, is an associate at the New York law firm of Paul, Weiss, Rifkind, Wharton &amp; Garrison.
She graduated from Wesleyan University and received her law degree from Harvard University.
She is the daughter of Harold I. Steinberg of McLean, Va., and the late Rosalie B. Steinberg.
Her father is the deputy controller of the United States Office of Federal Financial Management in Washington.


Votes in Congress
Tally Last Week in Connecticut, New Jersey and New York Senate There were no Senate votes last week.
House 1.
Line-Item Veto: Procedural vote to allow consideration of a bill giving the President watered-down line-item veto powers.
Approved 212 to 208, April 28. 2.
Line-Item Veto: Vote on a Republican alternative proposal that would give the President the authority to veto individual items in spending bills and individual tax breaks targeted at special interests in tax bills and would require a two-thirds majority to overturn a veto.
Rejected 219 to 198, April 29. 3.
Line-Item Veto: Vote on a Democratic sponsored line-item veto bill.
The measure would establish a procedure under which the President could reject particular items in spending bills, but his action could be reversed if simple majorities in both houses of Congress voted to do so.
Approved 258 to 157.
Connecticut  1.
Kennelly (D) . . .Y. . .N. . .Y
2. Gejdenson (D) . . .Y. . .N. . .Y
3. DeLauro (D) . . .Y. . .N. . .Y
4. Shays (R) . . .N. . .Y. . .Y
5. Franks (R) . . .N. . .Y. . .N
6. Johnson (R) . . .N. . .Y. . .Y New Jersey
1. Andrews (D) . . .Y. . .Y. . .Y
2. Hughes (D) . . .Y. . .N. . .Y
3. Saxton (R) . . .N. . .Y. . .Y
4. Smith (R) . . .N. . .Y. . .Y
5. Roukema (R) . . .N. . .N. . .Y
6. Pallone (D) . . .Y. . .Y. . .Y
7. Franks (R) . . .N. . .Y. . .Y
8. Klein (D) . . .Y. . .N. . .Y
9.
Torricelli (D) . . .Y. . .N. . .Y  10.
Payne (D) . . .N. . .N. . .N  11.
Gallo (R) . . .N. . .Y. . .Y  12.
Zimmer (R) . . .N. . .Y. . .Y  13.
Menendez (D) . . .N. . .N. . .N  New York
1. Hochbrueckner (D) . . .Y. . .N. . .Y
2. Lazio (R) . . .N. . .Y. . .Y
3. King (R) . . .N. . .Y. . .N
4. Levy (R) . . .N. . .Y. . .Y
5. Ackerman (D) . . .Y. . .N. . .Y
6. Flake (D) . . .Y. . .N. . .N
7. Manton (D) . . .Y. . .N. . .Y
8. Nadler (D) . . .Y. . .N. . .N
9.
Schumer (D) . . .Y. . .N. . .Y  10.
Towns (D) . . .N. . .A. . .A  11.
Owens (D) . . .N. . .N. . .N  12.
Velazquez (D) . . .N. . .N. . .N  13.
Molinari (D) . . .N. . .Y. . .N  14.
Maloney (D) . . .Y. . .N. . .Y  15.
Rangel (D) . . .N. . .N. . .N  16.
Serrano (D) . . .N. . .A. . .A  17.
Engel (D) . . .Y. . .N. . .N  18.
Lowey (D) . . .Y. . .N. . .N  19.
Fish (R) . . .N. . .Y. . .Y  20.
Gilman (R) . . .N. . .N. . .N  21.
McNulty (D) . . .Y. . .N. . .Y  22.
Solomon (R) . . .N. . .Y. . .N  23.
Boehlert (R) . . .N. . .N. . .Y  24.
McHugh (R) . . .N. . .Y. . .N  25.
Walsh (R) . . .N. . .Y. . .N  26.
Hinchey (D) . . .Y. . .N. . .Y  27.
Paxon (R) . . .N. . .Y. . .N  28.
Slaughter (D) . . .Y. . .N. . .Y  29.
LaFalce (D) . . .Y. . .N. . .Y  30.
Quinn (R) . . .N. . .Y. . .Y  31.
Houghton (R) . . .N. . .Y. . .Y  KEY: Y Yea; N Nay; (A) Absent or did not vote; (P) Present.


Christine Carey, Kevin O'Connor
Christine Elizabeth Carey, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Edward Charles Carey of New York, was married yesterday to Kevin Christopher O'Connor, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Joseph John O'Connor of Short Hills, N.J.
The Rev.
Gerald Greaves performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at St.
Ignatius Loyola Church in New York.
Miss Carey, 25, is a budget director at the BBDO Worldwide advertising agency in New York.
She is a graduate of Kenyon College.
Her father is the president of the Carey Energy Corporation in Great Neck, L.I.
Her mother, Moreen Carey, is a ski instructor for the Ski Windham Disabled Program in Windham, N.Y.


A Life in the Fast Lane Takes Terrifying Turn
She's been blond, she's been brunet, she's been AWOL, she's become a multimillionaire, she's been unworldly in her domination of every other woman tennis player on this planet, and now, although still a teen-ager, Monica Seles is also a victim.
Just over a year ago, Seles discovered she couldn't ride her bicycle and talk on her cellular telephone at the same time: She fell off her bike, sprained her wrist and had to cancel her much-anticipated debut at a $350,000 tournament on Hilton Head Island in South Carolina.


CHILDREN'S BOOKS
THE NOISY GIANTS' TEA PARTY
By Kate McMullan and Jim McMullan.
Illustrated by Jim McMullan.
Unpaged.
New York: Michael di Capua Books/ HarperCollins Publishers.


Elizabeth Bishop's Art
To the Editor:
Richard Tillinghast, in his review of "Elizabeth Bishop," by Brett C. Millier (April 4), credits me with calling Bishop "a poet's poet's poet." How I wish the genial phrase were mine!
In fact, it is John Ashbery's, coined many years ago when he introduced Bishop to a large audience in Oklahoma.
JAMES MERRILL New York


Macho Hypocrites Flock to Bars
To the Editor:
It is unfortunate that Jesse Green's article perpetuates the negative stereotype of "drag queens" without trying to understand our hearts and souls.
It is perverse and judgmental to portray us as the pitiful underbelly of society, without sharing the blame with society.
Society has a fascination with "drag," yet it expresses it with scorn and sometimes ridicule.
Our male-oriented society is attracted to the contradiction, a male appearing as the "ultimate female," but because that inclination undermines his machismo, he fears it.


Appreciating Al Arbour
TWO years ago, in the weeks before Bill Parcells decided not to continue as the Giants' coach, he was discussing how successful coaches often are forgotten when their teams start losing.
Especially under the New York microscope.
"Do people really appreciate," Parcells asked, "what Al Arbour did in this town?"


Taking a Cruise
To the Editor: As an enthusiast I thoroughly enjoyed cruise issue on Feb. 7.
I noted with interest the large number of cruise ships being built.
As the article said, only a small percentage of people have ever taken a cruise and the majority are repeat customers.
I feel the cruise lines are overlooking a large group of potential passengers -- the single population.
But the drawback is the exorbitant single supplement.
Older people, who have the time and money for cruises, don't want to share with a stranger whose schedules and tastes may be completely different.
Few cruise lines permit it anyway.
One cruise line said it charged "only" $75 a day extra for a single, but a three-week trip would cost $1,500 more.


In Amsterdam, A New Wing For Schiphol
A new wing is scheduled to open at Schiphol Airport in Amsterdam on May 10.
The West Wing, as it is called, is the first stage in the facility's 15-year building plan, which will end in 2003.
By then, the airport will be equipped to handle 30 million people a year (19.1 million passengers were served in 1992).
The new wing will be used for flights within the European Community, which do not require customs or immigration clearance, as well as non-Community travel.


And Speaking of Coming a Long Way
In the 1980's, Gene Strahan and his son Michael had this routine every week in the fall: They would go to bed as early as 7 P.M.
Monday and get up at 4 A.M. to watch football on television.
In the United States, the games they were watching were known as "Monday Night Football," but in Germany, where they were living, it became Tuesday Morning Football.
Gene Strahan (pronounced STRAY-han) was a major then in the United States Army (he retired in 1985).
Now he and his wife, Louise, own a transport business in Mannheim, Germany, near Frankfurt, and still live there.
Michael, the youngest of their six children, is now a 6-foot-4 1/4-inch, 262-pound defensive end chosen by the Giants last Sunday in the second round of the National Football League draft.


Is There Someone to Blame for Waco?
The Clinton Administration announced last week the formation of an official investigation of the Government's handling of the Branch Davidian cult near Waco, Tex.
But nowhere was there mention of any review of Attorney General Janet Reno's decision to use armored vehicles to punch holes in the walls and drench the occupants with tear gas.
That decision began the chain of events that ended in the fire -- believed to have been set by the cult -- that killed scores of cult members and their children.
The announcement spoke only of looking at the way the 51-day standoff had been handled by the Federal Bureau of Investigation, and at the initial February raid by the Treasury Department's Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms in which four agents and six cult members were killed.
Officials later said the investigators can analyze Ms.
Reno's decisions if they wish.


Atlanta Program Spurs Immunization of Poor
Four-year-old Laquisha Thomas did not want to cry.
But watching her older brother, Luther Jr., 5, sobbing this morning as he received a shot in the arm and another in the thigh, Laquisha could not hold back the tears.


Marion Gartner, Thomas Carling
Marion Moreau Gartner, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Murray Gartner of New York, was married yesterday to Thomas Daniel Carling, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Thomas E. Carling of Slough, Buckingham, England.
The Rev.
Charles A. Amstein, a Presbyterian minister, performed the ceremony at Wave Hill in the Bronx.
Mrs.
Carling, 29, graduated magna cum laude from Bryn Mawr College.
She is a candidate for a master's degree in divinity at Union Theological Seminary.
Her father is a partner in the New York law firm of Proskauer, Rose, Goetz &amp; Mendelsohn.


Tickets to Go, Rockefeller Plaza
An electronic machine that issues airline tickets has been installed on the concourse level of 30 Rockefeller Plaza in Manhattan by Airline Computerized Ticketing, a California company.
The site is the first in the company's planned network of 400 machines, which will be placed in office buildings around the country this year.
Within the next month or so, two other vendors, Mail Boxes Etc. and the Q.D.A.T.
Corporation plan to install similar electronic systems in large United States cities.
Q.D.A.T. already has less elaborate ticket-delivery machines in New York and other large United States cities.
With technology comparable to an automatic teller machine, Airline Computerized Ticketing's electronic ticketing machine, which can issue tickets for any airline, is a delivery-only service, an alternative to messenger agencies and overnight delivery companies.
Travel agents handle reservations and payment.
An attendant is on hand to insure ticket security.
A proposal to allow the machines to be operated unattended awaits a final decision, expected in June, by the reporting commission.


THE GUIDE
MAY FLOWERS TILL JULY
"Nature's Bounty: American Floral Painting, 1835-1935" will be on view at the Whitney Museum of American Art in Stamford through July 14.
The associate curator at the museum, Kathleen Monaghan, has included such early artists as Severin Roesen, a German immigrant who is not a household name but was an important painter of formal still life and florals.
Works by Martin Johnson Heade, Benjamin Champney and Charles Ethan Porter, whose 19th-century work may be new to many viewers, are also in the show.


Susan O'Callahan and James Pratt
Mr. and Mrs.
John O'Callahan of Bronxville, N.Y., have announced the engagement of their daughter Susan Gwyn O'Callahan to Ens.
James Lewis Pratt, United States Navy, a son of Charles and Jean Pratt of Atlanta.
A September wedding is planned.
Ms.
O'Callahan is an administrative assistant with Buckhead Life Restaurant Group, which owns and manages restaurants in Atlanta.
She graduated from Duke University, as did her fiance.
Her father is a senior partner in the law firm of Breed, Abbott &amp; Morgan in New York.
Her mother, Mary O'Callahan, is a lawyer in Bronxville.


Susan Holden, Hunt Squibb
Susan E. Holden, the daughter of Richard and Elizabeth Holden of Simsbury, Conn., was married there yesterday to Hunt Squibb, the son of David and Anna Squibb of Madison, N.J.
The Rev.
Robert Tucker performed the ceremony at St.
Mary's Roman Catholic Church.


Sarah Marcus and Richard Barton
Mr. and Mrs.
Irving C. Marcus of Short Hills, N.J., have announced September wedding plans for their daughter Sarah Rose Marcus and Richard Newcomb Barton, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
James N. Barton of New Canaan, Conn.
Miss Marcus, 25, is a medical student at Northwestern University.
She graduated from Williams College.
Her father is a partner in the Roseland, N.J., law firm of Lasser, Hochman, Marcus, Guryan &amp; Kuskin.
Her mother, Harriet Marcus, is the chairwoman of the English department at the Oak Knoll School of the Holy Child in Summit, N.J.


Maria Gillen, Jed Diamond
Maria Victoria Gillen, a daughter of Mrs.
William A. Gillen of Lincroft, N.J., and the late Mr.
Gillen, was married yesterday to James Edward Diamond, a son of Emily Diamond of Covington, La., and Dr.
Jack R. Diamond of Talisheek, La.
The Rev.
Jane Mauldin, a Unitarian Universalist minister, performed the ceremony at the home of the groom's mother.
The Rev.
James Clark, a Roman Catholic priest, took part in the ceremony.


Odyssey


Correction
A report last Sunday about the engagement of Sharon Gail Stampfer to Dr.
Matthew Darrell Weitzman misidentified Ms.
Stampfer's mother.
She is Deborah L. Stampfer.


Artist At Work With Key In Control
It is supposed to be the season in which the artistry has fallen out of the craft, where fine pitching is all but extinct, the victim of too much expansion and not enough talent to stem the tide of runs pouring across home plates throughout the major leagues.
One pitcher is single-handedly putting an asterisk next to such sweeping statements.


Waste Not, Want Not, Win Not: A's Feeling the Pinch of Frugality
The Oakland Athletics may be paying the price for their unwillingness to pay the price.
American League West champions four of the last five seasons, the Athletics have encountered culture shock.
They have a losing record and have tasted last place, developments they had not experienced since 1987.
They also have a team shorn of some of the players who helped them win those championships.
Did they shed too many of their winning players?


Free Trade's Huge Costs
Unfortunately, White House budget director Leon Panetta's pronouncement that the North American Free Trade Agreement is dead is untrue.
The powerful free-trade ideologues and business interests which helped President Bush design and draft the agreement in virtual secrecy are very much in the driver's seat.
Washington insiders, including President Clinton, talk as if free trade is a magic bullet that automatically raises wages and generates jobs.
Yet, since 1973, American trade with other countries has doubled while the average weekly paycheck has fallen by 18 percent, adjusted for inflation.
The economy got bigger -- our national income per capita grew 28 percent -- but the benefits were channeled to those with the highest incomes.


Political Scandals in Japan Find a Role for Mah-Jongg
Japan's running political scandals have tainted the governing party and brought down a onetime kingmaker on an array of charges of financial misdeeds.
Now the affair has implicated one of the nation's dearest institutions: mah-jongg.
Developed in China, mah-jongg is an ancient, four-handed game played a bit like gin rummy, but using ivory or plastic tiles.
Young men generally learn it at school, developing a lifelong passion for the gambling and bonhomie essential to the game.
It is a rite of passage not just into adulthood but into the back rooms of the political world.


A Night of Art In Washington
A preview of works from the Barnes Foundation, National Gallery of Art, April 28.


The Executive Life; A Loser's a Winner In Silicon Valley
Its performance has been underwhelming, its prices are rising and its game is a mystery to many of its customers.
Still, the two-year-old San Jose Sharks professional hockey team appears to have captured the hearts of its Silicon Valley neighbors.
This season the team set a National Hockey League record for losses: 72, against 11 wins and 2 ties.
It barely escaped setting another record for the longest losing streak, and it recently fired its head coach.
Meanwhile, the team's new home, the $150 million San Jose Arena, scheduled for September completion, has been plagued by cost overruns and has announced a relatively high $38 for a decent seat.
Yet at the end of the Sharks's final (losing) game of the season, the crowd gave the team a standing ovation.


For Sale: Creaky Gears Of Chinese Communism
THESE may be the best of times for China's economy as a whole, but the boom has not managed to rub off on the state sector -- the sprawling, ailing collection of dinosaur enterprises that once was the showcase of Chinese Communism.
State-owned companies remain mostly on life-support systems, and now they're listening anxiously as officials discuss whether it's time to turn them off.
Things are so desperate in the state sector that Chinese Communist leaders are daring to experiment with bold new methods -- even privatization -- to salvage enterprises.
The Chinese Government is peddling state-owned companies to foreigners, hoping that someone can make them efficient.
A few takeover artists have emerged, including here in Wuhan, a landlocked industrial city far from the economically vibrant coastline.


Adding Touches From the Far East to Spice Up a Barbecue
AS warm weather and the grilling season approach, the trend toward giving barbecue a whiff of the Far East appears to be continuing.
Books about Asian grilling are in stores, and an increasing number of prepared barbecue sauces and marinades are flavored with ginger, sesame oil, peanuts and soy sauce.
Using these products with standard barbecue items like steaks, chicken breast and fresh tuna on the grill, along with corn on the cob and tomato salads, amounts to East-West cooking, often called Pacific Rim, the marriage of Asian and Western styles and flavors.
This kind of cooking has been in the news for some time, especially in restaurants.


Glimpse Into a Possible Future Penn Station, if Amtrak Has Its Way


AUTO UNION SEEKS TO DETER DETROIT FROM NEW LAYOFFS
Unable to stop layoffs and plant closings, the United Auto Workers are preparing for contract negotiations with the Big 3 auto makers by embracing a major shift in policy.
More than ever before, this flagship of the American union movement is focusing its attention on keeping its current, aging members on full salary and benefits until they retire -- rather than preserving the jobs for successive generations.
The strategy, clearly visible at a U.A.W. conference last week, is critical for survival, the union leadership says.
But some union officials and members say the new approach, and a willingness to bend traditional union goals in other areas, could end up destroying the union rather than saving it.
Adapt, Rather Than Confront
The debate between union leaders who consider themselves flexible and willing to adapt to the auto makers' needs and those who prefer a more traditional militancy makes the U.A.W. a testing ground for organized labor.
That is happening just as the Clinton Administration says it is willing to help unions regain some of their old powers.


Voting Rules In School Races
In Tuesday's Community School Board Elections, nine seats are at stake on each of the city's 32 community boards.
Any registered voter, or anyone registered as a parent voter, may vote.
HOW TO VOTE: Voters mark a paper ballot on which candidates are listed by name only.
Voting is by a proportional representation system.
Voters indicate their choice of candidates, in order of preference, by writing numbers in front of the candidates' names: 1 for their first choice, 2 for second, and so on.
Voters may assign only one number to each candidate.


Christine Moyles, Kenneth Kovan
Christine Ann Moyles, a daughter of Philip V. Moyles of New York and Mrs.
Joseph H. Shea of Monmouth Beach, N.J., was married yesterday to Kenneth E. Kovan, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Edward F. Kovanic of Rumson, N.J.
The Rev.
Robert Hawkins performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at Holy Cross Church in Rumson.
Mrs.
Kovan, 26, graduated from Kenyon College.
She was until recently an assistant at Sotheby's in Brussels.
Her father is of counsel to the New York law firm of Lambos &amp; Giardino.
The bride's maternal grandfather, Thomas J. Kane, was formerly the vice president and general manager of the Waldorf-Astoria Hotel in New York.


Money and Mystery Lurk Beneath Comedy
THE differences between community theater and professional theater are not always immediately apparent.
Although acting standards tend to be higher in the professional companies, so are the ticket prices.
The directing talent is eclectic across the board, and set and design depend solely on the sensitivity of the person putting together the production.
A case in point is the Synergy Ensemble Theater Company production of John Bishop's "Musical Comedy Murders of 1940" in Islip.


In the Region: Westchester; First-Timers Reviving Low-Price Market
AN unusual set of circumstances got Ned Kleinschmidt and his fiancee, Lesley Koniuch, into the Westchester housing market.
They found a parcel of less than an acre in Yorktown where a house had burned down.
The driveway and foundation remained intact and the couple asked a modular builder to fit a house onto the foundation and save them some building costs.


Any War in Bosnia Would Carry a Domestic Price
AS the Clinton Administration drew up its tougher policy on Bosnia last week, Secretary of State Warren Christopher said any decision to intervene militarily in the Balkans had to meet four criteria: the goals must be clear and understandable to the American people; the chances for success must be high; the American public must support the effort; and an "exit strategy" for getting out quickly must exist from the start.
That is a very sensible list of criteria.
The problem is that the only operation they could fit is another American invasion of Grenada.
World War II would not have qualified, let alone Bosnia.
Mr.
Christopher cannot be faulted for trying to bring some analytical clarity to President Clinton's first major foreign policy decision: to commit American military power to help resolve the Bosnia crisis.
But Mr.
Christopher is like a navigator advising his captain to follow the stars in the middle of a hurricane; it's great advice, but in the middle of a storm, you can't see Orion.
And in the middle of a Balkan civil war, no checklist, no amount of advance planning, can eliminate the risks when a great power becomes embroiled in the politics of small tribes.


In the Pleasure District
The Japanese term
ukiyo-e
-- "pictures of the floating world" -- brings to mind the woodblock prints of the Edo period (1615-1868), yet many of the artists who designed these prints also created smaller numbers of refined
ukiyo-e
paintings.
Foreigners living in or visiting Japan from the 1870's onward were the first to appreciate and collect these paintings; more than 200 of them now held by the British Museum are reproduced, in color, in UKIYO-E PAINTINGS IN THE BRITISH MUSEUM (Smithsonian Institution, $39.95).
Courtesans of the Yoshiwara pleasure district of Tokyo are the predominant subjects.
In his introduction, Timothy Clark, a curator at the museum, describes the government-licensed brothel quarter, which opened in 1617, and something of the lives of the women indentured there.
He notes that the idealized images of
ukiyo-e
-- meant to extol the amusements of the quarter and the charms of its highest-ranking prostitutes -- did not show "the seamier side of the prostitution industry that is known all too well to have existed from diaries, popular literature and other written sources." Indeed, plate after plate depicts elegant women lounging about waiting for their patrons, reading love letters or strolling to houses of assignation.
The elaborate designs of their kimonos and sashes are far more expressive than their stylized facial features.
Also in this collection are paintings of craftsmen at work, landscapes, a selection of forgeries and some erotica.
Students of art history will appreciate Mr.
Clark's detailed notes on the artists.
And we can thank him as well for his candor in declaring that the primly titled "Maids Seduced by Workmen" is, in fact, a painting of a rape.


JACKKNIFED!
I drive rigs for a 90-driver terminal in the San Francisco Bay area.
The drivers have, to my knowledge, had one jackknife accident in the six years that I have worked for this company.
The accident occurred on a rain-slickened off-ramp.
No one was hurt.
Like most trucking companies, ours has an aggressive safety program, including weekly safety meetings.
This program is motivated as much by profit as by altruism.
As Nash states, a fully loaded truck may weigh as much as 80,000 pounds.
Fifty-thousand pounds of that may well be cargo.
If a candy bar costs 50 cents retail for less than two ounces of candy, even at wholesale prices 50,000 pounds of candy bars is worth a lot of money.
And 50,000 pounds of computers is worth enough to retire on.


Storied Nepal Losing Battle Against Pollution
On these warm spring days, a blue haze of pollution from cars, wood fires, kilns and construction fills the Katmandu Valley, forcing pedestrians and cyclists to wear cloth masks.
The area still draws tens of thousands of Western tourists every year.
"This city was built for 40,000 people," said Prem Lal Singh, the effervescent Mayor of Katmandu, who easily defeated a Communist rival for the post last year.
"Now it has more than 700,000 and it has no infrastructure to cope with the solid wastes or pollution."


The State's Drug Companies Face New Political Environment
WHILE the rest of the Connecticut economy languishes, pharmaceutical research is growing across the state.
Boehringer Ingelheim in Ridgefield, Miles Laboratories in West Haven, and Pfizer in Groton are all opening or building major laboratory expansions, and smaller operations are following suit.
A spokesman for the Pharmaceutical Manufacturers Association, David Emerick, said an estimated 12,000 people in Connecticut worked in drug research and development, which placed Connecticut ninth in the country.


U.S.-Russian Student Exchange Is Awry
To the Editor:
As a visiting professor at American colleges (Colby College, 1991, and Connecticut College, 1993) and a professor at St.
Petersburg Classical High School, I want to share my dissatisfaction with certain practices in Russian-American educational exchanges.


Investigation of Sex Assaults by Pilots Had to Beat Wall of Silence in Navy
To penetrate the stone wall of silence that had stymied earlier investigations, Pentagon authorities used lie detectors, undercover agents and detailed computer analyses to uncover the sordid details of scores of assaults against women two years ago at a convention of naval aviators.
Adapting tactics and techniques used in criminal inquiries, agents of the Defense Department's Inspector General said they were able to overcome the uncooperativeness of the aviators that had hindered two earlier Navy investigations into the Tailhook Association convention in 1991 at the Las Vegas Hilton.


3-Year-Old Gives 85-Year-Old His Derby Dream
The 119th Kentucky Derby, billed as the most wide open in years and belittled as the least distinguished in years, was won with style and personal drama today by Sea Hero, the horse who was nearly consigned to a career of grass racing until the plan was vetoed by his 85-year-old owner, Paul Mellon.
The switch was vetoed this spring because Mellon, the patron of the arts and one of the pillars of thoroughbred racing, was driven to win the one big prize that had eluded him three times -- the Derby.


New &amp; Noteworthy
MERCHANTS OF DEBT: KKR and the Mortgaging of American Business, by George Anders. (Basic Books, $12.) George Anders analyzes the brilliance of the leveraged buyouts that were the specialty of Kohlberg, Kravis, Roberts, while also acknowledging their human cost.
Last year our reviewer, William Taylor, said the work's "integrity makes it less of a page turner than some other books about Wall Street, but a far more enduring contribution."
JAZZ, by Toni Morrison. (Plume, $10.) Set in Harlem during the 1920's, Toni Morrison's novel revolves around a triangle consisting of a discontented middle-aged black married couple and the young, seductive woman who disrupts their uneasy peace.
But the story concentrates not so much on the affair as on its aftermath -- when murder has ended one of the lives but none of the longing.
"The effect is of a prism," Edna O'Brien said here last year, through which we "glimpse . . . shifting multifarious worlds." .


'Goans Are Indians'
To the Editor:
Many thanks to John Russell for all the enthusiastic things he had to say about the new British Council building  [ "In New Delhi, Pursued by an Enormous Tree," March 28 ] .
But let me point out that Goans are Indians and not, as he wrote, of "Portuguese origin." (At least, I'm not!) CHARLES CORREA Bombay, India
The writer is the architect of the British Council building.


A Famous Collection Escapes Its Moorings
It would take an eccentric like Alfred Barnes to begrudge anyone the beautiful, once-in-a-lifetime exhibition of 80 French paintings from his collection that opens today at the National Gallery of Art.
Who knows what he would think now, of course.
All that's certain is that until his death in 1951 at the age of 79, Dr.
Barnes (who was trained as a physician and made his fortune selling over-the-counter remedies like Argyrol) vehemently resisted every plea to lend his art.


Tripping, but Not Falling
OCCIDENTAL, Calif. -- Nibbling his "Cranberry Gobbler" sandwich in a sunny cafe, Terence McKenna explained his theory of how psychedelic mushrooms are the missing link in the story of human evolution.
About five million years ago, Mr.
McKenna said, our remote ancestors left the African rain forest for what were the verdant Saharan grasslands.
In search of protein-rich grubs and beetles, they flipped over dried cow pies and discovered the dung-loving psilocybin mushroom.
"For sure the mushroom would have been sampled," Mr.
McKenna said.
"Then our proto-hominid forebears, like legions of hippies millennia hence, discovered that the usual activities comprising the whirl of their days -- hunting and gathering, primarily -- were out of the question.


The Spring Flowers That Grow on Trees
THE parade of flowering trees has begun.
Every landscape deserves at least one.
The problem is, which one?
The best way to choose is to be alert as to what is blooming in the neighborhood.
Some trees give fleeting performances, lasting but a day or two.
If there is a heavy rainfall when these trees are in full bloom, alas, the rain pulls off the blossoms until the next spring.


Foreign Affairs; Means Without Ends
It looks like President Clinton has mercifully abandoned his search for the immaculate conception on Bosnia.
He now seems to realize there is no policy for Bosnia that can miraculously roll back Serb aggression without risking an American life, reconcile the irreconcilable warring factions and unite Gandhi and Godzilla.
So he finally appears to have gathered up his courage, ended his endless policy seminars and chosen among the unhappy choices.
Unless he has third thoughts, Mr.
Clinton has decided to bomb Serb forces in Bosnia and arm the Muslims.
But he will not act alone, nor should he.
His advisers expect the allies to go along, more or less, grudgingly.


Weekend Respite for Officials at Waco Compound
The Texas authorities suspended their work on the burned-out ruins of the nearby Branch Davidian complex on Friday, though medical examiners in Fort Worth continued autopsies on the bodies of sect members through the weekend.
The search for clues to the start of the April 19 fire that razed the cult's compound, leaving more than 70 members dead, and the recovery of bodies will resume Monday.


Thailand Stirs Criticism Over Cambodian Timber
Already criticized by the United Nations for failing to prevent the illegal import of Cambodian timber, the Thai Government is debating whether to reopen the border with Cambodia this spring to allow imports of millions of cubic feet of logs from its neighbor.
The proposal by the Thai Interior Ministry to reopen the border has startled United Nations peacekeeping officials in Cambodia, who warn that the plan could result in major violations of an international ban on the import of Cambodian logs.


As U.N. Prepares for Somalia Command, Rebuilding Is Most Urgent Task
Late into the night, the open-air cinema in central Mogadishu blares Bruce Lee movies and American rap and rock tunes, the towering screen dancing shadows off the walls of buildings.
During the day, in the overwhelming heat and humidity, the streets drone with the sounds of generators that supply electricity to one-room shops offering T-shirts, imitation Reeboks and even photocopying services.
Commercial ships dock at the port; one last month was laden with a shipment of thousands of plastic toy guns.
There are still no telephones, but on certain blocks, standpipes provide running water.
There is even a fledgling police force.


POSTINGS: Building a Bridge to a Deal; A Connection Counts for a Lot
You'd think that a tenant that adamantly refused to split itself between different floors in the same building would be even more averse to spreading out to the building next door.
Not necessarily.
On July 1, Project Return, a not-for-profit drug treatment group, is scheduled to move to 15,500 square feet on the seventh floor of 10 Astor Place and 3,000 feet on the sixth floor of 740 Broadway, next door.
The reason: Jeffrey and Aaron Gural, who own both buildings, are building an enclosed staircase that will enable Project Return people to walk between their offices without ever touching street level.


Jody Wolf, Morris Weissman
Jody Wolf, the founder and president of Jody Wolf Fashions, a personalized shopping service in New York, and Morris Weissman, the chairman and chief executive of the United States Banknote Corporation in New York, were married last Wednesday.
Rabbi Peter J. Rubenstein officiated at L'Orangerie of Le Cirque in New York.
Mrs.
Weissman is the daughter of Edith C. Wolf of North Miami Beach, Fla., and the late Ralph T. Wolf.
Her father owned Ralph Wolf Associates, an insurance brokerage in Westport, Conn.
Her previous marriage ended in divorce, as did her husband's two previous marriages.


Southport Showhouse Is Focus of Benefit
LAST summer the mother and daughter partners of Southport Design Ltd., Janet F. Ackerly and B. Elizabeth Rowley, conferred on an unusually challenging project.
It wasn't about puddling the draperies on the floor, or what color to striate the walls, or Adam vs.
Sheraton.
It was about how to raise money for a cultural arts program for the youngsters of the year-old McGivney Community Center in East Bridgeport.
When Ms.
Rowley, who is on the board of directors and teaches a video course for young people at the McGivney Center, told her mother that the center needed to raise money for dance, theater, music, art and video programs, Mrs.
Ackerly suggested a showhouse.


Out of Africa


Stacey Lane And Ira Pion
Mr. and Mrs.
George Lane of Monsey, N.Y., have announced the engagement of their daughter Dr.
Stacey Lane to Dr.
Ira Pion, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Al Pion of Oceanside, L.I.
An October wedding is planned.


Pro-Military Ads Cloud Nigeria's Political Future
A mysterious advertising campaign has become the unlikely spark of a debate here over whether Nigeria's military leaders are genuinely prepared to hand power back to civilians after elections in June.
The issue is hardly new in Nigeria, where soldiers have been in control for all but nine years since the country won independence from Britain in 1960.
But an anonymous British businessman gave it sudden urgency when he took out a series of full-page advertisements in newspapers and magazines here calling on Gen.
Ibrahim Babangida, Nigeria's military leader, to remain in power.
The advertisements were signed simply "Atkins."


TRANSACTIONS
Football National Football League
NEW YORK GIANTS -- Signed Willie Beamon, Mike McFarland, Harold Nash and Joel Thornton, defensive backs; Jerome Preston, defensive lineman; Scott Roseman, linebacker; Keith Crawford and Lawaan Latson, wide receivers; Kenyon Rasheed, running back, and Brian Kozlowski, tight end.


Bargains Where You Least Expect Them
That's New York, for you: a half-price fabric outlet store named Paron II, tucked away at 56 West 57th Street, about midway between Henri Bendel and the Russian Tea Room.
The store, upstairs from Paron Fabrics, sells Anne Klein pima cottons for $8 a yard and Bill Blass woolens for $15 a yard.
Other bargains include sand-washed silk prints for $8 a yard and 60-inch-wide printed cottons for $3 a yard.


A Tea Party In New York
An exhibition of teapots and tea sets by 200 artists, American Craft Museum, April 26.


APRIL 25-MAY 1: Late-Night TV; NBC Takes a Gamble On a Very New Comic
As surprised as most of the television industry was last week when NBC selected an unknown comedy writer for the position of late-night talk host being vacated by David Letterman, imagine how the roster of established comedians felt.
The phalanx of comics working stand-up in dark clubs smelling of stale beer, paying their dues, polishing their acts -- all of them lost out to 30-year-old Conan O'Brien, whose only important credit was an audition tape he made for NBC executives in mid-April.


Trenton Data Subpoenaed In Bond Sale
Federal investigators are subpoenaing records of major bond houses and several New Jersey government agencies in connection with an inquiry into whether bribes were paid to steer $2.9 billion in turnpike bond business to particular parties.
A senior Federal investigator involved in the inquiry, who spoke on the condition of anonymity, called the investigation "a serious matter" and said it was centered on an allegation that kickbacks were made to steer turnpike bond business to particular bonding agencies, lawyers or others who stood to reap financial benefits from the transactions, which took place in 1991 and 1992.


Bonilla's View Is Media's Fault
To the Sports Editor:
I was dismayed with Joe Sexton's attempt to "shed light" on the problems Bobby Bonilla has had since he started playing for the Mets ("Lost in a City He Calls Home," The Times, April 25).


An Untitled Player Slays a Few Giants
DANIEL EDELMAN of New Windsor, N.Y., the only player without a major title invited to the Hudson International Tournament at Pace University in Pleasantville, N.Y., earned his third and final norm for international master rank there on April 21 by scoring the required 3 1/2 points.
He started his giant-killing in Round 2 by taking advantage of errors by the Estonian grandmaster Jaan Ehlvest.
The anti-Sicilian system with 6 Be3 and 7 f3, popularized by Nigel Short, braces the white center against counterattack and prepares for king's wing operations beginning with 9 g4.
Ehlvest met it cautiously, exchanging with 9 . . .
Nd4 10 Bd4.


Elizabeth Bishop's Art
To the Editor:
Richard Tillinghast's review contains three errors that should not go uncorrected.
First, Mr.
Tillinghast states that during her lifetime, Bishop's poetry was "collected in three thin books." Actually, it was
four
thin books: "North &amp; South" (1946), "Poems" (1955), "Questions of Travel" (1965) and "Geography III" (1976).


Too Much of a Good Thing on Long Island Sound; Resurgence of Lobsters Lowers Prices, Brings More Fishers and Spawns Tensions
Running with the morning tide, Arthur Fodera cleared the entrance to Huntington Harbor, powered up the diesel engine in his 35-foot fishing boat and headed across the bay toward Long Island Sound to check the catch in his 700 lobster pots.
With fresh bait fish in buckets at the stern and sea gulls trailing in a cloudless blue sky above his wake, Captain Fodera flipped on his radar, depth finder and the Loran tracking system that helps him find the thousands of dollars worth of lobster fishing gear he leaves on the bottom of the Sound.


Knicks Are on Alert After an Early Jolt
While the Indiana Pacers did not get a victory in Game 1, they definitely got the Knicks' attention.
It will be interesting to see how New York responds this afternoon at Madison Square Garden in Game 2 of the first-round Eastern Conference playoff series.
But on Friday night, Indiana erased a 19-point deficit and made the Knicks sweat for a 107-104 victory, enhancing the Pacers' belief that they can win the three-of-five-game series.


Susan A. Meisel, David J. Sorkin
Susan Anne Meisel, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Herbert R. Meisel of Springfield, N.J., was married last evening to David James Sorkin, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Saul Sorkin of Great Neck, L.I.
Rabbi Marjorie Slome performed the ceremony at the Manhattan Penthouse in New York.
Ms.
Meisel, who is keeping her name, is counsel at the Sony Electronic Publishing Company in New York, the interactive software subsidiary of Sony U.S.A.
She graduated from Georgetown University, from which she also received a law degree.


The Idiosyncrasies of Shopping for and Storing Lumber
TO say that shopping for lumber can be intimidating understates the case for many homeowners and would-be amateur carpenters who freeze at the thought of visiting a lumberyard.
Here are some basic explanations and tips that may help.
Lumber derived chiefly from evergreen trees like pine, hemlock, spruce and fir is termed softwood.
Lumber from deciduous trees like oak and maple is called hardwood.


Madcap Millionaires
THE GREEDY 1980'S stand in such disrepute that Michael Milken, desperate for a fresh, just-folks image, poses for photographs without his wig.
"Barbarians at the Gate," the book about Wall Street buccaneering, turns up on television as a scabrous farce by Larry Gelbart, the author of "M*A*S*H." The big money, big hair and big scams of the Reagan-Bush decade now loom in memory as a decadent apocalypse to rival Weimar Germany and prerevolutionary czarist Russia.
Yet once again America's love affair with madcap millionaires is heating up.
Times remain hard, after all, and the egalitarian buzzword of the new Clinton age, sacrifice, as yet offers more long-term hope than short-term help.
In hard times, Americans traditionally turn to the fabulously rich and famous for escapist entertainment, and this economic drought has had no shortage of moneyed clowns.


What Bankers Really Want
To the Editor:
Contrary to "Bankers Want to Roll the Dice Again" (Viewpoints, April 18), to a banker, life is neither a cabaret nor a crapshoot.
Banks are in the business of taking risk.
They lend money that may or may not be paid back.
The banker's job is to find that delicate balance between financing dreams and determining the borrower's ability to pay for those dreams.


Tastes and Tours In Wine Country
The Sonoma County Wineries Association opened a new Wine and Visitors Center recently at 5000 Roberts Lake Road in Rohnert Park, Calif., (707) 586-3795, just off Route 101, between Petaluma and Santa Rosa.
Visitors can use an interactive video display terminal to help plan a tour of area wineries, and a wine-tasting bar is scheduled to open next month.
Visitors can also stroll through vineyards and a demonstration winery.
There is no admission to the center itself.
Viewing of a 30-minute videotape on Sonoma County wineries, along with a wine tasting and hors d'oeuvres or a boxed lunch, costs $10 to $17.50 a person.
In neighboring Napa County, the annual Napa Valley Wine Auction will be held June 10 to 13.
Related festivities include tastings of current vintages and of those in the barrel, receptions at various wineries and a Cajun-style dinner at the Meadowood Resort in St.
Helena on June 12.
Admission to all events is $540 a person or $950 a couple.
Information: Napa Valley Wine Auction, 900 Meadowood Lane Gatehouse, Post Office Box 141, St.
Helena, Calif. 94574, (707) 963-5246.


Honda's Ugly Little Secret
TOM ROULETTE opened a Honda dealership in Painesville, Ohio, in 1978, offering what were becoming the hottest cars in America.
But more than one Honda Motor Company executive told him, he recalls, that to get all the cars he wanted to sell he would have to "play the game."
During the next eight years, Mr.
Roulette concedes, he played the game faithfully, showering Honda executives with gifts -- a car, jewelry, a stereo system, barbecue grills and thousands of dollars in cash.
On some Christmases he received a list specifying what executives expected from Santa.
One year, he recalls, he sent his wife to buy a watch costing more than $2,000 for the wife of a Honda executive.


JACKKNIFED!
In "Jackknifed!" (April 11), Eric P. Nash investigates the epidemic of tractor-trailer accidents, and his results are very interesting -- statistically.
What he omits, however, is the reason so many of these accidents have been occurring.
These trucks haven't grown to their unwieldy size through natural selection.
They are the result of a deliberate policy of the Reagan Administration to deregulate the trucking industry.
We need not only new antilock brakes on these monsters but brakes on the trucking industry again.
BENITA HACK
Brooklyn


Tracey Fitzgerald, H. E. Sullivan 3d
Tracey Andrea Fitzgerald and Howard Edwards Sullivan 3d, both lawyers in New York, were married yesterday at the Church of the Resurrection in Rye, N.Y.
The Rev.
Lawrence C. Inzeo, a Roman Catholic priest, performed the ceremony.
Mrs.
Sullivan, 29, is an associate at the law firm of Coudert Brothers.
She graduated magna cum laude from Georgetown University, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa, and received her law degree from Columbia University.


It's Game, Set and Wallet for Open Fans
Tennis, anyone?
The tennis at the 1993 United States Open won't be for everyone, not with the massive price increases the United States Tennis Association has announced for all seating, from the elite courtside boxes to the distant bleacher rows that rim the top of the stadium.
The most stunning increase will affect owners of the 80 or more six-seat courtside boxes that command front-row proximity.
Prices for those boxes have been escalated from $9,600 to $15,000 for the 25-session event, which runs Aug. 30-Sept. 12.


Wall Street; A Quarter Full of That Old Junk Magic
JUNK is back.
The first quarter of this year saw more money than ever put into junk bond mutual funds by investors hungry for yield.
The flow, $3.1 billion of it, just exceeded the former peak, set in the second quarter of 1986.
Then, as now, falling interest rates were causing many investors to take greater risks in search of income.


More Cats
To the Editor: Outnumbering the cats of the British Museum ("On the Prowl at the British Museum," March 21) are the cats of Rome's Colosseum, lounging serenely on the semicircular tiers of the historical ruin, eyes closed, paws tucked under.
Cats occupy the Vatican's parking lot, too, quantities of cats and kittens on cars, under cars, along windowsills, underfoot.


CHRISTOPHER SEEKS BACKING ON BOSNIA
Despite the decision by the leader of the Bosnian Serbs to sign a peace agreement for Bosnia and Herzegovina, Secretary of State Warren Christopher said today that he would press the United States' allies to support a plan for the use of force to help bring an end to the war.
But Britain today reiterated its opposition to arming the Muslim-led Bosnian Government's forces as part of an American strategy that includes a decision in principle to commit American warplanes to attack Bosnian Serb artillery positions, British officials said.


Abandoned Hotel Is Demolished for State Arts Center in Newark


Diamond Shamrock Offshore Partners L.P.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


First United Bancshares (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Datascope Corp.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Bias Suspected In an Attack In Brooklyn
A 16-year-old youth told the police that he was attacked with fists and a walkie-talkie and that eight of his friends were roughed up on a Brooklyn street early yesterday by 20 to 30 men in Hasidic garb who said his "kind" was not wanted in their neighborhood.
The police said they were investigating the attack as a possible bias incident.
The victim and a friend said in interviews last night that the assault had followed a dispute between some members of their group and a Hasidic youth at a pizzeria.


Local School Board's Power Is Often Less Than Expected
For Barbara Strauss, those heady first days after her election to a Manhattan community school board were a time of lofty aspirations: She hoped to improve reading scores, ease classroom overcrowding and inspire other parents to get more involved in her district's schools.
Four years later Ms.
Strauss is stepping down, and although she feels she has contributed much, parent apathy remains, and classroom crowding and reading scores in her district have worsened.
But it is not surprising that many of her goals have gone unmet, she said, given the immensity of the workload heaped on local school board members and the immutable bureaucracy that limits their powers.


Commerce Bank reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


America Service Group Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Leave It to Gooden To Set Mets Straight
Dwight Gooden took the baseball and the mound, fully aware that the reading on the crisis meter for the Mets had gone off the charts.
The losing streak stood at seven, the mood in the clubhouse was marked by desperation.
The assignment was to stop it -- halt the losing, end the embarrassment, stop all of it.
The job also had an unspoken clause in it: do it alone, for the bullpen had been exhausted and exposed.


BT Financial Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Dryer's Grand Ice Cream (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 27


Kuwait Plans 120-Mile Ditch to Keep Iraq at Bay
Kuwait plans to dig a 120-mile ditch along its entire land border with Iraq, primarily to discourage infiltration by Iraqis but also to symbolically renounce any future relations with the Government of President Saddam Hussein.
The decision, which reflects the bitter rift that has remained between the two countries since the Iraqi invasion in August 1990 and its seven-month occupation of Kuwait, was approved by the Cabinet last week.


CGC Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


American Federal Bank reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Wisconsin Energy Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Track Changes at the Indy Speedway Get Bumpy
The kind of daring pass that Rick Mears made on Michael Andretti to win the 1991 Indianapolis 500 may be only a videotape memory, and not just because Mears has retired and Andretti has gone to Formula One racing.
For it now seems that Mears's daring maneuver -- passing on the outside in turn one -- may be too risky, thanks to changes made at the Indianapolis Motor Speedway over the winter.


Weekly Treasury Activity Will Be Confined to Bills
The Treasury's schedule of financings this week is confined to the bill market and today's regular weekly auction for three- and six-month maturities.
Traders said that by the close of the New York cash market on Friday, the rate on the outstanding three-month bill was 2.88 percent and the rate on a six-month bill was 2.96 percent.


Corrections
An entry in the Addenda listing of the Media Business page on April 16 about the assignment of Kyocera Electronics' advertising account to the Wells Rich Greene BDDP agency included an erroneous history supplied by the agency.
The account was previously handled by JMH &amp; Associates of Florham Park, N.J.; Wells Rich was thus not the first agency to handle it in the United States.
JMH &amp; Associates will continue to handle other projects for Kyocera.


Mueller Industries reports earnings for Qtr to March 27


At Biggest Magazines, Revolution Trickles Up
In an underground newsroom filled with $2 million of the most advanced editorial, imaging and transmission technology, a staff of top magazine executives stepped into the future last week.
For six days they worked entirely electronically in the basement of the Time-Life building at Rockefeller Center producing a magazine.
For most of them, it was the first time they were able to integrate all of the preprinting steps -- writing, editing, reviewing photographs, retouching images, laying out pages, writing captions and headlines -- on one desktop computer system.
By the end of the week they had produced a high-quality four-color 92-page general interest magazine about -- what else? -- how technology is transforming the magazine industry.


Voting Rules In School Races
In tomorrow's Community School Board Elections, nine seats are at stake on each of the city's 32 community boards.
Any registered voter, or anyone registered as a parent voter, may vote.
HOW TO VOTE: Voters mark a paper ballot on which candidates are listed by name only.
Voting is by a proportional representation system.
Voters indicate their choice of candidates, in order of preference, by writing numbers in front of the candidates' names: 1 for their first choice, 2 for second, and son on.
Voters may assign only one number to each candidate.


Sunrise Federal Bancorp Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Patents
BRUCE A. LEHMAN came to work for the House Judiciary Committee in 1974 at the crest of Watergate.
While some colleagues enjoyed high-profile assignments under the klieg lights of the Nixon impeachment hearings, Mr.
Lehman toiled anonymously in the nether world of patent policy provisions for nonnuclear energy research.
Mr.
Lehman, now 47, was said to be unenthusiastic about his initial Congressional assignment almost 20 years ago.
But look where it led: President Clinton recently nominated him as Assistant Commerce Secretary and Commissioner of Patents and Trademarks.
As such, Mr.
Lehman would play an important role in trade negotiations, while overseeing the Patent Office, which has about 4,500 employees and a 1993 budget of $486 million.


Corrections
A chart on Saturday listing candidates in local school board races in Brooklyn omitted an endorsement for Chester P. Lustgarten, a candidate in District 15.
He has been endorsed by the Council of Supervisors and Administrators, the union representing principals and other school administrators.


Micronics Computers Inc.  (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Uneasy Days for the Bond Market
This week could be bumpy for the bond market.
The beginning of every month brings the Labor Department employment report and the traumas that come with waiting for its release on Friday.
But coming just after last week's report on the economy's weak performance in the first quarter, the jobs report could be more jolting than usual.
It will be scrutinized to see if the slow trend in economic growth is continuing or was just weather related.


Essef Corp.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Alltrista (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to April 4


Abroad at Home; Candor and Fortitude
One of the many revealing passages in George Shultz's new book on his years as Secretary of State, "Turmoil and Triumph," deals with the massacre of Palestinians in Beirut in 1982.
Israeli forces occupying the city sent Phalange Christian militia units into Palestinian refugee camps, where they killed hundreds of civilians.
At 11 P.M. on Sunday, Sept. 19, the Israeli Ambassador to Washington, Moshe Arens, came to see Secretary Shultz.


Fortis Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Caryl M. Stern, Donald LaRosa
Caryl Mignon Stern, the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Edwin A. Stern of Peekskill, N.Y., was married yesterday to Donald Leonard LaRosa, the son of Leonard LaRosa of Glendale, Queens, and the late Jeanette LaRosa.
Barry Traub, a Nyack, N.Y., village justice, officiated at Flowerfield, a catering establishment in St.
James, L.I.
Mrs.
LaRosa, 35, is director of the World of Difference Institute in New York, a prejudice-reduction program owned and operated by the Anti-Defamation League.
She graduated from the State University at Oneonta, N.Y., received a master's degree in student personnel administration from Western Illinois University and is a candidate for a Ph.D. in the same field from Loyola University of Chicago.


Successful Drug War Can Afford to Shift Focus
To the Editor:
"Mr. Clinton's Invisible Drug Policy" (editorial, April 22) fails to capture the fundamentals of the drug issue: High school seniors' monthly cocaine use is lower today at 1.3 million compared with 1.9 million in 1975.
Adult monthly cocaine use, an estimated 1.9 million to 2 million, is lower than 2.5 million in 1977.


Pacers Find Playoffs A Quick Place to Visit
In the dismal quiet of the corridor outside the Indiana Pacers' locker room yesterday afternoon, Bob Hill got into the abstract of basketball, a subject that has left many a fired general manager and coach confounded and cursing the stars.
"Another big forward who has presence," Hill guessed in answer to the question of what his team would need to come to Madison Square Garden some day and win a playoff game.
Actually, not just this Garden, but also the one in Boston -- where the Pacers performed this flirtation of a playoff act the last two years -- and the rest of the arenas around the country where pro ball is still being played.


ISRAEL TO REALIGN STATE-RUN BANKS
The Israeli Government approved a reorganization of the highly centralized banking system today in the hope of increasing competition and loosening the iron grip that a handful of banks have on the economy.
The plan came under sharp attack both from Israeli bankers, who said it would unduly limit their activities, and from advocates of drastic change, who said it did not go far enough.


Shared Medical Sys (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Bush Industries reports earnings for Qtr to April 3


Review/Music; A 12th-Century Abbess and Her Songs of Female Imagery
The music of the 12th-century church might seem a specialized taste; formal motets and melismatic songs full of mystical imagery generally have a limited following.
But in the case of Hildegard von Bingen (1098-1179), other forces are at work.
A German abbess whose life was promised to the church by her parents, she was one of the most significant female composers of the past millennium.
Under the influence of feminist scholarship, her works are being re-examined for the light they shed on sexual differences in art and religion.
And in a concert on Thursday night at the Church of St.
Mary the Virgin, the female singers of the Cologne-based medieval music group, Sequentia, presented an exquisite and refined sampling of what they called her "ecstatic devotions." The group is in the process of recording Hildegard von Bingen's works for the German Harmonia Mundi label.
They approached it with the devotion of initiates.


Mandated Insurance Faces Fight
Small businesses are making an emotional 11th-hour appeal to head off the Clinton Administration's plans to require all companies to pay for health insurance for their workers -- a mandate that critics say could bankrupt thousands of companies and cause large-scale layoffs.
Small business is squaring off not only against President Clinton, who needs employers to help finance the huge cost of extending coverage to uninsured Americans, but also large companies, which already provide health coverage and say small companies are not doing their share.


Tandy Brands Accessories (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Baroid Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Maverick in Accident
Dallas Mavericks forward TERRY DAVIS shattered his left elbow in a car accident that killed a passenger early yesterday morning near Davis's hometown of South Boston, Va., officials said.
Davis, of South Boston, was driving west on Interstate 360 in Halifax County when it failed to make a turn onto Virginia 832, state police said.
The car ran off the road and struck a tree.


Budget Relies On Aid of U.S. And Albany
The budget Mayor David N. Dinkins will unveil this morning calls for nearly $100 million in new cuts, city officials said last night, but it relies heavily on $530 million in state and Federal aid that may not materialize.
All spring, Mr.
Dinkins has been laboring to close a $2.1 billion gap in the city's $31.4 billion spending plan for the fiscal year that begins July 1.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Press; Newspaper publishers consider a heretical new idea: just how dated their products are
"YOU guys are irrelevant," a quick-talking man said in a room full of newspaper publishers here on Wednesday morning.
Then, to drive the point home, he added, "You are extinct."
The speaker was Alf Nucifora, an Atlanta-based marketing consultant, not a newspaperman.
But none of the publishers in the room, and it was a big one, rose to challenge his assertion.


For Yankees, Victory Is a Walk in the Park
Here was the classic Little League confrontation at Yankee Stadium: a shy batter, reluctant to swing at intimidating pitches with the bases loaded, the score tied and two outs in an extra inning.
"It was the first time in my life I've seen a hitter get up with the bases loaded in the last inning with no intention of swinging the bat," said Norm Charlton, the bully, the Seattle pitcher.


New York's School Election: What Do We Want for Our Kids?; Fight the Moral Decay
To the Editor:
Juxtaposing your extremely moving "Children of the Shadows" series with several recent news articles on the controversy over the involvement of the "religious right" in the forthcoming New York City school board elections, I perceive a useful lesson.


A $5 Million Walk in the Sun


CHRONICLE
They are improbable partners: KURT VONNEGUT and Igor Stravinsky, but their words and music will come together on Thursday at Alice Tully Hall at the premiere of a new version of "L'Histoire du Soldat" by the New York Philomusica Chamber Ensemble.
The original libretto for "L'Histoire du Soldat" was by Charles-Ferdinand Ramuz, a Swiss novelist who died in 1947.
It related a Faustian bargain made by a soldier, who sells his violin to the Devil in exchange for a book containing the secrets of wealth (mainly stocks and bonds).


Mid-America Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Magazine Name Change
Decorating Remodeling magazine will change its name to American HomeStyle with its November issue, The New York Times Company's Women's Magazine Group announced today.
"Around the office we like to think of this as outgrowing your nickname," said Karen Saks, one of the two editors in chief of the magazine.
"American HomeStyle is better on defining what we do." Decorating Remodeling magazine, which is published eight times a year and has a circulation of 659,000, is for readers and advertisers interested in home building, decorating and remodeling.


Merchants Bank of New York (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Executives Hired For 2 Lowe Teams
Lee Garfinkel, vice chairman and chief creative officer at Lowe &amp; Partners of New York, said on Friday that the agency had hired executives for two creative teams to work on its Halston Borghese and Paddington Corporation accounts.
For Halston Borghese fragrances, the agency hired Veronica Nash as a senior vice president and creative group head and Mark Dixon as a vice president and art supervisor.
She had been freelancing, while he was previously a vice president and senior art director at Wells Rich Greene BDDP of New York.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
President Clinton's health-care plan may require $100 billion to $150 billion a year in new spending by Government, business and consumers, depending on the scope of benefits guaranteed to Americans, Government financial experts told the White House.
Administration officials contend that the numbers are too high, but the financial experts have refused to reduce them.  [ Page A1. ]
Small businesses are making an emotional 11th-hour appeal to head off plans to require all companies to pay for health insurance for workers -- a mandate that critics say could bankrupt thousands of companies and cause large-scale layoffs.  [ D1. ]


Fruit of the Loom Post
Fruit of the Loom Inc., a Chicago-based apparel manufacturer, has appointed Ronald J. Sorini, a former senior Bush Administration trade official, to fill the new position of senior vice president for international development and government relations.
As chief textile negotiator for the last four years, Mr.
Sorini, 37, was one of four top aides to Carla A. Hills, the former United States trade representative.
He oversaw part of the negotiations last year that produced the North American Free Trade Agreement.


Corrections
A map on the Education page on Wednesday showing public school spending per pupil classified six states incorrectly.
Connecticut's average spending is over $7000 a year; Maine, Maryland Michigan and Ohio spend $5,000 to $7,000 a year; Louisiana spends $3,000 to $5,000 a year.


Kenfil Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Canada Races to Ratify 3-Nation Trade Pact
The North American Free Trade Agreement may face opposition in the United States Congress, but Canada is rushing to ratify the monumental pact that would bind 360 million people into a single market.
Having already cleared most of the major legislative hurdles, the Nafta Implementation Act is headed toward a final vote in the House of Commons in mid-May, despite opposition charges that the Government is ramming the bill through and polls showing strong opposition.


Corrections
A picture caption on Thursday about two fund-raising events for the New York City mayoral race referred incorrectly to the parents of Andrew J. Stein.
They are Jerry and Shirley Finkelstein.


NUI Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Rivals Now Wage Battle of Blame Over the Moscow Street Fighting
After riot policemen and pro-Communist demonstrators battled Saturday in the worst disturbance in Moscow since the failed coup attempt in August 1991, Russia's politicians maneuvered today to try to turn the violence to advantage.
The Chairman of the conservative Parliament, Ruslan I. Khasbulatov, ordered an investigation into the "use of force against the participants in a peaceful demonstration." Supporters of President Boris N. Yeltsin urged Mr.
Yeltsin to deal harshly with the "provocateurs" who went after the police with staves, spears and steel bars.


Counsel Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Willcox &amp; Gibbs reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


To Get to the Preakness, Just Follow Sea Hero's Lead
Sea Hero, the only horse in the world with a chance to win racing's Triple Crown in 1993, came out of the Kentucky Derby in good shape, his trainer reported today.
He will be flown to Baltimore in midweek to pursue his goal in the Preakness Stakes on May 15.
"I don't know what my chances are," MacKenzie Miller, who trains Sea Hero for Paul Mellon, said of the Triple Crown.
"But I know my horse is fit. He came out of the Derby beautifully and he's going on to Pimlico. And after that, we'll shoot for the Belmont in New York."


Sex Shops Testing Neighborhoods' Tolerance
One evening not long ago, on a street corner in Chelsea, an angry crowd of lawyers, teachers, artists and others gathered in front of a newly opened "adult" video store, its signs blaring "XXX" and its windows frosted white.
A young woman began berating a store employee for ravaging the Manhattan neighborhood.
"Why don't you go back to where you came from?" the woman screamed.
"I'm just doing business," the employee, an immigrant, replied, obviously flustered.
"We don't want your business here!" she screeched.


Starks Interrupts Miller's Monologue
Without their defense and determination, the Knicks probably would have lost yesterday.
Without John Starks and Anthony Mason, they almost certainly would have lost.
Thundering back from a 16-point deficit late in the second quarter, the Knicks beat the Indiana Pacers, 101-91, at Madison Square Garden to take a 2-0 lead in their three-of-five Eastern Conference playoff series.
Game 3 will be tomorrow night at Indianapolis.


Amerifed Financial Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Apogee Enterprises (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 27


HEALTH-CARE COSTS MAY BE INCREASED $100 BILLION A YEAR
Government financial experts have told the White House that President Clinton's health-care plan may require $100 billion to $150 billion a year in new public and private spending by Government, business and consumers, depending on the scope of benefits guaranteed to all Americans.
Several Administration officials contend that those numbers are too high and are urging the financial experts to reduce their estimates.
So far, they have refused to do so.


DMR Group reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28


Now the Wait For the Deeds
At least for the moment, and just possibly for a lot longer, the decision by the leader of the Bosnian Serbs to accept a peace pact relieves the pressure on President Clinton to do something immediately to end the slaughter in the Balkans.
It also eases the danger that Mr.
Clinton's action might misfire and undermine his already shaky political position at home.
The accent was on the negative in Washington today, with warnings from the President, Vice President Al Gore and Senator Bob Dole of Kansas, the capital's principal Republican spokesman, that "other agreements in this protracted war have raised hopes but not changed behavior," as Mr.
Clinton put it.
All three said Serbian deeds, not promises, were needed before there could be any relaxation in the search for peace.
The Heat Is Still On
Because it believes the threat of military action by the West, along with pressure from Moscow, produced today's potential breakthrough in negotiations, the Administration vowed to continue its preparations for intervention.
Secretary of State Warren Christopher, who is visiting European capitals, was instructed to keep pressing for British and French support for air strikes and for the end of the arms embargo against the hard-pressed Muslims in Bosnia.


Amoskeag Co. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


First Western Bancorp Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Dance in Review
'Dance by Neil Greenberg'  La Mama E.T.C. Annex
Anguish can be fun.
That appeared to be the theme of the first of the two thematically related works presented on Friday night.


Parkvale Financial reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


May Day Dancing Without the May Pole


New York Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Time to Reflect


Delphi Financial Group (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


The Fleas That Saved Main Street
SOMETHING happens here on weekends.
No one is sure when it started, exactly.
But every Saturday morning, throngs of tourists -- from kissy couples to large, extended family groups -- pour into this pastoral Morris County borough as if the carnival were in town, hanging out all day and staying for dinner.
And even more show up on Sunday, when Main Street might as well be Disney World.
Downtown Chester, all four blocks of it, is day-tripper heaven.
Tourists trek in throughout the year from all over New Jersey, New York and Connecticut to browse the antique stores and boutiques, experience a meal in the town's landmark inns, marvel at one- and two-story colonial buildings and take in the apple orchards and horse farms along the way.


Belgrade's Serbs Are Skeptical On Peace Move
The capital of what remains of Yugoslavia reacted skeptically today to news that the Bosnian Serb leader had signed a peace treaty in Greece that could lead to the end of the war in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
In street-corner interviews, Serbs here said they doubted that the treaty would lead to a quick and lasting piece.


Former N.F.L. Player To Face Drug Charge
DON SMITH, a former Buffalo Bills and Tampa Bay Buccaneers running back, has been charged with buying a pound of cocaine for $10,000.
Smith, who works at a state-run group treatment home for troubled youths, in Tampa, Fla., was arrested Friday night and ordered held on $100,000 bond.


New York's School Election: What Do We Want for Our Kids?
To the Editor:
New York City's radical right targeted Schools Chancellor Joseph A. Fernandez and the public schools' "Children of the Rainbow" curriculum.
By distorting its content and inflaming antigay sentiments, they unseated the Chancellor and revised the much-needed new curriculum.


Jefferson Bankshares (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Big Aircraft Leaser Races the Clock for Financing
The GPA Group P.L.C., the aircraft-leasing company that is the largest purchaser of commercial jets, is scrambling to avert a financial crisis that could leave the company crippled and even jeopardize its survival.
Faced with a severe cash squeeze caused by its rapid expansion just as the airline business went into a steep slump, the company is hurrying to complete a deal with its lenders, suppliers and bondholders before it has to make $200 million in debt payments in the next two months.
At the same time it is discussing selling a big stake to one or more outside investors, including the General Electric Company of the United States.


METRO DIGEST
A NEW ATTITUDE ON SMALL BUSINESS
After decades of counting on big business and local government to create jobs, New York City must now look mainly to small companies to rebuild its decimated jobs base and thus must make it easier for them to operate, political leaders, economists and urban planners say.
This represents a new attitude toward small businesses, which for years have lacked the clout to pressure City Hall for the financial incentives granted to large corporations that threatened to leave the city.
A1.
SEX SHOPS TEST NEIGHBORHOOD TOLERANCE
New York City has long held a reputation as one of America's most permissive cities, especially on issues that touch on First Amendment protections of free speech and expression.
But the striking proliferation of sex video stores, topless bars and nude dance clubs in neighborhoods where they have rarely ventured before -- from Chelsea to Marine Park in Brooklyn, from the Upper East Side of Manhattan to Forest Hills in Queens -- is now straining that tolerance.
B3.


Iowa National Bancshares reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Sports of The Times; N.B.A.'s M.V.P. Problem: Four Won't Go Into One
LATER this month, the National Basketball Association will announce the recipient of its most valuable player award, the winner having been selected by a vote of writers and broadcasters at the end of the regular season.
According to some who voted recently, this year's choice may have been the toughest since 1980, when the m.v.p. selection was taken from the players.


Back Spasms May Idle Lemieux for Game 2, Too
When the ballots are tabulated, Mario Lemieux of the Pittsburgh Penguins will probably be voted the most valuable player in the National Hockey League.
But he's also one of the most vulnerable players.
Lemieux, who returned from cancer treatments late this season, left the opening game of the Islanders-Penguins second-round playoff series early in the first period with spasms in his surgically repaired back.


Dataflex Corp.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


FirsTier Financial (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Review/Dance; Pure Movement as Art: High Tech but Human
The movement's the thing in Trisha Brown's repertory, and it is never in the same style in her current dance programs.
Before beginning the second week of its season at City Center (131 West 55th Street, Manhattan) the Trisha Brown Dance Company presented another premiere, "Astral Converted," on Friday night.
The evening included two pieces from the 1970's, "Accumulation" and "Glacial Decoy," making for a wide-ranging mixed bill.
For Miss Brown and other leaders of what was the 1960's dance avant-garde, art is more concerned with process than product, and "Astral Converted" is actually a modified and extended version of her 1991 piece, "Astral Convertible."


Western Financial Corp.  (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Sun Television &amp; Appliances (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28


Sungard Data Systems Inc.  (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Carlisle Plastic reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Foothill Independent reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Nancy Dubitsky, Peter Seiden
Nancy Dubitsky, a senior publicist at Penguin USA, publishers, was married yesterday to Peter Seiden, an associate with the law firm of Gogick &amp; Seiden, both in New York.
Rabbi Elliot Spar performed the ceremony at the Garden City (L.I.) Hotel.
Mrs.
Seiden, 27, is a daughter of Judith Nachamie of Sands Point, L.I., and Les Dubitsky of Wainscott, L.I.
She graduated from Union College in Schenectady, N.Y.


Successful Drug War Can Afford to Shift Focus; The Judges Transgress
To the Editor:
The decision by two Federal judges, Jack B. Weinstein and Whitman Knapp, to refuse to preside over drug cases is disturbing (news article, April 17).
Such action by a Federal judiciary member is destructive and sets a dangerous precedent.


Presto! Islanders Pull Penguins Out of Hat
If the Islanders play .500 against the Pittsburgh Penguins for the next six games, they will eliminate the two-time defending champions from the Stanley Cup playoffs.
How's that for fantasy?


Tolland Bank reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Webster Financial Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


U.S. Presses Argentina On Patents
Despite Argentina's deep changes in opening markets to foreign competition, selling state companies and stabilizing the economy, the Clinton Administration has notified the Government of Carlos Saul Menem that it has not yet done enough.
The Office of the United States Trade Representative is considering taking the first steps that could eventually lead to trade sanctions against Argentina, if the Government fails to pass a law that protects the patents of American pharmaceutical companies here.


Fastenal Co. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Andrea Pepper, Marc Friedman
Andrea Jane Pepper, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Gerald Pepper of Jericho, L.I., was married yesterday to Marc Alan Friedman, the son of Myrna Denberg of Englewood Cliffs, N.J., and Norman Friedman of Pittsfield, Mass.
Rabbi Richard Chapin performed the ceremony at Tappan Hill in Tarrytown, N.Y.
Mrs.
Friedman, 33, is a vice president at Bank of America in New York.
She graduated summa cum laude from Boston University and received an M.B.A. from Pace University.
Her father is a senior executive in the sales promotion department of Macy's Northeast in New York.
Her mother, Othalie Pepper, retired as an English teacher for Island Trees High School in Levittown, L.I..


Essay; What Took Us So Long?
What happened when the United States made it plain that further murder and rape in Bosnia would result in the bombing of Serbian positions and the arming of Bosnia defenders?
Suddenly the light of reason seemed to illuminate the Serbian leadership.
The realization that conquest might have a high cost -- not only that uniformed killers would be killed, but that Serbian civilians would suffer -- caused the dictator in Belgrade to send word to his stooge within Bosnia to sign on the dotted line.


People
*
Neal Sellman, senior vice president and Taco Bell creative director at Foote, Cone &amp; Belding, San Francisco, was named creative director on the Mattel account at the agency's Brentwood, Calif., office.
Foote, Cone said that it was seeking to hire a creative talent from outside the agency to work on Taco Bell.


Joan S. Rader, 58, G.O.P. Party Officer And School Trustee
Joan Sperry Rader, who was active for two decades in the Republican Party in Connecticut, died on Friday at her home in Greenwich, Conn.
She was 58.
The cause was lung cancer, said her husband, William Donald Rader.


A Love Letter To HG, R.I.P.
Publishers like to tell the world how wonderful their magazines are.
But here's one Letter from the Publisher that may puzzle a few folks.
In the 5,000 copies of the June issue of HG that go to advertisers and others on the magazine's list of complimentary subscriptions, the publisher, Kevin Madden, states: "HG is clearly the magazine of choice for growing numbers of affluent, style-minded and design-savvy readers.


BE Aerospace (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 27


Lobbying Deals Form Setting of Armand D'Amato's Case
It was a late night in 1982 when Charles F. Gardner, a Sperry Corporation vice president, learned that a Congressional panel had eliminated the Mark-92 antimissile program, worth tens of millions of dollars to his company.
The bill had just left the military appropriations conference committee, the mark-ups had been completed, and the new version was heading toward the printer when Mr.
Gardner reached Representative Joseph P. Addabbo, the chairman of the House Appropriations Subcommittee on Defense.


Making Welfare Work By an Emphasis on Jobs
MORE people now receive welfare than attend public school in New York City.
Graduation rates for both groups are alarmingly low.
The ranks of welfare recipients are swollen by the school system's failures.
But few candidates in tomorrow's school board elections, while sermonizing about ancillary issues in a stampede to claim the moral high ground, draw a parallel between one group and the other.
And some defenders of the poor argue that further education may not always be as good an antidote to welfare as work.


Accounts
*
Prince Manufacturing, Lawrenceville, N.J., to Media Buying Services International Inc., New York, to handle media planning and buying on its Prince racquets account, estimated at $2 million to $5 million.
The account was previously handled by Brouillard Communications, New York.


Dance in Review
New York City Ballet  New York State Theater
Kyra Nichols was a regal Princess Aurora when the New York City Ballet offered "The Sleeping Beauty" on Saturday afternoon.


Julio Gallo, 82, Wine Industrialist, Dies
Julio Gallo, who helped to build the immense E.&amp; J. Gallo Winery and in the process helped change Americans' drinking tastes, was killed yesterday when a vehicle he was driving hurtled off a road on the family ranch near Tracy, Calif., about 80 miles east of San Francisco.
He was 82.
Mr.
Gallo, the longtime president of the company, which is one of the world's largest winemakers, was thought to be driving the vehicle.
He was flown by helicopter to Memorial Medical Center in Modesto, Calif., where he was declared dead on arrival, Elaine Day, a nursing supervisor, said.


Action On Illegal Drivers Is Contemplated by Police
The New York City Police Department said yesterday that it is considering new procedures to crack down on unlicensed drivers in the wake of three car accidents in the last three weeks that killed three pedestrians in Brooklyn, all children, and injured several others.
Meanwhile, a 90-year-old woman was killed yesterday in Brooklyn by a car driven by a man who the police said was intoxicated.
Unlike the drivers in the other recent fatalities, the man charged in the crash had a valid driver's license, the police said.


Applied Bioscience International Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


That's entertainment? The increasing practice of product placement is stealing the show
IT is the height -- or is it the depth? -- of product placement, that contentious practice of arranging for brand-name goods to make prominent, paid-for appearances in films, television programs and other entertainment productions.
Paramount Pictures Television is producing a one-hour series called "Viper" for the 1993-94 season.
The star of the action drama, which could appear on NBC's fall schedule: a Dodge Viper sports car.
It could be worse.
Stephen J. Cannell Productions had planned a series of the same name to be syndicated to local television stations around the country.
That company has agreed to rename its series "Cobra."


Black Muslims Enter Islamic Mainstream
Every Friday afternoon, hundreds of black men, women and children stop work or school for a couple of hours and hurry to a 15,000-square-foot building on the edge of town.
They represent the rainbow of black America: suburban and urban; professional and poor; deep brown and light tan.
They pull up in faded station wagons and gleaming Mercedes Benzes.
Inside, the men sit in the front; the women in the back.
Many used to be Baptists, African Methodist or Roman Catholic.


Info Solutions reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


CyberOptics reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Sahara Resorts (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Review/Television; Blood, Guns and Tears
American television just can't keep its hand off the violence button.
This week's prime exhibit is "Murder in the Heartland," a four-hour, two-part movie being broadcast at 9 P.M. on ABC tonight and tomorrow.
This is the story of Charles Starkweather, a 19-year-old psychopath who in 1958 killed 11 people in Nebraska.
As ABC puts it, virtually salivating, it was "one of the most sensational murder rampages in American history." In short, perfect for television entertainment.
Thinly fictionalized, the Starkweather story was the inspiration for the 1973 Terrence Malick film "Badlands," which, like "Bonnie and Clyde," is one of those gorgeously produced but fuzzy movie exercises elevating thugs into national myths.
"Murder in the Heartland" isn't even that ambitious, though there are allusions to the story's Eisenhower era and, apparently, a kind of sociocultural repression ready to explode.
Police officers are depicted, for the most part, as morons.


'Jacob Zulu' to Close
"The Song of Jacob Zulu," a drama by Tug Yourgrau at the Plymouth Theater, 236 West 45th Street, Manhattan, is to close after the Sunday matinee.
The matinee of the play, directed by Eric Simonson, will be its 53d regular performance; it had 11 previews.


Opera (Sacred Opera!) Writhes In Italy's Web of Troubles
"Teatro Carlo Felice, per favore" said the visitor.
"Ah," replied the taxi driver, "Teatro Carlo
in
felice." By which he meant that the fortunes of Genoa's handsome new opera house were more unhappy than otherwise.
These are not happy times for Italy as a whole, burdened by a faltering economy, a devalued currency and a scandal-ridden political system.
And they are not happy times for the performing art by which the country is best known, grand opera.
A recent 10-day journey, sampling standard-repertory performances and talking to Italian opera administrators and cultural politicians, exposed a system under severe strain.


Torstar Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


UST Corp. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Electromedics (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


A Breakthrough on Bosnia?
President Clinton's escalation of pressure on the Serbs to make peace in Bosnia appears to be yielding encouraging results.
In the most hopeful sign in months, the recalcitrant leader of the Bosnian Serbs, Radovan Karadzic, has signed the international peace plan designed to end fighting in the Balkans.
If the Serbs really mean to halt their genocidal onslaught, this is indeed a diplomatic triumph.
Under the peace plan approved yesterday in Greece, the Bosnian Serbs would be forced to yield roughly a third of the territory they have seized and would be denied the corridors they seek to link Serb-held territory in Bosnia and Croatia with Serbia proper.


Rhonda Karol, Gordon Berger
Dr.
Rhonda Leslie Karol, a dermatologist, was married yesterday to Gordon Bernard Berger, a bank executive Rabbi Joseph Potasnik performed the ceremony at Temple Israel in Lawrence, L.I.
Mrs.
Berger, 30, works at the New York Medical Group in the Bronx, and is a clinical instructor at the Albert Einstein College of Medicine there.
She graduated summa cum laude from Harvard University, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa, and received an M.D. from Yale University.


Transco Energy reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


GTI Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Poles Don't Deserve Anti-Semitic Label
To the Editor:
With anger and sadness I read your two news articles devoted to the 50th anniversary of the Warsaw Ghetto uprising.


Economic Calendar
Listed below are the scheduled release dates for major economic indicators this week.
Monday  Construction Spending March . . .
Tuesday  Leading Indicators . . .
March  Wednesday  None  Thursday  Weekly Jobless Claims Friday  Employment . . .April Consumer Credit . . .
March


Warren Knowles, 84, Governor Of Wisconsin in Tumultuous 60's
Warren P. Knowles, a Republican Governor of Wisconsin who in 1969 drew national attention by calling out National Guard troops to curb campus protests, died Saturday at Black River Memorial Hospital in Black River Falls, Wis.
He was 84 and lived in Milwaukee.
The cause was a heart attack, said Julie Huber, the coroner of Jackson County, which includes Black River Falls.
The former Governor was stricken after a day of fishing on a local lake.


World Economies


Pennsylvania Power &amp; Light Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


A Valley of Death for the Navajo Uranium Miners
On the way up to the summit of the red rock mesas where uranium was mined for atomic bombs for a quarter-century, Jim John pointed to the frail houses and quietly recited the names of Navajo miners who died young of lung cancer.
"John Yellowhorse. Tony Sorrowhorse. Clark Dick. John Tapaha. Peter Yazzie. Harry James. James Yazzie. Billy Johnson. Jimmy Johnson," he said.
He did not mention his own father, Lee John, a respected Navajo tribesman who died in 1971 at age 34, leaving behind a widow and nine children.


Suffolk Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


VOTE SET ON ACCORD
Bowing to pressure from his sponsor in Belgrade and the threat of American air strikes, the leader of Bosnia's warring Serbs signed an international peace plan today intended to end the devastating year-old civil war in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
The endorsement by the leader, Radovan Karadzic, came after months of on-again, off-again talks in which he seemed intent primarily on buying time so his forces could seize more territory.


CHRONICLE
In the latest installment of the saga of DONALD and IVANA TRUMP, the former couple kissed and settled the disputes that have kept them in court since they divorced in 1991.
They said "I do" on Friday, but this time it was to indicate that they understood and approved the agreement that ended their legal quarrels.


In Spring Rite, TV Networks Test Pilots for Airworthiness
After more than a decade of auditioning pilot episodes for would-be series, David Poltrack, the head of research at CBS, has seen pretty much every trick in Hollywood.
There are the producers who sugar the pilot with ever-popular pets and babies.
The studios that spend $2 million for the pilot of a series that is budgeted at $500,000 a show.
And the studios that get what Mr.
Poltrack calls a "big-name super-deluxe" writer for the pilot's script, even though they have no intention of using the writer for the series.


Interleaf (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Church &amp; Dwight Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to April 2


INSIDE
Cult Leader's Body Identified
The Branch Davidian leader, David Koresh, died from a gunshot wound before the fatal fire at the Texas compound, officials said.
Page A12.
Of Schools and Power
The 288 candidates who emerge with seats on New York City's school boards will enjoy powers that are significant yet limited.
Page B1.
A Setback for Sri Lanka
With the assassination of both its President and its opposition leader, stability for Sri Lanka appears to be further away than ever.
Page A3.
Julio Gallo Dies in Crash
Julio Gallo, 82, whose skill at wine-making helped change the drinking tastes of Americans, was killed in a Jeep wreck in California.
Page B11.
Puzzle Master Dies
Will Weng, who challenged and confounded thousands as editor of The New York Times crossword puzzles, is dead at 86.
Page B11.


Aames Financial (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Utilicorp United reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Coventry Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Quixote Corp. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Cordis Corp.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


No Headline
We don't make distinctions based on color or race.
No longer are we an isolated community, happy to keep to ourselves.
PLEMON TAUHEED EL-AMIN, a black Muslim leader.  [ A1:4. ]


Provencal Leading a Revival Of Europe's Local Languages
In a classroom in the heart of Provence, a teacher and her 8-year-old pupils are working against 400 years of history: instead of learning to read and write in French, the children are being taught in their native Provencal, a language first carried across the Continent by the troubadours of the Middle Ages.
For "yes," the class writes "oc." Not "oui."


New York City Looks to Small Businesses for Jobs
After decades of counting on big business and local government to create jobs, New York City must now look mainly to small companies to rebuild its decimated jobs base and thus must make it easier for them to operate, political leaders, economists and urban planners say.
This represents a new attitude toward small businesses, which for years have lacked the clout to pressure City Hall for the tax concessions and financial incentives granted to large corporations, like CBS, Chase Manhattan, Morgan Stanley and Prudential Securities, that threatened to leave the city.


American Heritage Life Investment Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


The Talk of Hollywood; Hollywood Recycles The Western to Offer New Heroes: Women
Tamra Davis has a problem.
Ms.
Davis, a rising 30-year-old director, is about to start filming "Bad Girls," a western.
"But New Mexico is booked and almost all of Arizona and a lot of Montana," she said.
"It's crazy. All these towns that had been starving for years are booming with film makers. There's a new Kevin Costner film that's booked practically the entire state of New Mexico."
Ms.
Davis has finally found a town, outside Sacramento, to start shooting her film in June about a group of female gunslingers in the 1860's.
Ms.
Davis, who has directed "Gun Crazy" and "CB4," said: "Props are hard to find and so are clothes. You just find yourself in a difficult situation because of this onslaught of westerns."


Calumet Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Equity Issues This Week
The following equity and convertible debt offerings are expected this week:
Amerhost Properties Inc., Des Plaines, Ill., 1.5 million shares. Rodman &amp; Renshaw.


Pulse/Winter: The Final Tally
Dare we close the books on winter?
Barring, say a blizzard on Mother's Day, state and city agencies are compiling final clean-up costs from a very expensive winter.
Figures include salary and overtime for crews, salt costs and the cost of new equipment and repairs.
New York City used 230,000 tons of salt for snow removal last winter - much more than the average of 146,000 tons.
Street damage was heavier than usual and tens of thousands of dollars in parking ticket revenues were lost because vehicles were hard to reach and tow.
New Jersey is expecting about $5.5 million in Federal reimbursement for emergency snow removal and Connecticut will get about $300,000.
New York State estimates are incomplete, bur more than 1,600 damage assessment applications are expected in coming weeks.


Apple South (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Delmarva Power &amp; Light Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Dance in Review
James Sewell Dance Company  Clark Studio Theater 70 Lincoln Center Plaza
When the six members of James Sewell Dance walked solemnly to Bach in Mr.
Sewell's "Common Loss," their processional had the gravity of a sacred ceremony.


Regent Bancshares reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Odds Are Tough to Figure On Bill to Allow Casinos
For all the public-relations thundering about jobs and the endlessly repeated television and radio advertisements by Mirage Resorts of Las Vegas, the final outcome of Connecticut's casino gambling debate remains a crapshoot, and people like Gary D. Le Beau are the reason.
Mr.
Le Beau, a Democratic State Representative from East Hartford, is exactly the kind of lawmaker that casino promoters had counted on.
His district is home to thousands of employees of Pratt &amp; Whitney, the aircraft engine company that is threatening severe cutbacks in Connecticut, and for the last nine months he supported the casino plan.
But with the first floor votes only a few weeks away, he has turned, scared by the power and money of the gambling promoters who he now thinks could end up running the state if they get approval to build the casinos they want in Bridgeport and Hartford.


Gibson (C.R.) Co. (A) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Keep Arms Control a Separate Agency
To the Editor:
"Who's in Charge of Curbing Arms?" (editorial, April 21) endorses the State Department's proposal to merge the Arms Control and Disarmament Agency into State.
You advocate this as the best way "to reorganize the United States Government to meet the next major challenge: curbing the spread of nuclear arms and other weapons of mass destruction."


Allied Healthcare Products Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


United Federal Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Will Weng, 86, Crossword Editor For 10 years for New York Times
Will Weng, who for 10 years challenged, confounded, befuddled and thus became beloved by thousands of readers as editor of The New York Times crossword puzzles, died yesterday at St.
Luke's-Roosevelt Hospital Center in Manhattan.
He was 86 years old and lived in the Chelsea section of Manhattan.
He had been suffering from throat cancer and was admitted to the hospital on Wednesday complaining of shortness of breath, said his sister, Damaras Rogers.


Engraph Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to April 4


The Administration's Trade War
The President calls for raising the tariff on Japanese minivans tenfold; his Treasury Department puts the proposal on indefinite hold.
The President promises to hold up the free trade agreement with Mexico until he negotiates stringent conditions on the environment and labor; his chief trade negotiator, Mickey Kantor, goes before Congress to propose tame conditions.
The President vows to push the Uruguay Round of international trade talks to conclusion; U.S. negotiators stymie negotiations.
The Clinton Administration is engaged in a trade war -- with itself.


Ronald Gow Is Dead; English Playwright, 95
Ronald Gow, an English playwright known for his adaptations of novels, died on Tuesday in London, his family announced last week.
He was 95.
The cause was not disclosed.
Mr.
Gow's first hit was his play "Love on the Dole," which he adapted from a novel by Walter Greenwood about a woman's travails in the Depression.
Wendy Hiller, later Dame Wendy, starred in it in 1934 in London.


Tracor Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Betz Laboratories reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Lori Howard, Lee S. Parks
Lori Denise Howard, a senior account executive with the Harry Walker Agency, a New York lecture bureau, and Lee Stephen Parks, a partner in the New York law firm of Fried, Frank, Harris, Shriver &amp; Jacobson, were married yesterday.
Rabbi Chaim Stern performed the ceremony at Tappan Hill in Tarrytown, N.Y.
Mrs.
Parks, 34, graduated from Barnard College.
She is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Edward Howard of New York.
Her father is the executive vice president of the American Pistachio Corporation, importers in Teaneck, N.J.


Telus Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Homedco Group (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Keep Arms Control a Separate Agency; A Face Lift for ACDA
To the Editor:
You are right about the Clinton Administration's choices of how best to reorganize the Government to promote nuclear nonproliferation ("Who's in Charge of Curbing Arms?", editorial, April 21).
The Arms Control and Disarmament Agency needs to be rejuvenated or folded into the State Department.


San Diego Gas &amp; Electric Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Breed Technologies reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Balking at Clinton in Party Bedrock
They call their Congressman Jerry in the blue-collar Polish neighborhoods of South Milwaukee, where the Democratic Party still holds a place of importance in people's lives, along with close families, tidy lawns and attending church.
But as Representative Gerald D. Kleczka prepares to vote in the House Ways and Means Committee this month on the tax proposals in President Clinton's economic package, the message the Democratic lawmaker is hearing from his constituents goes against the grain of Administration policies.
The predominant theme in his mail and town meetings, his staff members say, is that spending should be cut before taxes are increased.


Review/Jazz; Bobby Watson Leads His Own Big-Band Revival
A year and a half ago, Bobby Watson pulled together some big-band arrangements he had been working on, took them to Columbia University's jazz orchestra and led the orchestra in a surprisingly successful concert.
Mr.
Watson, known as a saxophonist and composer, had big-band aspirations, not a fruitful thing to have, given jazz's generally enfeebled economic situation.
The concert, often brilliant, looked as if it was set to go down in legend, a one-time event making Mr.
Watson one of those rare jazz composers lucky enough to hear their music played by a large ensemble, if only for one night.
With big bands seemingly relegated to the dustbin of history, the music was destined for the security of Mr.
Watson's desk drawer.
But the current jazz renaissance has had all sorts of salutary effects, not the least of which is a flowering, albeit small, of interest in big-band music among both audiences and musicians.
Lincoln Center and Carnegie Hall both have jazz orchestras; Jimmy Heath and Slide Hampton have started large ensembles recently, and Wynton Marsalis moves closer to fronting a big band every year.
Illinois Jacquet's orchestra was one of the highlights of the 1980's, and the American Jazz Orchestra, David Murray's big band and Clifford Jordan's orchestra have all offered exceptional music.
Along comes Mr.
Watson, who has just released his first album on Columbia Records, "Tailor Made," which happens to be a big-band album.


Market Place; Inquiring minds want to know if Enquirer/Star can revive sales
ENQUIRER/STAR GROUP INC. -- the supermarket tabloid publishing empire, which specializes in reports on space aliens and Elvis sightings -- is capturing the fancy of another set of eerie beings: Wall Street analysts.
While The National Enquirer and The Star may not be popular reading on Wall Street, some analysts are betting on their moneymaking potential.
Kindly called "celebrity journalism," The National Enquirer and The Star, have a combined circulation of seven million.
Only TV Guide is a more popular weekly publication.
Among women aged 18 to 34, The Enquirer and The Star are the No. 1 read.
Their journalism may be easy to dismiss -- Cher's latest affair, Roseanne's weight loss and the feud between Liz and Raquel -- but their financial underpinnings are hard to ignore.
The parent company, created by a 1991 initial public offering, has an improving balance sheet, strong cash flow and a bold new pricing strategy.


Hoboken's Top Crust; Chewy Bread Has a Growing Cachet
It is an argument born of success: Who invented Hoboken Bread?
Not just bread baked in Hoboken, although it is probably the same thing, but Hoboken Bread, as it is coming to be known: the crusty, chewy staff of life, next to which mass-produced, packaged bread is more like the damp noodle of life?


Books of The Times; A Wonderful Batter, but What an Impossible Man!
Hitter  The Life and Turmoils of Ted Williams  By Ed Linn  Illustrated. 437 pages.
Harcourt Brace &amp; Company. $23.95.
As Ed Linn observes of his subject near the end of "Hitter: The Life and Turmoils of Ted Williams," "He committed himself to becoming the greatest hitter in the game, and for two decades he made the Red Sox exciting in the sheer anticipation of his next turn at bat."


Texans Reject Sharing School Wealth
Even though a court has threatened to shut down the Texas public schools on June 1 unless the state divides money for education more equitably, voters on Saturday rejected a plan that would have forced some wealthy districts to share money with poor ones.
The defeat of the proposed amendment to the state Constitution, Proposition 1, throws right back to the Legislature the vexing question of how to insure a decent education for all of the 3.2 million children in the Texas school system, the nation's second largest after California's.


Review/Cabaret; A Chanteuse Out to Shed Her Disguise
When the German cabaret performer Ingrid Caven made her New York debut at the Ballroom last year, the singer, who wore Kabuki-style makeup and sang in a hard, husky buzz, instantly established herself as a master of intriguing disguises.
For her return engagement to the club, Miss Caven has peeled off most of the makeup and has polished her singing.
Instead of coming across like an eccentric ruin, she now projects more the image of a chanteuse with a mischievous glint who lightly mocks the melodramatic cabaret mannerisms that inform her style.
Miss Caven's opening-night performance on Tuesday, for an engagement that extends through Saturday, was completely riveting.
Backed by a quartet that included piano, violin, saxophone and bass, she sang a largely German program that featured songs by Peer Raben (who composed the music for many films by the director Rainer Werner Fassbinder, to whom Miss Caven was briefly married) and J. J. Schuhl.
With titles like "Trans-Europe Tango" and "Polaroid Cocaine," these songs are parodies of German art songs and offer deliberately cartoonish images of decadent European night life.


Designer Fashion's New Frugality
If the styles on models strutting down the catwalks in Paris, Milan and New York seem less than inspired, it may have more to do with designers' financial backing than with their creativity.
While the 1980's brought glamour and buckets of money to designer clothes, attracting investors who hoped to ally themselves with the next Calvin Klein or Donna Karan, the 90's have been marked by a sort of austerity.


Family Aid to Elderly Is Very Strong, Study Shows
An exhaustive new Federal study of middle-aged Americans is shattering prevailing myths about the loosening of family ties and is providing the first reliable picture of how those people care for their grown children and elderly parents.
The study, the Health and Retirement Survey, was conducted by Dr.
Thomas Juster of the University of Michigan for the National Institute on Aging.
It looks at people ages 51 to 61 and meticulously documents the time and money they donate to other family members.
Its findings extend and are consistent with those from other recent studies, including a new national survey of people aged 18 and over, conducted by the American Association of Retired Persons and a separate Federal study of people over age 80.


Johnson &amp; Johnson's Marketing Honored
Johnson &amp; Johnson of New Brunswick, N.J., was the top winner last week at the eighth annual Edison New Product Awards ceremony, sponsored by the American Marketing Association of New York.
Johnson &amp; Johnson was named the New Product Marketer of the Year and won three gold and silver awards for product introductions like Monistat-7 and Mylanta Gelcaps.


Mullen Starts 2 Campaigns
Mullen Advertising Inc. of Wenham, Mass., is introducing campaigns for a new client and a longtime client.
The Gitano Group Inc. is seeking to reposition itself in the apparel market by abandoning its five-year-old "family fashions" campaign in an effort to promote the Gitano brand as high fashion.


Bridge
A young New Jersey foursome has earned a trip to Washington in July to compete in national playoffs in the Grand National Teams, Flight B. Playing a week ago in Ardsley, N.Y., Steve Yuen of Edison, Cho-Wei Sit of Warren, and Tom Hoi and Joel Stein berg, both of East Brunswick, won their district title in knockout play.
Their margin of victory in the final was just 7 imps, and the diagramed deal could have changed that result.
When Hoi and Yuen were East and West, they defended seven hearts after the auction shown.
The declarer led out all his trumps, hoping for an even club split or an unlikely squeeze against East in the minor suits.
This play failed, but South could have done better.
After winning the opening spade lead and drawing trumps with the king and ace, he should have led a low diamond from his hand.
West would play an honor, and South would take the ace followed by the king, hoping to collect a Q-J-doubleton.


A Key Question: Whose General?
For decades, the United States has resisted putting American forces under the command of a foreign general.
The main reason, George P. Shultz, Secretary of State in the Reagan Administration, said today, was that this allowed Washington to avoid being dragged into situations it did not control.
Where the United States has been part of a multinational force, as in Somalia, Korea or the Persian Gulf, it was clearly the leader.


Dance in Review
Ellie Herman and Company
Theater for the New City
Ellie Herman's "Winter: The Evolution of a Soul" concerned seasons, both of the year and of human life.
The theme, though very familiar, remains eternally significant, and it inspired the haunting work that Ellie Herman and Company, a group from San Francisco, presented on Monday night.


Secor Bank reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


A New Sense of Urgency at Kodak
In the three and a half months he served as the Eastman Kodak Company's chief financial officer, Christopher J. Steffen was unable to instill in his boss, Kay R. Whitmore, and other senior executives a sense of crisis about the problems facing the world's leading maker of photographic film.
So last Tuesday, Mr.
Steffen resigned.
"Now we have an artificial crisis," Mr.
Whitmore, Kodak's chairman, chief executive and president said in a telephone interview Saturday from his home near Kodak headquarters in Rochester.
"There's going to be more weekend meetings, more night meetings."  Facing the Public
There are also going to be demands by restive shareholders at Kodak's annual meeting next week in Fort Lauderdale, Fla., that Mr.
Whitmore and the board be more explicit than they had intended to be about Kodak's strategy for change in coming months.


MNB Bancshares reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Brooks Brothers Turns to Ogilvy
Brooks Brothers said on Friday that it had named Ogilvy &amp; Mather New York to handle advertising and marketing assignments to build the clothing retailer's brand image.
Billings were not disclosed.
"We wanted to work with a full-service agency and a strategic marketing partner," said Sharon Mosse, vice president of marketing and strategic planning at Brooks Brothers in New York.
Ogilvy's London office has worked on several assignments for Brooks Brothers' British parent company, Marks &amp; Spencer P.L.C.


Results Plus
GOLF McGovern Prevails in Sudden Death Jim McGovern birdied the final hole of regulation to force a playoff yesterday and then birdied the second playoff hole to beat Jim Huston and win his first PGA Tour event.
McGovern, who earned $234,000 from the $1.3 million Houston Open purse, charged into contention with an eagle on No. 15 and forced Huston into a playoff with an 8-foot birdie putt on the 54th hole of the rain-shortened tournament in The Woodlands, Tex.
McGovern and Huston each shot a four-under-par 68 in the final round and finished with 17-under 199 totals. (AP)


Dance in Review
Urban Bush Women  The Kitchen
Jawole Willa Jo Zollar has a rare gift for evocative persuasion.
Her theater-dance pieces usually draw the viewer into sometimes unfamiliar worlds, making potentially alienating themes like spirituality and multiculturalism seem reasonable and familiar.


Review/Theater; Musical Says, 'Take That, Colorado!'
In "Linda," a social protest country-western musical, Everett Quinton clowns as the vile villainess, evidently a graduate of the Agnes Moorehead wicked stepmother school of acting.
The role is that of an anti-gay evangelical preacher, the Rev.
Mrs.
Charlotte Drum, who speaks her last name as a Drummmmm roll.
"Linda," at the Ridiculous Theatrical Company, is a broadside against the Colorado state amendment that banned local laws protecting homosexuals from discrimination.
Mr.
Quinton, glamorized in long white robe and blond hair, is dedicated to the no-choice proposition "Repent or die." This is one of his most demonic roles, and he misses no opportunity for malice or mockery, as in his character's inability to pronounce the hated word, homosexuality.
Curdling on his lips, it comes out "homersexyality."


Somerset Savings reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


School Election Battle Moves To Street, Parks and Churches
The battle for control of New York City's 32 school boards moved to churches, streets and parks yesterday, as opponents made a final push in a heated election that some combatants hope will chart the ideological future of education in the city.
Two days before the voting, congregants at St.
Patrick's Cathedral swarmed near the stone entrance to pick up voter guides produced by Pat Robertson's conservative Christian Coalition, which opposes condom distribution in public schools and a curriculum that teaches tolerance toward gay people.


Dividend Meetings


Instacool reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Potomac Electric Power reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Close the Hate Crime Loophole
When the Supreme Court struck down a St.
Paul cross-burning law last June for the wrong reasons, it immediately called into question other civil rights laws punishing crimes motivated by racial or religious bigotry.
Only one day after the decision, Wisconsin's highest court struck down a state law increasing the penalty against defendants who choose victims on the basis of race or religion.
All 49 other states and the Justice Department have joined Wisconsin's Attorney General in asking the Supreme Court to reinstate that law and remove the cloud over similar statutes in other states.
Fortunately, when the case was argued recently, several justices seemed aware of the need for clarification.
This view is shared by the Bush and Clinton Administrations.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article yesterday about the assassination of the President of Sri Lanka referred incorrectly in some copies to Rajiv Gandhi, the former Prime Minister of India.
He was not in office when he was killed in 1991.


Don't Come to Bury The Nets. Not Yet
The fact that New Jersey has evened its Eastern Conference playoff series with Cleveland at one game apiece -- no matter what the Nets players say about how they knew they were as good as the Cavaliers -- is nothing short of a semi-miracle.
And considering what the Nets have gone through recently, it's easy to understand why the team was so jubilant after it beat the Cavaliers, 101-99, in Richfield, Ohio, Saturday night in Game 2 of the three-of-five-game series.
Game 3 will be Wednesday night at Byrne Meadowlands Arena.


Tokyo Journal; They Eat Whales, Don't They? A Fight Resumes
As he surveyed his restaurant one recent pre-holiday evening, Kiyoo Tanahashi was proud that almost all the wooden chairs and tatami mats were occupied by office workers or college students partaking of the house specialties -- whale steak, whale bacon, fried whale, smoked whale, raw whale and whale soup containing slivers of whale tongue.
But Mr.
Tanahashi, who dishes out the equivalent of two whales a year, turns sour when he thinks of the ban on commercial whaling that is making restaurants like his Kujiraya, which means whale store, an endangered species.
"I am rather angry that outside countries would tell us what food we should or should not eat," he said.


News Summary
International A2-11 SERB LEADER SIGNS PEACE PLAN
After months of talks and pressure from Belgrade and Washington, the leader of Bosnia's Serbs, Radovan Karadzic, signed an international peace plan intended to end the civil war in Bosnia.
A1


Becoming A Writer, Remaining A Farmer
Dori Sanders first began telling stories sitting in the nook of a massive rock here, with acres of her family's peach trees all around and the warm Carolina sun beginning its descent on the horizon.
The 10 children in her family called it the storytelling rock and marveled at how time and weather had shaped it to look like a giant mushroom, and how if your eye caught it from a certain angle, it appeared as if an eagle sat perched on its edge.


How an Association Monthly Reaps Prizes for Its Reporting
Newsweek.
The Atlantic.
Harper's Bazaar.
Good Housekeeping.
Many of the names in this year's list of National Magazine Awards winners were familiar, but the winner in the prestigious category of reporting, I.E.E.E.
Spectrum, was considerably less likely to be a household word, unless the household included an engineer.
Spectrum is the flagship publication of the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers, a professional association of about 320,000 electrical, electronics and computer engineers worldwide.
With a total staff of 35, about half of that editorial, the monthly has done uncommonly well in the prize wars.
The 1993 National Magazine Award was its fourth and it has been a finalist in the competition 11 of the last 16 years.


Death in Sri Lanka: A Paradise That Lost Its Peace
With the assassination of President Ranasinghe Premadasa on Saturday by a suicide bomber, just a week after the assassination of the country's leading opposition politician, Sri Lanka has once again stumbled in its search for political stability and ethnic peace.
Many Sri Lankans are now questioning whether these goals are attainable.
"It is of course one of the most serious political tragedies," said Neelan Tiruchelvam, a leading lawyer in Colombo, the Sri Lankan capital, "because in the span of one week, two of the most important political leaders in this country have been assassinated. This is a terrible setback to the political system's effort to resolve differences through democratic means."


Coastal Banc Savings Assn reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Rexnord Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


DeOssie Seems Left Out Of the Linebacker Shuffle
For most of the last four years, Steve DeOssie has played strong-side inside linebacker for the Giants, lining up alongside Pepper Johnson.
Now, as DeOssie is on the verge of signing a two-year contract with the Giants, he is about to lose his job -- to the same Pepper Johnson.
Although Dan Reeves, the Giants' new head coach, has not announced it, he is planning to move Johnson from the weak side to the strong side.


Corrections
An entry in the Addenda listing of the Media Business page on Wednesday referred imprecisely to Lintas New York's efforts to hire high-level creative executives.
Though the agency is seeking an executive to assume the duties of creative director on the Diet Coke account from Tony DeGregorio, that executive will be hired by and report to Mr.
DeGregorio, who will supervise overall work on the account as executive vice president and chief creative officer.


CB&amp;T Financial Corp.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


United Wisconsin Services Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Bank United of Texas reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Forecast for Winter: Expect a Flurry of Long Coats
Heads up!
The winter coats are coming.
By the time the weather gets cold enough to wear them, they are expected to become an inexorable fashion force.
From the first showings of clothes for the fall and winter season in Milan in March, it was clear that designers had taken a fresh look at what had been a traditional winter staple: the good cloth coat.
At the first important New York opening, when Bill Blass's long fitted coats caught everybody's eye, it was evident that the movement had crossed the Atlantic.


Wheeling-Pittsburgh Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Gallo Family Likely to Fill Void After Founder's Death
The E.&amp; J. Gallo Winery will weather the loss of its president and co-founder, Julio Gallo, who died Sunday night in an automobile accident, industry analysts and former Gallo executives said today.
But they were quick to add that his passing leaves one of the world's largest wineries with a void that will not be easily filled.
Julio Gallo and his brother, Ernest, founded the winery after the repeal of Prohibition in 1933, and it now makes more than one of every four bottles of wine sold in the United States.
Last year, it sold 48 million cases out of an industry total of 173 million.
From the start, Julio managed production, while Ernest, the company's chairman, handled marketing.


Third-World Medical Site: South Bronx; French Relief Group Used to Somalia Attracts U.S. Doctors to Help Poor at Home
Dr. Nadia Marsh is a medical panhandler, begging people to be her patients.
She stood outside a South Bronx soup kitchen one recent morning, casually dressed in jeans and jacket, strolling from one person to another in line as they awaited their only meal of the day.
"I'll be here for anyone who needs medical consultations," she shouted as the mostly homeless men and women looked on with glazed and puzzled eyes.


BEI Electronics (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to April 3


Swift Transportation Co.  (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Wellfleet Communications (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Ex-Master of the Universe Seeks Support From His Ex-Wife
The divorce trial of Anonymous I v. Anonymous II began, well, anonymously.
Guards who usually know everyone and everything about State Supreme Court in Manhattan had no idea who Anonymous I and Anonymous II were.
They did not even know what courtroom the trial was being held in.
Neither did clerks in the first-floor Matrimonial Office.
They pecked at their computer keyboards and declared that they could not call up the case on their screens.


Water-Rate Freeze Maintains a Balance
To the Editor:
Marjorie Shea and Peg Kocher wrote (letter, April 20) to express their concern that my program for affordable water and sewer rates -- a two-year rate freeze followed by at least a two-year inflation-limited cap on rate growth -- would produce cutbacks in resources for watershed protection and other critical environmental programs.
This is a misplaced anxiety.
Our rate freeze is based on a plan developed by the Department of Environmental Protection that establishes long-term balance between revenues and key service needs.
That plan reprioritizes the use of D.E.P. resources to increase investment in long-term, cost-saving programs: watershed protection, water conservation, preventive infrastructure maintenance and customer service.


Atlantic American reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Triad Systems (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Mystery of Rare Emerald Icebergs Is Solved
FOR many years, ship captains navigating the waters of Antarctica have been intrigued by rare sightings of emerald icebergs.
Now a new study shows that these icebergs are turned upside down, like a capsized ship, said Dr.
Stephen Warren, the lead author.


MTB Investment Company Is Now a Commercial Bank
At a time when the number of banks is declining, the first new institution in New York State in more than two years opened yesterday.
But the company, the MTB Bank, has in fact been in parts of the banking business for 40 years.
The bank succeeds the MTB Banking Corporation, which was chartered as an investment company.
It will continue the company's lending to small business, generally in connection with international trade and dealings in precious metals and currency.
The company was founded in 1953 to handle international payments as Manfra, Tordella &amp; Brookes.


Italy's Electoral System Is Not the Problem; &gt;Mafia and Corruption
To the Editor:
Your editorial on the Italian election system referendum ("Proportional Representation Flunks," April 24) repeatedly moved from a reason able condemnation of current Italian politics to unjustified attacks on proportional representation in general.
You were correct in your observation that proportional representation as it is practiced in Italy gives voters little control over whom the parties nominate as candidates.
But you fail to point out that this flaw is not present in most other forms of proportional representation -- and thus give the mistaken impression that all such systems undermine direct accountability to voters.
Most forms of proportional representation do allow voters to cast votes for their preferred candidates.


GenRad Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to April 3


Allies Still Resist Christopher On Call to Arm the Bosnians
Despite a campaign by Secretary of State Warren Christopher to win support for President Clinton's plan for Western military intervention in the Balkans, the European allies remain firmly opposed to the American proposal to arm Bosnia's Muslim-dominated Government, senior European officials said today.
The Europeans argue that arming the Bosnian Muslims would extend the fighting and that since the bulk of the arms would have to come through Croatia, it would be practically impossible to prevent diversion by the Croats.


Doctor Cites Inconsistencies In Dylan Farrow's Statements
The doctor who headed the Connecticut investigation into whether Woody Allen molested his 7-year-old daughter, Dylan, theorized that the child either invented the story under the stress of living in a volatile and unhealthy home or that it was planted in her mind by her mother, Mia Farrow, a sworn statement released yesterday says.
Dr.
John M. Leventhal, who interviewed Dylan nine times, said that one reason he doubted her story was that she changed important points from one interview to another, like whether Mr.
Allen touched her vagina.
Another reason, he said, was that the child's accounts had "a rehearsed quality." At one point, he said she told him, "I like to cheat on my stories."


Corrections
A chart yesterday listing candidates for community school boards in Queens and on Staten Island misstated the position of the Council of Jewish Organizations of Staten Island.
According to its executive director, Bracha Cabot, while the group has encouraged people to vote in the elections in District 31, it has not endorsed candidates.


Myers Industries reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


CHRONICLE
ANNIE L. COHEN-SOLAL cut quite a swath across New York's cultural and social scene during the four years she served in New York as the cultural counselor at the French Embassy, a position from which she resigned last month.
Now, she is making plans to return to the scholarly life.
A former teacher, she has been named a research professor in the French department at New York University.
"That means that I will give one seminar a semester to do with the history of France and contemporary France, and I will write again," she said the other day.


Voters Show Increased Interest in School Elections
Thousands of callers clogged phone switchboards at the Board of Education, at the Board of Elections and at other offices yesterday, seeking information about the balloting today for New York City's 32 community school boards, the most vigorously debated school races in two decades.
The outpouring of voter inquiries about the candidates and about where and how to vote underlined the intensity of the school board campaign, in which battles over issues like sex education and religion overshadowed the patronage and other local controversies that have dominated recent school elections.


Crucial Support Virtually Assures McCall's Election as Comptroller
Assembly Speaker Saul Weprin, the Legislature's most powerful Democrat, endorsed H. Carl McCall for State Comptroller today, virtually assuring that Mr.
McCall will become the first black to hold statewide elective office in New York.
If he is elected by the State Legislature on Wednesday, as is expected, Mr.
McCall plans to resign as president of the New York City Board of Education by the end of the week, said his spokesman, Steven Alschuler.


No Headline
"We have a real responsibility, once put in a position like this for the first time, to be a credit to all of the people who made it possible." -- H. CARL McCALL, who is expected to become the first black to hold statewide elective office in New York State.  [ A1:5. ]


Billing Cycles
Harley-Davidson Inc., the fabled maker of motorcycles, is introducing a credit card in June, according to Reuters.
The card could be used to buy accessories, repairs and Harley-Davidson brand clothing.
Harley's stock price fell slightly yesterday, after trading lower for most of the session.


Green Giant Moving to Fresh Produce Aisle
Life has not been too jolly lately for the Green Giant in the frozen and canned food business.
So the division of Grand Metropolitan P.L.C. has mapped a plan to plunge into marketing fresh fruits and vegetables, a company spokesman said today.
Green Giant first stuck its toe into the fresh produce section of the supermarket two years ago when it began selling branded potatoes.
That business has more than doubled and has been a "huge success," said Jeffrey Sholl, Green Giant's president.
More recently, the company has sold fresh salads on the West Coast under the Freshtables name.


Tyson Foods (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to April 3


Mick Ronson, 46, A Record Producer And Rock Guitarist
Mick Ronson, the former lead guitarist for David Bowie's band, and a rock music producer, died on Friday in London.
He was 46.
The cause was cancer of the liver, British newspapers reported.


Idaho Power Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


German Social Democrats' Leader Quits Over Lie
Caught in a lie about an old scandal in which he had seemed to be the victim, the leader of Germany's Social Democratic Party resigned today, leaving the opposition to Chancellor Helmut Kohl without a candidate only a year before the next general election.
The politician, Bjorn Engholm, age 53, a pipe-smoking North German who promised a gentler brand of politics, quit as the Social Democrats' leader and as Premier of the state of Schleswig-Holstein.


Vanderbilt Hires Jan van Breda Kolff
JAN VAN BREDA KOLFF, after running the Cornell program for two years, is the new coach at Vanderbilt, where he starred as a player during the 1970's.
Last season, van Breda Kolff coached Cornell (16-10) to its first winning season in four years.
Cornell was 7-19 in his first year.


Books of The Times; Reagan Didn't Let Reality Hamper His Beliefs, Shultz Says
Turmoil and Triumph  My Years as Secretary of State  By George P. Shultz  Illustrated. 1,184 pages.
A Robert Stewart Book/Charles Scribner's Sons. $30.
George P. Shultz's memoirs of his years as Ronald Reagan's Secretary of State made headlines in February when advance excerpts of the book were published in Time magazine, asserting that Vice President George Bush had tried to blur his role in the Reagan Administration's arms-for-hostages deals with Iran.


On My Mind; Time For Apologies
Something important is missing in all the talk about how only American muscle and guts are bringing peace in Bosnia -- an apology to Cyrus Vance and Lord David Owen.
The apology is a matter of decency.
It is also a matter of understanding what happened, to help protect the peace in case it actually comes about.


Political Elite In Italy Finds Feast Ending
It was just another power lunch at the Augustea, a high-class eatery that the sleek, socialite companion of a sleek Socialist Party figure laughingly called "the Socialist canteen." But the important thing was not so much the excellence of the tortellini as the precise location of the table it was served on.
"If you don't sit on this row, you don't count," the socialite said.
"Look." She gestured to the top table, occupied by Bettino Craxi, Claudio Martelli and other dignitaries of Italy's Socialist Party.


Memorial Service Held for Wallace Stegner


Morningstar Group Inc.  (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Loews Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Tran Duc Thao, 76, Vietnamese Thinker
Tran Duc Thao, a Vietnamese philosopher who had ties to Jean-Paul Sartre, the French Existentialist thinker, died on April 24 in a hospital in Paris.
He was 76 and had returned in 1991 to France, where he had lived as a young man.
The Associated Press reported that Mr.
Thao had been in ill health and had been admitted to the hospital after a fall on April 23.


Review/Television; Skinheads Having Fun: Hating and Discoing
The hazard of making light of any ragtag band of true believers is that they may turn out to be a serious force.
That must be what Bill Riccio, the head of the Aryan National Front and the star of tonight's HBO documentary, is counting on when he informs his followers that Hitler and Jesus both started small.
Still, Mr.
Riccio, who may be in his 30's and has spent some of those years in jail, runs his little gang of male teen-agers like a permissive camp counselor.
There are hugs for the best boys and beer for all.
A few tell of running away from home or being kicked out.
At Aryan Front headquarters in a run-down house in rural Alabama they seem to have found a sort of belongingness, flaunting their collective identity with shaven heads, tattoos, White Power T-shirts and lots of straight-armed heiling at one another.


McCall's Loss Hurts Dinkins on Board
Long after Mayor David N. Dinkins lost a working majority on the Board of Education, his appointee H. Carl McCall preserved at least an appearance of mayoral influence, if not clout, by serving with dignity as president of the board.
But now that Mr.
McCall has been called to fill an interim appointment as State Comptroller, board members say the Mayor is in danger of losing even that last power.


Bears' Gentry Decides to Retire
Chicago Bears wide receiver DENNIS GENTRY retired yesterday after 11 seasons.
Gentry, 34, was the Bears' fourth-round draft pick from Baylor in 1981 and played his entire career with Chicago.


Enquirer/Star Group reports earnings for Qtr to March 29


Enterra Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Mr. Coffee Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 28


A Big Second Step in Somalia
The world's disarray over the bloodletting in Bosnia has obscured a more successful lifesaving operation in Somalia.
An international force led by the United States has created a secure environment for delivering relief supplies.
Millions of Somalis now live in relative peace as violence has abated.
And Somalis themselves have taken the first steps to reconstruct a shattered society.
Americans have reason for pride as the United Nations takes over a humanitarian operation authorized by President Bush and inherited by President Clinton.
Yet some Americans worry that a perilous precedent is being set in this second phase of Operation Restore Hope.
Of 28,000 peacekeepers due to remain in Somalia, about 4,000 will be American.
They will be led by a non-American, Lieut.
Gen.
Cevik Bir of Turkey.
This will be the first peacetime instance in which Americans have served, outside NATO, under a foreign commander.


Maverick Tube Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Leading Cocaine Trafficker Is Slain in Mexico
In the latest blow to drug trafficking in Mexico, the police have killed one of the country's leading cocaine traffickers in a shootout on the northern outskirts of the capital.
A United States drug-enforcement official described the notoriously violent 42-year-old drug baron, Emilio Quintero Payan, as "probably our most important drug trafficker in Mexico."


Finally, Mr. Ferguson Goes to Washington
With each stiff left he throws in training camp here, Jesse Ferguson, at the age of 36, is a punch closer to fighting for the heavyweight championship of the world.
In the corner, his trainer shouts instructions.
This time, in something of an about-face, Ferguson is no one's sparring partner: He is the main figure in the One Punch Gym, preparing to head to Washington next week for a shot at Riddick Bowe's title on May 22.


Stevens Graphics Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Burnham Pacific Properties reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Classes Improved Gays' Ties to Police
To the Editor:
"Healing Wounds and Seeking Understanding" (news article, April 19) performs a valuable service by illustrating the benefits of striving for openness and cooperation between citizens and the police.
The relationship between the 115th Police Precinct and the gay and lesbian residents of Jackson Heights are remarkably improved thanks to the precinct's willingness to learn about who we are through the classes our community provided.
If only other people in power could get that message.


Ramsay-HMO Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


COMPANY NEWS
ANGELES CORP., Los Angeles, a diversified investment management company, said it had filed for protection from its creditors under Chapter 11 of the United States Bankruptcy Code because of its inability to service its debt, as well as cash-flow problems.
MEDI-MAIL INC., San Diego, a provider of discount mail-order pharmacy services, completed the acquisition of Mail-Rx of Baltimore for $8.1 million.


A Dismissal In an Attack In Brooklyn
A judge yesterday dismissed assault charges against a Hasidic Jew who was accused of being part of a group of Hasidim who beat a black man last year in Crown Heights, Brooklyn.
The dismissal of the case against Moshe Katzman, a 24-year-old rabbinical student, came five months after the widely publicized encounter between the Hasidic group and the black man, Ralph Nimmons, who said he was the victim of a racial attack but then refused to cooperate with Brooklyn prosecutors.
The incident occurred in a neighborhood with a history of racial tensions, which culminated in several nights of violence in August 1991.


Citadel Holding Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


The Hotel Industry Is Roiled By Frequent-Guest Awards
A donnybrook between the giant Marriott Corporation and Hilton Hotels is riling the hotel industry.
And as the invective has intensified, the Hyatt Hotels Corporation has cautiously sided with Hilton while Holiday Inn has come down equally gingerly on the side of Marriott.
"But mostly it's been kind of fun just sitting back watching our competitive brethren go at one another," Ken Pierce, a vice president of Holiday Inn, said.


The Manifold Uses of Memory
FROM the electronic mailbag, Arthur Hostage of Cheshire, Conn., asks: "All of the ads for PC's and Macs state the amount of RAM included, and many of them indicate the expandability of this memory up to 20, 32, 64 or 68MB. Why would anyone want such large amounts of RAM?"
"The primary answers are speed and convenience," said Mike Frost, president of Techworks Inc. of Austin, Tex., a major supplier of memory chips for Apple Macintosh computers.
Before letting Mr.
Frost explain, some background may be helpful.


Right Management Consultants reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Coda Energy Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Zilog Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to April 4


SkyWest Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Year to March 31


Indiana Energy reports earnings for 12mo to March 31


Jet Newcomer Hopes To Shake Reputation
Johnny Johnson, the running back the Jets acquired from Phoenix by swapping their No. 3 pick for No. 4 on draft day, was handed his new jersey today.
With his size and talent, he could become the Jets' best runner since the young Freeman McNeil.
But along with impressive numbers, Johnson brings with him a reputation as being undependable, which, he says, is an unfair one that traces to his college days at San Jose State.


Tokyo Worried by U.S. Criticism Of Curbs on Construction Bidding
For months, the Government of Prime Minister Kiichi Miyazawa has been trying to end the stream of embarrassing revelations about millions of dollars in illegal donations to prominent politicians, mostly in return for multibillion-dollar construction contracts.
Now, just as the scandals were beginning to die down, the Government is threatened with a new and unwelcome set of investigations, this time from the Clinton Administration.


Health Plans Like Canada's
There are a variety of proposals for single-payer systems.
Some would essentially expand the Medicare program to all Americans.
Others would create new state or regional entities that would collect taxes and pay for care.
But the heart of these systems is replacing private health insurance with a Government-administered insurance program financed by taxes.
Most are modeled on the Canadian system, which is financed by a variety of taxes and administered by the provinces.
The provincial governments regulate hospital budgets and doctor fees.


DeOssie and Giants Agree on Contract
Linebacker STEVE DeOSSIE has reached agreement with the Giants on a two-year agreement, his agent, JACK MULA, said last night.
The Giants don't discuss such agreements until a contract has been signed, something Mula suggested would take place within a few days.
Mula would not discuss all the financial terms, but said that in anticipation of a salary cap next year, the contract had been front-loaded, giving the 30-year-old DeOssie more money this season and the Giants more room under next year's anticipated cap.


Michael Gordon, Comic Director On Stage and Screen, Dies at 83
Michael Gordon, a stage and screen director whose gift for light comedy was unaffected by his being blacklisted in the 1950's, died on April 29 at Century City Hospital in Los Angeles.
He was 83.
Mr. Gordon died of natural causes, said his daughter Jane Gordon of Los Angeles.


Jerusalem Journal; His Strength Is Grace, and Now for a Graceful Exit
Throughout one recent morning, at 40-minute intervals, the new ambassadors of five countries presented their credentials to President Chaim Herzog, who was leading such ceremonies for the last time.
They were purely routine rituals, and Mr.
Herzog, who leaves office next week, has seen more than his share.
Nevertheless, they underlined how much Israel's international position has changed since he began the first of his two five-year terms in 1983.


Prudential Securities Account In Review
Prudential Securities in New York unexpectedly announced yesterday that it had placed its advertising account in review.
For three years, the account has been handled by Lowe &amp; Partners in New York, which said it would participate in the review.
Though billings were not disclosed, Leading National Advertisers, an advertising tracking service, reported that the brokerage firm spent almost $2.7 million on advertising last year.
Prudential Securities said Lowe would continue to serve as the agency for its parent, the Prudential Insurance Company of America.


Union Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


CHRONICLE
The Rev.
THEODORE M. HESBURGH, former president of the University of Notre Dame, has been showered with every honor imaginable, it seems.
He has held dozens of appointments from the White House and the Vatican and in the public and private sectors, among them, chairman of the United States Commission on Civil Rights, representative of the Holy See to the International Atomic Energy Agency and chairman of the Rockefeller Foundation.
But the title -- and the role -- dearest to his heart, he said yesterday, remains, simply, priest.
Father Hesburgh's 50th anniversary of his ordination to the priesthood will be June 24, but he is already beginning to celebrate this month.
"When you boil it all down, all the different jobs and posts and honors, what I am the most happy about is being a priest," he said from his office at Notre Dame.
"And wherever I've gone -- I've been in 160 countries and around the world many times -- I've always been conscious of being a priest.


Newport Corp. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Growing Up Under Koresh: Cult Children Tell of Abuses
For sins as small as spilling milk, the children said, they were struck with a wooden paddle known as "the helper." To train for the final battle, they were instructed to fight each other, and if they did not fight hard enough, they were paddled for that, too.
David Koresh told them to call their parents "dogs"; only he was to be referred to as their father.
Girls as young as 11 were given a plastic Star of David, signifying that they had "the light" and were ready to have sex with the cult leader.
A team of therapists said these were some of the things that 19 of the 21 surviving children of the Branch Davidian cult had told them about their lives inside the compound.


Financing of $31.4 Billion Budget Presented by Dinkins Is Criticized
Mayor David N. Dinkins presented a $31.4 billion budget plan yesterday that drew criticism from independent fiscal experts for putting off tough decisions in an election year.
Mr.
Dinkins proposed a modest series of cuts, including eliminating the Police Cadet Corps, ending 300 community college classes and slowing reductions in the commercial rent tax.
But the core of the plan was his proposal to close a half-billion-dollar budget gap by relying on state and Federal aid that has yet to materialize.


Tire Slashings Are Investigated as a Bias Crime
The tires on more than 40 cars were slashed early yesterday morning in Williamsburg, Brooklyn, and at least one windshield was marked with a swastika in an attack that is being investigated as a possible bias crime, the police said.
Residents on Penn Street, Marcy Avenue and several other streets in the neighborhood said they awoke to discover that someone had methodically walked down their blocks, puncturing the two outside tires of most of the cars.
Many Hasidic Jews live in the area. 'Everybody Is Very Upset'
Andor Mann, 57, who lives at 236 Penn Street, said that when he returned home from an early morning visit to synagogue about 7 A.M., he found that two of the tires on his station wagon were full of holes.
He had not noticed the damage when he left in the dark about 5:30 A.M.


Ex-Spy Chief Assails German Treason Trial
On the eve of his trial on charges of high treason and bribery, the former head of East Germany's foreign intelligence service denounced the proceeding today as politically motivated "victor's justice" and said its main objective is to force him to reveal the names of his former agents and sources around the world.
The accused, Markus Wolf, headed the East German Ministry for State Security's foreign intelligence service from 1953 until his retirement in 1986, building an international reputation for his intellect, skill and cunning.
Under his guidance, the East German foreign intelligence service scored a number of spectacular successes, including placing an agent in the West German Chancellor's office and thoroughly infiltrating Bonn intelligence agencies.


Corrections
An article on April 21 about experts' views about the standoff with Mhe Branch Davidian sect near Waco, Tex., drew an incorrect inference about Dr.
Chris Hatcher's view of the outcome.
While several experts said they felt that an Armageddon would have been avoided if the authorities had focused on the fact that they were dealing with a violent sect, he was not among those who voiced that view.


College's Ties to Church Group Challenged
Opponents of the University of Bridgeport's affiliation with a group sponsored by the Unification Church filed suit today, challenging the agreement.
The suit contends that the agreement with the Unification Church group, the Professors World Peace Academy, violates the private university's charter and state laws governing nonprofit institutions.


Akorn Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


By Design; Oddball Sneakers
Let the rest of the world plod around in sensible sneakers.
It takes real attitude to strut in this season's spoofy versions.
And there are plenty of them out there.
All of the new sneakers bear a passing resemblance to the real thing, with white laces and thick molded rubber soles.
But after that, they take off into the wild blue yonder.
The wackiest are the open-toed sneaker mules from Gaultier Junior.
They cost $115 at Barneys New York Co-Op.
In the same vein are Sam &amp; Libby's "high jump" oxfords.
Made of navy canvas, they rest on a stocky heeled sole and lace up to just under the ankle.
They are $34 at Bloomingdale's.
Also at Bloomingdale's, for $38, are Sam &amp; Libby's high-heeled, high-top sneakers that look a lot like ice skates without the blades.


Animated Presentations For Business Occasions
CURTAIN CALL is enjoying a well-deserved encore.
Version 2.0 of the presentation program, for computers running Microsoft Windows 3.0 or later, adds some nifty new features, particularly in the area of animation.
Presentation programs are often employed in business for getting a point across graphically on a computer screen.
The point might be how well the concern is doing or, conversely, that things are not nearly as bad as they seem.
The presentation might be made to groups of employees, executives, the board of directors or stockholders; an executive might also employ such a program to push, or justify, a pet project.
With Curtain Call, the presentation can be so dressed up with fancy fonts, sound, animation and the kitchen sink that restraint and dignity are called for, unless the company is itself unrestrained and undignified.


At Bell Labs, Gore Gets a Glimpse of New Information Technology


Italy's Electoral System Is Not the Problem; North Carolina Test
To the Editor:
If sustained by the Supreme Court, North Carolina's 12th Congressional District, drawn to guarantee African-American representation, will move us a long way toward proportional representation and away from the geographic constituency that has been a feature of our democracy for almost two centuries.
The 13th District in New Jersey, while not as extreme, exhibits many of the same characteristics -- in this case to insure Hispanic representation.
If the districting process can be thus stretched in order to provide representation for specified groups, why bother with the charade of geographic districts?
Why not go the whole way with a truly proportional system of representation, selecting members of Congress from non-geographic lists prepared by the groups receiving special consideration?


Pan Atlantic Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Allstate Financial Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


METRO DIGEST
MCCALL LIKELY CHOICE AS COMPTROLLER
Assembly Speaker Saul Weprin endorses H. Carl McCall, chairman of the New York City Board of Education, for State Comptroller.
The move virtually insures that Mr.
McCall will become the first black person to hold a statewide elective office in New York.
A1.
Despite losing on votes, a reputation for the middle road.
B8.
Another blow to Mayor Dinkins's power on the Board of Education.
B8.
NEW YORK CITY A HOLDING BUDGET IN AN ELECTION YEAR
Mayor Dinkins releases a $31.4 billion budget for the next fiscal year, one that relies on modest spending cuts and promises of state and Federal aid to close a $2.1 billion gap.
The strategy enables him to avoid layoffs or large cuts in city services during the year that he is up for re-election.
A1.
SIX KILLED, THEN SET ON FIRE
Six people, including a baby, were beaten, stabbed and strangled in their East Harlem public housing apartment.
Then the place was set on fire, apparently in an attempt to conceal the crime.
A1.
ASSAULT CHARGES DISMISSED
A judge dismissed assault charges against a Hasidic Jew who was accused of being part of a group who beat a black man, Ralph Nimmons, last year in Crown Heights.
Mr.
Nimmons, who said he was the victim of a racial attack, has refused to cooperate with prosecutors.
B3.
BOESKY V. BOESKY, OVER MONEY
The divorce trial of Ivan F. Boesky, arbitrageur and ex-convict, and his wife, Seema, is under way, as anonymously as the participants can keep it.
At issue is how to divide Mrs.
Boesky's assets, which are estimated at $100 million.
B3.
In what police call a possible bias crime, tires are slashed in Williamsburg, Brooklyn.
B2.
The doctor who headed the Connecticut investigation into whether Woody Allen molested his daughter, Dylan, theorized that the child either invented the story or that it was planted in her mind by her mother, Mia Farrow.
B5.
REGION FLORIO AIDE IN BOND INQUIRY
Merrill Lynch &amp; Company has suspended three senior executives involved in municipal bond transactions with a company tied to Joseph C. Salema, chief of staff to Governor Florio.
The company says its internal inquiry prompted the Federal investigation into the possibility that brides were paid to steer nearly $3 billion in New Jersey Turnpike bond business.
A1.
TRUMP SUES ON INDIAN CASINOS
Donald Trump, who owns three casinos in Atlantic City, has sued the Federal Government, maintaining that allowing Indian tribes to open casinos discriminates against him.
The lawsuit, filed in Newark, argues that the Indian Gaming Regulatory Act is unconstitutional.
B6.
Lawyers deliver their closing arguments in the fraud trial of Armand P. D'Amato.
B6.
The wife of Mahmud Abouhalima, arrested in the World Trade Center bombing, gives her first interview since returning from Egypt.
B3.
Chronicle B4 Our Towns by Joseph Berger B6


Bally Manufacturing Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Patterns
Stuck on SoHo
Stephen Gan never gave up on downtown -- even after its premiere mouthpiece, Details magazine, was taken national by Conde Nast Publications in 1990.


Yanks Work Backward, Go Forward
If, five months from today, the Yankees should be champions of a division bereft of teams worthy of that stature, architects of future would-be champions would be hard-pressed to copy New York's blueprint for success.
Among other moves since the end of last season, the Yankees have made some that prompt head-scratching no matter how successful the team is:


A First Bow, This Time To the Press
As a dizzying circle of photographers screamed "Conan!" from every side and a dozen video cameras and a room full of reporters recorded his every utterance, Conan O'Brien officially entered the world of big-time show business yesterday.
In the elegant setting of the Rainbow Room, Mr.
O'Brien held his first news conference since NBC's surprise announcement last week that he would succeed David Letterman as the host of its weeknight comedy and talk show, "Late Night."


Knicks Prefer Just a Day In Indiana
The Knicks' immediate goal is simple. Accomplishing it may be difficult.
New York hopes to end its first-round playoff series with the Indiana Pacers when the two teams play Game 3 on Tuesday night in Indianapolis.
But while the Knicks won the first two games of the three-of-five-game playoff series, neither victory came easily.
The Knicks lost a 19-point lead in Game 1 last Friday night before squeaking out a 3-point victory.
Then in Game 2 on Sunday afternoon, the Knicks rallied from a 16-point third-quarter deficit to win, 101-91.


Liberty Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


The Big Met Bats Seem to Be Made of Wouldn't
The computations remain very viable for the Mets.
An eight-and-a-half-game deficit in May isn't statistical death.
But for all the optimistic equations the Mets can draw up, they have no option every night but to write the names Murray, Bonilla and Johnson into the lineup card's No. 3, 4 and 5 spots.
The names and their numbers haven't added up to much for the Mets -- in 1992, and so far in 1993.
Are they a hopelessly inadequate fit?
There is plenty of reason to suspect so, and there is doubt about whether the Mets can ever generate the kind of offense needed to establish themselves as a contender this season.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
6.50
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
3.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.00
3.01
3.80
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
2.88
2.88
3.65
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
2.98
2.96
3.78
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
5.51
5.59
7.17
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
6.85
6.92
8.01
TELEPHONE BONDS
7.80
7.87
8.96
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
5.88
5.96
6.76
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Amos N. Wilder, a Bible Scholar, Literary Critic and Educator, 97
Amos Niven Wilder, a Bible scholar, literary critic and emeritus Hollis Professor of Divinity at Harvard Divinity School, died Saturday at his home in Cambridge, Mass.
He was 97.
The cause was cancer, his family said.


Islam in New York: Growing Presence of Diverse Peoples United by Faith
To get an idea of who New York City's Muslims are, stand outside the Islamic Center of New York, the city's most prominent mosque, on Third Avenue at 96th Street in Manhattan.
On a recent religious holiday, through its doors came Pakistanis in flowing pastel gowns, black Americans wearing kente-cloth hats, an Albanian couple trying to quiet their crying daughter, West Africans in high head wraps, Bahrainis in business suits, Egyptian cab drivers, Yemeni restaurateurs, a young Bosnian who stood up in mid-service and gave an emotional appeal for his countrymen.


Lemieux, Hurting, Set To Be a Pain To Islanders
Mario Lemieux of the Pittsburgh Penguins said today that his back felt better and that he expected to play in Game 2 of the Patrick Division finals Tuesday night against the Islanders.
But Lemieux also said that he might need more surgery on the back after the Stanley Cup playoffs.
"It's always possible -- I'm talking to the doctors," Lemieux said after getting a back massage while his teammates practiced here at Civic Arena.
"Hopefully, I can get through the next couple of months and see what we do in the summer. We might have to go in again. Minor surgery. I just try to deal as best I can with it. It's really frustrating when you don't know what's happening from day to day. It's a tough situation."


Restore Trust, Honda Stresses
Responding to assertions that its retail-dealer and distribution network had been tainted by corruption, the Honda Motor Company urged its dealers in the United States today "to work together in order to reinforce our customers' trust in the Honda organization and in our business operations."
The company's statement -- signed by Koichi Amemiya, president of Honda's American sales subsidiary -- was sent by computer to the 1,291 Honda and Acura dealers in the United States.
On Sunday, The New York Times published allegations by some dealers and Honda workers that company executives had been bribed so that dealers could secure more cars and franchises.


CRSS Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Most Violence Against Women Isn't Domestic
To the Editor:
"Muggings in the Kitchen" (editorial, April 23) says that "an American woman is beaten by her husband or boyfriend every 15 seconds." At that rate, 21 million women would be beaten by their husbands or boyfriends every year.
That is simply not the case.
Statistics from the Department of Justice National Crime Survey show only 56,000 cases of violence suffered by female victims that were reportedly caused by a spouse.
An additional 216,000 violent acts were perpetrated by a former spouse; 198,000 by a boyfriend or former boyfriend.
There were 696,800 assaults from another "person whom victim knew" and 1.13 million from a stranger.
The total from the Justice Department's survey, including strangers, is approximately one-tenth the number your editorial cites: 2.2 million cases.


Arthur Belfer, 86, Philanthropist And Head of Petroleum Concern
Arthur B. Belfer, the founder of the Belco Petroleum Corporation and a philanthropist, died on Sunday at New York Hospital.
He was 86 and lived in Manhattan and Palm Beach, Fla.
His son, Robert A. Belfer, said the cause was cancer.


CNA Financial Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Sports of The Times; A 'Crucial' Mets Series, Sort Of
IN their best seasons, the Mets often had a "crucial series" with the Cardinals or the Cubs or the Pirates, but usually in September with first place in the National League East at stake.
But for these Mets, it has come to this: their "crucial series" this week involves four games with the Florida Marlins, beginning Friday night at Shea Stadium, with last place at stake.


10 Out of 12 Warhols Go Unsold In First of Big Spring Art Auctions
Sotheby's gambled last night and lost.
Prices at its sale of contemporary art, the first in a two-week auction marathon, sank to the levels of 1990-91, when experts proclaimed that the market had hit bottom.
The poor sales were something of a surprise, since the market seemed to be slowly turning around last fall.
Of the 77 works up for sale last night, only 40 found buyers.
Of those that did sell, most went for prices below or at the auction house's low estimates.
And not one work reached $1 million.


Biscayne Holdings Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Italy's Electoral System Is Not the Problem
To the Editor:
There are undoubtedly many problems in Italy; I write to suggest that its electoral system contributes rather little to them.
Your news articles and editorial on Italy's proportional representation system are misleading in suggesting that the single-member district method is widely used in Europe.
Britain uses it.
France has a modified version.
Almost all other countries use variants of proportional representation.
Germany elects half of its parliament through majority voting in districts, but the overall distribution of seats in the Bundestag is determined by a simultaneous proportional representation election.


Precision Castparts Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 28


6 Are Found Slain In a Harlem Home That Was Set Afire
Six people including a baby were slain -- most of them beaten, stabbed and strangled -- in an East Harlem apartment that was then set on fire yesterday in an apparent attempt to conceal the crime.
The motive for the brutal killings remained a mystery yesterday as the police questioned a former boyfriend of one of the dead women, who was the center of a family striving for a better life.
The police speculated that the crime was not connected to drugs but rather was an act of revenge, or a crime of passion.
They grappled to explain why the bodies were so mutilated -- with bruises, slashes and rope burns -- and how one or more people could have killed an entire family without attracting attention in the densely populated Thomas Jefferson Houses, a public housing project on East 115th Street.


Kelly Orders Crackdown On Licenses
Police Commissioner Raymond W. Kelly announced a crackdown yesterday on motorists driving with suspended licenses.
For the first time, any driver stopped by the police with two or more suspensions arising from separate incidents will be arrested rather than merely given a summons.
The procedure, which will take effect today, is a response to three pedestrian deaths in three weeks involving drivers with a record of suspended licenses or no license at all.


Give Mercy a Day in Court
Why are prosecutors in Texas, the state with the most executions, so determined to inflict the death penalty on killers who were 17 or younger at the time of their crimes?
It's a mystery, since the state legislature recently decreed that henceforth juries are to consider a murderer's youth as a mitigating factor that could result in a life sentence instead of death.
A 30-day reprieve by Gov.
Ann Richards from an execution gives Texas a little time to reconsider its prosecutorial zeal.
The condemned man, Gary Graham, who killed a man in his youth, was convicted under the state's old law, which defined mitigation so narrowly that juries weren't required even to
consider
mental retardation or youth as factors warranting mercy.
Mr.
Graham can't even get a hearing before the state's Board of Pardons and Paroles, which turned him down by a vote of 10 to 7 last month.


Bombing Suspect's Wife Holds On as Her Husband Awaits Trial
Her neighbors in Egypt had quietly told Marianne Abouhalima about the secret police, about the telephone taps, about the midnight raids that dragged men away for interrogation, about the torture.
But don't worry, they assured her, the men usually came back in four or five days.
The warnings proved prophetic; the assurance of quick release has not.


Khmer Rouge Hit Post Used by U.N. Peacekeepers
Khmer Rouge guerrillas attacked a Cambodian city close to the fabled ruins of Angkor today, briefly held the local airport and destroyed a fuel and ammunition dump used by United Nations peacekeeping troops.
The attack by the Khmer Rouge on the city of Siem Reap near a tourist center before dawn came only three weeks before a United Nations-sponsored election and seemed intended to prove that the United Nations cannot provide security during the voting.


An Uncertain Budget
An election-year budget is usually an expansive affair, brimming with new revenues and innovative programs aimed at constituencies whose support could help an incumbent mayor retain the pleasant, spacious office in the northwest corner of City Hall.
The $31.4 billion executive budget proposed yesterday by Mayor David N. Dinkins does come in an election year, but that is its only resemblance to a traditional election-year spending plan.
Mr.
Dinkins's proposal is fraught with fiscal uncertainty, particularly his appeal to fellow Democrats in Washington and Albany for hundreds of millions of dollars in additional Federal and state aid to close a potential deficit of of $500 million, and possibly much more, in the fiscal year that begins July 1.
The Mayor's plan also includes a long contingency list of service cuts that would be imposed if the help does not arrive.


Chiefs Sign Outland Trophy Winner
WILL SHIELDS, the Outland Trophy winner and an all-America guard at Nebraska, signed with the Kansas City Chiefs yesterday.
Shields, a third-round draft choice who was the Chiefs' highest selection, signed a series of three one-year contracts.
The 6-foot-2-inch, 298-pounder was regarded as one of the best pulling collegiate guards and helped Nebraska to a rushing average of 333.4 yards a game.


Elsinore Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Armand D'Amato's Link To Unisys Called 'Seamy'
A Government lawyer charged today that Armand P. D'Amato entered into a "seamy" and "corrupt" business relationship that brought him $120,500 for helping a military contractor gain access to his brother, Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato.
In his closing statement this morning in Mr.
D'Amato's trial on mail fraud charges, the lawyer, Joshua Hochberg, said, "To call what the defendant did consulting work is to dignify it." He added sarcastically, "To even call it lobbying is to dignify it.


Voting Rules In School Races
In today's Community School Board Elections, nine seats are at stake on each of the city's 32 community boards.
Any registered voter, or anyone registered as a parent voter, may vote.
HOW TO VOTE: Voters mark a paper ballot on which candidates are listed by name only.
Voting is by a proportional representation system.
Voters indicate their choice of candidates in order of preference, by 1 for their first choice, 2 for second, and so on.
Registered voters whose name does not appear on voter lists at their polling site should request to vote on an affidavit ballot.


Clinton Repeats His Pledge On Use of Troops in Bosnia
President Clinton today renewed his pledge to send United States troops to Bosnia as part of a peacekeeping force as long as European countries were "heavily engaged."
But he told reporters he would make no decisions until it was clear whether the Bosnian Serbs would abide by the peace treaty that their leader signed over the weekend.


Wabash National reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Audrey Hepburn Tribute
Three films that starred Audrey Hepburn, who died on Jan. 20, are to be shown today as part of a daylong tribute to the actress sponsored by the New York Metropolitan Committee for Unicef.
"Wait Until Dark" and "Charade" are to be shown at 2 and 4 P.M., respectively, at the Angelika 57 Theater, 225 West 57th Street, Manhattan.
Tickets to the double bill are $10.
A screening of "My Fair Lady" at 7:30 P.M. is to have a Champagne-and-dessert intermission.
Tickets are $35; with a cocktail reception at 5:45 P.M., $75.
All proceeds will go to Unicef's Audrey Hepburn Memorial Fund for needy African children.
Information: (212) 759-0760.


New York City's Teetering Budget
Mayor David Dinkins boasts that, with his new budget, New York City's books will be balanced for the 14th year in a row.
That is nothing to boast about; it's required by state law.
What matters is how the balance has been struck.
As usual, it is precarious.
This is an election year, for the Mayor's office and the City Council -- not a situation that's likely to produce tax increases or bold cuts in city spending.
Indeed, the Mayor says he will no longer press the State Legislature for the added taxing authority he had sought, which the Legislature has been unwilling to give him.
And he proposes to hold cuts in city programs to a minimum, with no layoffs.


Malette Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


HIGH COURT LIMITS SEARCH CHALLENGE
The Supreme Court ruled today that partners in crime do not have the right to challenge the legality of police searches of one another's cars, homes or other possessions.
The unanimous, unsigned opinion reaffirmed the Court's longstanding approach to the question, overturning a contrary decision by a Federal appeals court.
That decision, issued last year by the United States Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit, in San Francisco, threw out much of the evidence linking a Customs Service agent to a conspiracy to smuggle cocaine across the Mexican border into Arizona.


Five Andy Awards For DDB Needham
DDB Needham New York took top honors last night at the 29th annual International Andy Awards presentation sponsored by the Advertising Club of New York.
DDB Needham won five Andys for its New York State Lottery campaign.
Lord, Dentsu &amp; Partners in New York followed with four Andys for Lea &amp; Perrins television spots and a print ad for TDK Electronics.


Ivax Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Results Plus
TENNIS And a New Teen-Ager Shall Lead Them Iva Majoli, a 15-year-old from Croatia, scored the biggest upset in the first round of the Italian Open yesterday in Rome.
In her first victory in a major tournament, she beat 10th-seeded Nathalie Tauziat of France, 6-1, 6-2, in a center-court match interrupted by rain for 30 minutes.
In another surprise, Silvia Farina of Italy defeated No. 13 Lori McNeil of the United States, 5-7, 6-2, 6-2, delighting the hometown fans.
Mary Pierce of France, No. 11, struggled before beating Shaun Stafford of the United States, 6-4, 7-5.
The 16th-seeded player, Naoko Sawamatsu of Japan, advanced with a 6-3, 6-4 victory over Bettina Fulco-Villella of Argentina.
The top eight seeded players received first-round byes.
The hard-hitting Majoli, who moved to the United States three years ago from Croatia, overpowered Tauziat.
"I expected to win," Majoli said.
"I was feeling very comfortable." (AP) O'Brien Beats Stark: Alex O'Brien defeated his former Stanford teammate, the seventh-seeded Jonathan Stark, 6-4, 6-4, yesterday in the first round of the $260,000 United States Tennis Association men's clay courts tournament in Tampa, Fla.
O'Brien will meet another former Stanford player, Jeff Tarango, in the round of 16.
Tarango rallied past a qualifier, Diego Perez of Uruguay, 0-6, 6-2, 6-2.
In other matches involving seeded players, No. 6 Luis Herrera of Mexico beat Claudio Mezzadri of Switzerland, 6-1, 7-5, and No. 8 Derrick Rostagno defeated Leonardo Lavalle of Mexico, 6-4, 7-5.
Mark Woodforde of Australia, who is seeded No. 1 in a tournament for the first time in his 10-year career, was scheduled to face Patrick McEnroe in a first-round match last night. (AP) COLLEGE BASEBALL It Didn't Even Take a Century It was an otherwise routine victory over a non-conference rival, and a Division III rival at that, but Springfield College made a lot of yesterday's 8-3 defeat of Williams at Berry-Allen Field in Springfield, Mass.
The victory gave the Chiefs a 21-11 record this season, including 16-6 in the Northeast 10 Conference, but more important, a 1,000-791 record over all in 87 varsity seasons.
Springfield is the first Division II school in New England to reach 1,000 victories.


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt  *
Duarte, Calif., is offering $150 million of tax-exempt certificates of participation for the City of Hope National Medical Center through Paine Webber Inc.
The certificates were initially priced to yield a maximum 6.40 percent for an issue due in 2023, with shorter-maturity serial bonds yielding from 3.25 percent in 1994 to 5.70 percent in 2001.
Longer-maturity yields include 5.90 percent in 2003, 6.20 percent in 2008 and 6.30 percent in 2013.
Moody's rated the bonds Baa-1. *
Federal National Mortgage Association, Washington, known as Fannie Mae, is offering $800 million of five- year debentures through various securities dealers.
The securities, due in 1998, have a 5.25 percent coupon and are priced at 100, to yield about 19 basis points more than Treasury securities with a similar maturity.
In addition, the debentures are redeemable on or after May 13, 1996.


The N.B.A. Has NBC Feeling 7 Feet Tall
When NBC signed a four-year extension of its television deal with the National Basketball Association last week, no one questioned the wisdom of the network paying the league 25 percent more than it currently remits.
The N.B.A. had shown clear evidence of its rising value.
Just a few days after the extension -- $750 million through 1998 -- more evidence was submitted for N.B.A.
Commissioner David Stern's giddy good humor: The five weekend playoff games on NBC averaged a 6.8 overnight Nielsen rating compared with the 5.7 for four games last year in the same slots.
Take away the 8.8 prime-time rating for Sunday's third game, between Chicago and Atlanta, and NBC was still up 11 percent.


Macy Sales Rose in March
R.
H.
Macy &amp; Company, the department and specialty store operator, reported increased sales in March and said it had met its cash flow target for the second straight month, despite stormy weather that closed stores.
In its monthly report to the United States Bankruptcy Court, which is overseeing Macy's performance, the company said its total sales for the five weeks that ended April 3 increased 7.7 percent to $504.9 million, from $487.1 million in the corresponding period last year.


Executive Changes
BURLINGTON INDUSTRIES EQUITY INC.
Greensboro, N.C., a maker of textiles, appointed George W. Henderson 3d president and chief operating officer.
In addition, Bernard A. Leventhal, Abraham B. Stenberg and Gary P. Welchman were named executive vice presidents, and John D. Englar was named senior vice president of finance and law.
MELLON BANK CORP., Pittsburgh, appointed Walter R. Day 3d chief community investment officer and head of the new community investment department.


American Employee at Embassy in Athens Arrested on Spy Charges
An American employee of the United States Embassy in Athens has been arrested in Virginia on charges of selling highly classified information to contacts suspected of being Greek military officers, United States officials said today.
While the details have not been made public, the officials said the case involved the sale of more than 240 documents containing American assessments of Greek military capabilities and Greek intentions in the former Yugoslavia.


Century Telephone Enterprises Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Federal Information Age Hasn't Dawned
To the Editor:
The National Archives and Records Administration's failure to develop policies to save electronic computer-generated records is being criticized, not least by historical groups (e.g., news article, April 11).
Much of this criticism is justified, but placing sole blame on the agency overlooks its work and other factors.
The Federal Government needs an information policy.
NARA's role is complicated by the absence of a comprehensive set of statutes, regulations and standards to guide the creation, management and use of Government information.
The agency should play an aggressive role in advocating information policy development, but it is up to the President and Congress to enact it.


Bridge
The result of the annual battle to determine the Grand National Team champions for New York City and Long Island is coming into clearer focus.
In one semifinal, played Sunday at the Beverly Club, 130 East 57th Street, John Rengstorff, Bill Ehlers, Michael Radin, all of Manhattan, and Michael Kopera of Brooklyn won by 36 imps against Brian Glubok, Jim Rosenbloom, Arjun Ray, all of Manhattan, Fred Chang, Jared Lilienstein, both of Flushing, Queens, and Win Allegaert of Astoria, Queens.
The Rengstorff team, hoping to advance to national playoffs in Washington in July, will eventually play the winners of the other semifinal, scheduled May 23 between teams headed by John Roberts of Manhattan and Alex Pollenz of Wantagh, L.I.


People
*
Michael Korn, the vice president of media and promotion at Ryan &amp; Partners, New York, was promoted to the new position of president and chief operating officer.
Jeff Pappalardo, the art director, was promoted to the new position of executive vice president and creative director. *
Skip D'Amico was named senior vice president and director of broadcast production at TBWA Advertising, New York, succeeding Bob Nelson, who left to join Lowe &amp; Partners,New York, in a similar capacity.
Mr.
D'Amico was most recently a freelance producer.


Julio Gallo, 83, Wine Industrialist, Dies
Julio Gallo, who helped to build the immense E.&amp; J. Gallo Winery and in the process helped change Americans' drinking tastes, was killed Sunday afternoon when a vehicle he was driving veered off a dirt road on a family ranch near Tracy, Calif., about 80 miles east of San Francisco.
He was 83.
Mr.
Gallo, the longtime president of the company, which is one of the world's largest winemakers, was driving the vehicle, The Modesto Bee, a California newspaper, reported yesterday.
He was flown by helicopter to Memorial Medical Center in Modesto, where he was declared dead on arrival.
According to the Stanislaus County coroner, he died of a cervical spine fracture and partial dislocation caused by blunt-force trauma.
Family Injured
Mr.
Gallo's wife, Aileen, and two granddaughters were in the vehicle, a Jeep Wrangler, which plunged 35 feet down an embankment and into a shallow pond, an officer of the Tracy rural fire department said.


Middle-Class but Not Feeling Equal, Blacks Reflect on Los Angeles Strife
Every so often, Dr.
Delaney Smith will pull out a year-old videotape and relive the Los Angeles riots on his wide-screen television, watching the flames rise against the night sky and feeling the rage of his people all over again as the liquor stores and gas stations burn only blocks from his home.
"It has never left me," Dr.
Smith, an internist who specializes in emergency medicine, said recently.
"It brings me back to my roots. I don't ever want to forget."


Cigna Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Modine Manufacturing Co.  (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Borg and Other Seniors To Hold Court
Twelve years ago he won his fifth Wimbledon title, but lately he's become better known as the fair-haired marquee idol of the senior men's tennis brigade.
This week, the 36-year-old BJORN BORG, whose repeated attempts to fashion a comeback on the men's circuit have yielded an 0-11 ATP Tour record, will stop trying to turn back the clock as he headlines an elite field of 12 seniors at the first Manhattan Masters tournament.
At the Lexington Avenue Armory, a site that often is host to antique shows, Borg's partner in the six-team doubles round-robin is none other than his emotional opposite, the stormy ILIE NASTASE, 46.
Other competitors at the event, which runs from tomorrow through Sunday and offers $100,000 in prize money, include ROD LAVER, KEN ROSEWALL, ROY EMERSON and ROSCOE TANNER.
The 12 contestants own a combined 141 Grand Slam titles, 11 of which were won by Borg at the French Open and Wimbledon.
The 56-year-old Emerson, with 28 Slam titles, leads the list.


Q&amp;A
Seeing Spots
Q.
What are floaters and flashers in the eye?
A.
Floaters are perceptions that semitransparent bodies are floating in the field of vision, according to The A.M.A.
Encyclopedia of Medicine.
They are usually shadows cast on the retina by small structures in the vitreous humor, the jelly that fills the eyeball.
Other changes in the vitreous humor may lead to the perception of flashing lights, or flashers.


Ducommon Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to April 3


20,000 U.S. TROOPS MAY GO TO BOSNIA, NATO ADMIRAL SAYS
Under preliminary plans being drawn up by NATO military authorities, American and allied peacekeeping forces are to sweep into Sarajevo and other key Bosnian cities before fanning out into the Bosnian countryside to police a new peace accord.
The initial troops sent to Sarajevo would be the vanguard of a force of more than 50,000, which is to include about 20,000 to 25,000 American troops, according to Western diplomats and military officials.
Other European officials said that the United States has advised NATO that it is prepared eventually to contribute up to 34,000 troops.


Backers of Canada-Type Health Plan: Idealistic, Outmuscled but Scrapping
They are the guerrilla fighters of the health-care debate: outfinanced by the industry groups, outmuscled by the policy gurus in the White House, viewed by most of the pundits as hopeless idealists.
But advocates of installing a Canadian-style health-care system in this country have a simple message: They are not dead yet.
The only true reform in health care, they argue, is a system of national insurance financed by taxes.


The School Board Sham
Today is Election Day in all 32 Community School Board districts.
There are important issues at stake, including the potentially destructive involvement of the religious right.
We had hoped to offer endorsements.
But after carefully studying the campaigns in each district, we regretfully conclude that we cannot responsibly endorse in a sufficiently large number of districts.
There are 543 candidates in 32 districts.
The system is chaotic and, with exceptions, tends to attract low-quality candidates less interested in education than in politics and patronage.
The choice among candidates is often merely between a puppet and an incompetent.


Vanguard Cellular Sys. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Elxsi Corp.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


SRI LANKA CAPITAL MOURNS PRESIDENT
White streamers fluttered from wires strung across this languid city, while businesses and homes displayed small white flags, banners in the color of Buddhist mourning.
Throughout the city, soldiers with assault rifles warily surveyed passersby and stopped occasional vehicles, their presence exuding an air of uncertainty.
Yet, two days after a suicide bomber assassinated President Ranasinghe Premadasa during a political rally, Colombo was quiet despite the death of two of the country's leaders.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Companies
Merrill Lynch suspended three senior executives involved in the underwriting of New Jersey Turnpike bonds because they had dealings with a company tied to a chief aide of Gov.
Jim Florio.
It said its internal inquiry prompted a Federal investigation into the possibility that bribes were paid to steer nearly $3 billion in turnpike bond business.  [ Page A1. ]
More insurance companies are ending or limiting property insurance in coastal and other regions prone to natural disasters, which is likely to push up prices and force many consumers to turn to government-sponsored plans for coverage.  [ D1. ]


WEST OFFERS PLAN TO CLEAN UP EAST
After more than three years of hand wringing over the environmental disasters left by Communism, the rich nations of the West have adopted a common strategy to help clean up in Central and Eastern Europe.
A plan adopted on Friday by nearly 50 environment ministers from virtually all of Europe, the United States, Canada and Japan identifies the most urgent targets and lists projects deemed most manageable in the former East bloc, including western Russia.


IHOP Corp.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Watsco Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Corrections
A front-page headline on Saturday about Defense Secretary Les Aspin's disciplinary actions against officials involved in the C-17 cargo plane program misstated the action against Maj.
Gen.
Michael J. Butchko Jr.
He was relieved of his current duties, not dismissed.


Merry Land &amp; Investment Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


City Lights and Space Ads May Blind Stargazers
AS the glare of artificial light spreads ever more pervasively across the planet's night skies, astronomers are having nightmares.
America's great observatories now face the possibility that huge commercial billboards may soon be rocketed into orbit, while cities fearful of crime are flooding the night sky with ever brighter lights.
Added to this plague of light pollution, astronomical observatories also face increasing interference from such mundane sources as radio-operated garage-door openers,


Health Equity Prop.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Tennessee Valley Authority reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Outsider Named Chief Financial Officer at I.B.M.
I.B.M. reached out yesterday for another outsider to help revive the troubled computer giant, naming Jerome B. York, a veteran of the Chrysler Corporation's turnaround, as its chief financial officer.
Mr.
York, 54, who was Chrysler's top finance executive, joins the International Business Machines Corporation's new chairman, Louis V. Gerstner Jr., as the second key member of I.B.M.'s new management team.
Mr.
York is expected to join the company immediately.


Trump, in a Federal Lawsuit, Seeks to Block Indian Casinos
Donald J. Trump, who owns three casinos in Atlantic City, has sued the Federal Government, maintaining that allowing Indian tribes to open casinos discriminates against him.
The Trump lawsuit, filed Friday in Federal District Court in Newark, gives legal voice to fears that growth in legalized gambling threatens New Jersey's casino monopoly on the East Coast.


Gulf Canada Resources reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Corrections
A report in the Events column of The Home Section on Thursday about an exhibition of designs for the Whitehall Ferry Terminal omitted the name of an architectural firm in the team that won the design competition.
The team consists of Venturi, Scott Brown &amp; Associates and Anderson/Schwartz Architects.
The listing also omitted a firm that was among the finalists.
It is James Stewart Polshek &amp; Partners.


National-Standard reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Corrections
Because of an editing error, a report in the Currents column of The Home Section on Thursday, about a show at the Rotunda Gallery in Brooklyn, misidentified an architect in some editions.
He is Clifton Balch.


Nevada Power Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Thriving Amid Harmony, A Mosque Is Transformed
Under a festive white tent with green trim, the members of the Islamic Center of New England gathered this spring to break ground for a mosque in this quiet town 20 miles south of downtown Boston.
The master of ceremonies was a doctor from Kashmir.
The call to prayer was chanted by a welder from Trinidad.
The building's plans were drawn by an architect from Turkey, and the feast that followed the ceremony was prepared by a chef from East Pakistan.
All are Muslim.


8 Weeks' Worth of Balanchine From City Ballet
The New York City Ballet has a long history of festivals, but nothing quite matches the scope and ambition of the company's "Balanchine Celebration," which opens tonight at the State Theater.
Seventy-three ballets by George Balanchine, who died 10 years ago, will be performed during this eight-week festival.
The ballets, which will be presented chronologically, range from the 1928 "Apollo" to "Mozartiana" and the Garland Dance from "The Sleeping Beauty," both choreographed in 1981.
The festival opens on the birthday of Lincoln Kirstein, who brought Balanchine to the United States in 1933 to create dances that would one day help to define American ballet.


YUGOSLAVIA LOSING THE HIGHLY SKILLED
Students at Belgrade University say the class of 1993 has adopted an unofficial slogan: "First graduate, then emigrate."
University graduates are leaving Yugoslavia by the thousands, and joining them are many of the country's leading scientists, engineers, entrepreneurs and intellectuals.


Bonds Gain Amid Investor Caution
The prices of Treasury bonds and notes jumped yesterday, but traders and investors remained cautious ahead of the April employment data to be released Friday and the details of next week's quarterly Treasury auction to be announced tomorrow.
The price rise was set in motion, traders said, by the size of the drop in the purchasing managers index of manufacturing activity.
The index fell from 53.4 in March to 49.7 in April, its lowest level since September.
Any reading below 50 indicates that manufacturing activity has declined.


Alliance Capital Management reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


AlaTenn Resources Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


High Court Restricts Antitrust Tactic
A Supreme Court ruling today all but shut the door on the use of antitrust laws as a defensive tactic in legal disputes between competitors.
The question for the Court was how to decide when an ordinary commercial lawsuit, like a suit for copyright infringement, is simply a "sham" suit filed for the purpose of burdening a competitor or stifling competition.


Audi Narrows List Of Review Agencies
Audi of America Inc. said yesterday that it had narrowed the review on its account, with billings estimated at $23 million to $28 million, to seven semifinalists: Ammirati &amp; Puris in New York; Carmichael Lynch in Minneapolis; Cliff Freeman &amp; Partners in New York; Hill, Holliday, Connors, Cosmopulos in Boston; Jordan, McGrath, Case &amp; Taylor in New York; Kirshenbaum &amp; Bond in New York, and McKinney &amp; Silver in Raleigh, N.C.


It's No Bluff: Barkley Says Suns Will Not Set in West
Either the Phoenix Suns are in denial or they know something.
They have botched their first two playoff games at home to a Los Angeles Lakers team that has been disowned by even Jack Nicholson, but today the Suns promised they will sweep the next three.
"We've won three in a row lots of times, against teams better than the Lakers," Phoenix Coach Paul Westphal said, feet up on his desk.
"I would not use the word 'guarantee,' but I do say we will win the next three to take the series."


Former Foes Team Up
THE top nuclear weapon designers of East and West, who for decades labored in secret to devise better ways of destroying each other's homelands with radioactive fire, are teaming up to conduct a joint scientific experiment for the first time.
The collaboration in basic science, to begin this summer, is seen as a post-cold-war milestone.
While many East-West partnerships have formed since the collapse of the Soviet Union, including a few among scientists with atomic skills, no experimental work has yet involved the highly specialized researchers who usually devote themselves to devising new kinds of nuclear armaments.


JG Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 30


Consumer-product marketers are using premiums and incentives as rewards for customers' loyalty
BOY SCOUTS may have to be loyal, but consumers certainly do not -- as purveyors of products in categories from cigarettes to shampoo have been rudely reminded recently.
As a result, an increasing number of marketers are intensifying their efforts to woo fickle shoppers with programs that reward loyalty and build relationships.
Consumer-product companies "spend billions of dollars to attract customers, without any kind of strategic focus on keeping them," said Bruce Bolger, the director of the Premium Incentive Show, the annual trade exposition of the industries that offer premiums like free or reduced-price merchandise and incentives like frequent-flier and frequent-buyer programs.


Northwest And Unions In Accord
Northwest Airlines and its two largest unions tentatively agreed yesterday to trade an equity stake in the airline for labor concessions.
The beleaguered airline, based in St.
Paul, has said it needs $900 million worth of concessions over three years from its unions and managers.
And although several hurdles remain before the agreement is completed, the move is nonetheless an important development in Northwest's bid to steer clear of bankruptcy courts.


Review/Music; Separating The Instrument From a Guitar's Spirit
With a few exceptions, Julian Bream's generous evening of guitar music at the 92d Street Y on Saturday consisted of his own transcriptions.
The process created two situations: one physical, the other more evanescent.
The solo guitar has interesting things to say about Bach's G-minor Violin Sonata, Paganini's A-major for violin and guitar or the little Ravel piano piece, "Pavane pour une Infante Defunte." It also gives them a dimension of technical striving they did not have before and may not have wanted.
The guitar's delicate sensibilities are brought to bear by a master, but we are never able to forget what a brute the instrument is to play.


Review/Television; SJF, 40ish, Pressured In TriBeCa
At the very bottom of last week's Nielsen ratings, on a list of more than 90 programs, was Fox's "TriBeCa." Things do not, to put it delicately, look good for the weekly series valiantly backed by Robert De Niro's production company.
And that is hardly cause for celebration.
Admittedly, the Tuesdays-at-9 P.M. anthology has been uneven, sometimes brilliant, not infrequently obvious.
As its tales of life in lower Manhattan have unfolded, there has been little consistency of tone or style.
The two continuing characters of Harry the cafe owner (Philip Bosco) and Carlton the mounted policeman (Joe Morton) haven't been quite enough to make on-a-dime weekly transitions from dramas about the homeless to light comedies about aging Lotharios.
Before tuning in, most television viewers like to know what they can more or less expect.


LTV Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Lesbians, Long Overlooked, Are Central to Debate on Military Ban
When Congress begins a new round of hearings on homosexuals in the military this week, it will take its first long look at the group that is believed to be most affected by the current ban on such soldiers: women.
So far, the debate has been cast largely in terms of gay men: Would they hurt combat morale?
Would they spread sexually transmitted diseases?
What about communal showers?


Some Patients Arouse Hatred, Therapists Find
WIDE publicity has been given to the occasional psychotherapist who sleeps with a patient.
Less widely known is that many psychotherapists, beneath their professional mask of unflappability, sometimes hate or fear their patients, according to a national survey of 285 therapists.
The portrait that emerges from the first national survey of the disturbing feelings clinical psychologists harbor toward their patients shows that therapists can be under the sway of feelings every bit as extreme as those of their clients, at times skewing how well they conduct therapy.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball American League  BALTIMORE ORIOLES -- Placed Mike Devereaux, outfielder, on the 15-day disabled list.
Recalled Damon Buford, outfielder, from Rochester of the International League.
National League


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-19  NATO PREPARES BOSNIA PLAN  Under preliminary NATO plans, peacekeeping forces would sweep into key Bosnian cities before fanning out into the Bosnian countryside to police a peace accord.
A1  Clinton renewed his pledge on the use of U.S. troops in Bosnia.
A18


Market Place; Companies that work for other companies are getting popular
WALL STREET is taking a shine to companies that take care of business for other companies.
Known as outsourcers, these specialty companies perform specific services or manufacturing tasks under long-term contracts with corporations, which once handled the tasks themselves.
The use of these companies for everything from medical care to computer software gained momentum during the recession and now is a permanent part of the landscape, since the idea is to increase the operating efficiencies of large corporations.


Man in the News; In Line for Fiscal Chief: H. Carl McCall
As president of the New York City Board of Education, H. Carl McCall could not get a majority to back him on an AIDS instruction program that stressed condom use and could not get the majority to join in trying to retain Schools Chancellor Joseph A. Fernandez.
Yet, despite being on the losing end of such high-profile votes, Mr.
McCall has generally comported himself with cunning, fairness and an eye on the navigable middle road that has drawn respect even from foes.
So it was no surprise to those who have worked with him for the last two years, and those who have known him as a state senator or as a Citibank vice president, that Mr.
McCall yesterday won an almost certain appointment as state comptroller.
The appointment would make him the first black to hold a statewide elective office in New York.


Slaying of Gay Sailor Is Admitted; Shipmate Says It Was Unplanned
In a case that has focused attention on attitudes toward homosexuals in the military, an American sailor admitted at a hearing today that he beat a gay shipmate to death in Japan last fall but offered no motive for the crime.
In his first public response to the charges, the sailor, Airman Apprentice Terry M. Helvey, sought leniency by rejecting the Navy's charge that the slaying had been planned.


Leon Solis-Cohen, 73, Lawyer in Real Estate
Leon Solis-Cohen Jr., a Philadelphia real estate lawyer, died Saturday at his home in Rydal, a suburb of Philadelphia.
He was 73.
He died of lung cancer, his family said.


After Surgery, Mansell Returns Home
NIGEL MANSELL, the Indy Car World Series points leader, was released yesterday from Morton Plant Hospital in Clearwater, Fla., six days after undergoing surgery.
Mansell required 100 stitches to close an internal cavity in his lower back.
The cavity was caused when he collided with the wall during practice on April 2 at Phoenix International Raceway.


April Purchasing Data Show Weaker Economy
A dearth of new orders seems to have brought the nation's manufacturing growth to a standstill in April, dashing hopes for a quick rebound from last quarter's slower economic growth.
The closely watched purchasing managers' index, which provides a first look at the economy's performance in the previous month, fell to 49.7, its lowest level since September, from 53.4 in March.


Wallace Remains in Hospital
RUSTY WALLACE remained hospitalized yesterday after crashing at the end of Sunday's Winston 500 in Talladega, Ala.
Wallace, the Winston Cup points leader, suffered a broken wrist and a concussion when his Pontiac was clipped by DALE EARNHARDT off the final turn, lifted off the track and barrel-rolled several times before coming to rest beyond the finish line in the infield grass.
Wallace was in stable condition at the Carraway Methodist Center in Birmingham, where he was taken by helicopter after the crash.


Coleman's Name at Top Of Nets' Casualty Report
With their best player resting a sore knee and two others sidelined by illness, the Nets couldn't even put together a full scrimmage today as they prepared for Game 3 of their opening-round playoff series against Cleveland.
Derrick Coleman, the power forward who has averaged 29 points as the Nets and Cavaliers split the first two games, sat out practice today with a sore left knee.
The Nets said it was not considered serious and that Coleman would play in Wednesday's game, at Byrne Meadowlands Arena.


Drug Emporium (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 27


Review/Theater; For the Musical, a Love Affair Beyond the Liaison in a Latin Jail
In its new incarnation as a dark Broadway musical directed by Harold Prince, "Kiss of the Spider Woman" is still about what happens when a gay window dresser and a straight Marxist guerrilla are thrown together in a Latin American jail.
That tale of an unexpected friendship has its touching moments, most of which are in the tender, fluttering hands of Brent Carver, the riveting Canadian actor who makes his New York debut as the window dresser, Molina.
But the relationship that fascinated and finally moved me most in the show at the Broadhurst is only tangential to its plot: the love affair that Mr.
Prince masterminds between Chita Rivera and the audience.
Ms.
Rivera plays the title role, a B-movie queen in a Louise Brooks bob who stars in the celluloid reruns that Molina conjures to pass the time of his incarceration.
This means that she gets to pop on stage every scene or two in musical parodies of 1940's movie schlock (music by John Kander, lyrics by Fred Ebb) and to wear costumes that include a scanty, yellow feathered jungle skirt and headdress, a czarina's silk gown and, most persistently, a horror picture's spider bodysuit befitting her status as the evening's symbolic angel of death.


Pool Energy Services (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


In French Ex-Premier's Suicide, Cries of 'J'Accuse'
Pierre Beregovoy, until a month ago Prime Minister of France, apparently left no message when he shot himself on Saturday with a borrowed gun.
Yet France has done little else these past two days but ask why.
The suicide of the 67-year-old leader has set off a deep and painful soul-searching on a scale rarely seen in this country, with politicians and newspapers asking what is wrong with a political system that drives one of its most prominent men to take his life.


Cincinnati Financial (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Canadian Foremost reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Observer; A Case Of Eerie Leakage
Does anybody else here have leaking TV cable?
Does anybody here even know that leaking TV cable is a terrible menace?
That's right: menace.
Airplanes could crash, possibly into your very own house, because your TV cable is leaking.
I was completely unaware of any of this until just yesterday when a man came to the door with a TV-cable-leakage detector.
He said eerie electronic emissions had been detected from our house, which immediately made me think of flying saucers.


Chess
A criticism that grandmasters level at their colleagues -- and, in especially candid moments, at themselves -- is the occasional lack of a sense of danger.
One is not supposed to be startled in the last moment by an opponent's attack, which can then no longer be fended off, but to sense weaknesses in one's king position and take steps early to bolster them.
Sometimes that is not enough.
David Vigorito of Massachusetts, a national master, had anticipated the chief line of attack that the Manhattan grandmaster Lev Alburt had intended to snare him with in their Round 4 encounter in the New York Open at the Ramada Hotel.
Vigorito had also prepared an ingeniously effective counterattack.
But he had not foreseen the secondary danger, and Alburt smashed through with a stunning queen sacrifice.
The game was played on April 9.


Xircom Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Accounts
*
The International Wool Secretariat, New York, to Merkley Newman Harty, New York, to develop creative work for a new Woolmark campaign in the United States.
The agency will work with sibling Omnicom agencies in Paris and Tokyo on the marketing board's account.
Billings were estimated at $10 million to $20 million.


Dance/USA Wins Award
The 42d annual Capezio Dance Award has been given to Dance/USA, a national service and lobbying organization for nonprofit professional dance.
The award was presented in a private ceremony on Wednesday at the Hyatt Regency Hotel in Washington.
This is the first time the award, a major dance honor given for achievement, has gone to an institution rather than to an individual.
It carries a cash prize of $5,000.


This Tale Of a Nanny Ends Well
THIS is a Cinderella story.
It is about a young woman from the hardscrabble heart of Appalachia who comes north to work as a nanny.
After burrowing inside herself, she finds kindred spirits and a Prince Charming and makes plans to move with him into a palace of a house.
Our heroine even goes Cinderella one better because she unearths her long lost father.
Yvonne McDowell's fairy tale needs telling now because the image of nannies has been transformed from the charm of Mary Poppins to the menace of "The Hand That Rocks the Cradle." Westchester nannies have been charged in two brutal infant deaths, with one of them acquitted and one yet to face a jury.


ILC Technology (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to April 3


A Test for Clinton in Race for Aspin's Seat Today
Bill Clinton is not on the ballot, but he is definitely in the campaign here to fill Les Aspin's seat in the United States House.
The Republican candidate is running against the President, and his Democratic opponent is running away from him in Tuesday's special election.
The rolling dairy lands and lakeside industrial towns in the southeast corner of the state is a swing district, Republican in some Presidential elections, Democratic in others.


Wisconsin Central Transportation Corp. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Penn Central Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Michigan Agency Promotes Executives
Lintas Campbell-Ewald in Warren, Mich., said yesterday that it had promoted three executives.


BROKER SUSPENDS 3 OVER BOND DEAL WITH NEW JERSEY
Merrill Lynch &amp; Company, the lead underwriter for New Jersey Turnpike Authority bonds, said today that it had suspended three senior executives involved in a $2.9 billion bond transaction that is now the subject of a Federal investigation.
Merrill Lynch said a routine audit had turned up "apparent irregularities" related to transactions conducted in 1992 with Armacon Securities, a bond consultant in Camden County.
The irregularities raised the suspicion of improper payments to Armacon to obtain more bond business.


INSIDE
Asthma Care Criticized
Shortcomings in doctors' training are partly responsible for a rising death rate from asthma, health officials say.
The Doctor's World, page C3.
New Weakness in Economy
A dearth of new orders seems to have brought manufacturing growth to a standstill in April, dashing hopes for a quick economic rebound.
Page D1.
Limits on Property Insurance
More insurers are stopping or limiting the sale of property insurance in coastal areas and other regions prone to natural disasters.
Page D1.
Feeling a Gap
For well-to-do blacks, the Los Angeles beating trials were reminders of how much has to change before they are accepted as equals.
Page A20.


Health Images Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Bid to Acquire Online Is Weighed
Paul Allen, co-founder of the Microsoft Corporation and chairman of the Asymetrix Corporation, said today that he might seek to acquire America Online Inc., a leading supplier of information services to users of personal computers.
Mr.
Allen already owns 24.9 percent of America Online, which is based in Vienna, Va., and provides services like access to newspaper articles, messaging and other services over a network that PC users can access with a telephone modem.


Salant Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to April 3


Lindal Cedar Homes (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to April 4


TakeCare Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Wendy's International Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to April 4


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article on Wednesday about the intended merger of four European airlines misstated their financial structures.
Spokesmen for the four carriers -- KLM Royal Dutch, Scandinavian Airlines System, Swissair and Austrian Airlines -- say their companies do not receive any government subsidies or support.


Dance of Genes Weaves Pattern Of Pigments in Pelts, Skin and Hair
ROGER D. CONE, a molecular biologist at Oregon Health Sciences University in Portland, has a dog named Koda, a big, grizzled, lumbering tail-thumper who is part German shepherd, part collie.
Lots of people own dogs that look like Koda, but not many are likely to know the molecular nuances of why their pets bear the coat colors they do.
And it is because his dog so perfectly embodies basic principles of mammalian pigmentation that Dr.
Cone has brought the animal into the laboratory to serve as exhibit A.
"Koda has classic agouti fur," says Dr.
Cone, pushing apart a patch of the creature's thick pelt so the individual hairs can be seen in detail.
"Black at the base, a yellow stripe in the center and black at the tip -- that's the archetypal agouti." As though in proud concurrence, Koda thwacks her tail on the floor.


Union Texas Petroleum Holdings Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Abbott Sees McGwire Here, There, Everywhere
The stare is blank, the pain painted across his face is deep.
The responses to inquiries about his performance are soft.
Life as a Yankee has not been endearing to Jim Abbott.
Not yet.
Blame it on pathetic run support, Abbott's penchant to start seasons in a frigid manner or misplaced pitches.
All three have helped spoil Abbott's initial days with the Yankees.
But Abbott does not cling to such handy excuses and regurgitate them like reliable cliches.
He blames himself.


Alberta Energy reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


CHRONICLE
VISCOUNT LINLEY, 31, the son of Princess Margaret, has become engaged to SERENA ALLEYNE STANHOPE, 23, it was announced yesterday in London, by Viscount Petersham, the prospective bride's father.
The viscount, the nephew of Queen Elizabeth II and 12th in line to the British throne, is also the son of the photographer Lord Snowdon.


Insurers Are Limiting Sales in Risky Areas
A rising number of insurance companies are stopping or limiting the sale of property insurance in coastal areas and other regions prone to natural disasters, actions that are likely to push up prices and force many consumers to turn to Government-sponsored plans for coverage.
The cuts are in response to the worst year of property losses ever for the industry, which continues to face unusually severe losses this year.


MTV to Widen Its Production
MTV, the music video channel, announced yesterday that it was forming a division to produce network television shows, as well as feature-length films and commercials.
The production company, to be called MTV Productions, represents an effort by the channel to expand its franchise at a time when its name is hot, but its ratings flat.
Nielsen survey figures indicate that MTV's audience has remained steady for the last two years.


Anna Perkins, 93, A Family Doctor In Rural New York
Dr.
Anna Perkins, a country doctor who for 65 years cared for generations of families in the foothills of the Catskills, died on Wednesday at Albany Medical Center.
She was 93 and lived in the village of Westerlo.
Dr.
Roger Drew, her personal physician, said the cause was pneumonia and congestive heart failure.


OHM Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Late Rally Produces Solid Gains for Stocks
The stock market snapped to attention on a broad front yesterday, after a morning session muffled by a weak April report from the nation's purchasing managers, data that are thought to be a harbinger of the economy.
Money swerved from the bond market to stocks in the late afternoon, when bonds became more expensive on buying attributed in part to the expectation that the economy would remain sluggish and restrain interest rates.
In generally light trading, all major stock indexes closed up solidly.


Glenayre Tech reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Allen Group Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Fernandez Takes Control of Troubled Bronx School District
Schools Chancellor Joseph A. Fernandez yesterday removed all eight members of a local South Bronx school board from office, citing widespread patronage and abuse in hiring and promotion, including the accusation that a woman paid a bribe to try to get an appointment as principal.
The action followed the arrest last Wednesday of an educator, Virginia Noville, after investigators said she was videotaped turning over thousands of dollars in cash to a member of Community District School Board 12 in hopes of getting the principal's post.


Rules on Vendors Offered
A measure to prohibit book vendors from setting up tables on some of New York's most crowded streets passed a critical hurdle yesterday, winning approval from the City Council's consumer affairs committee.
The committee also passed a measure that would create 100 new licenses for food vendors, which will be reserved for veterans.
The two measures have the support of Mayor David N. Dinkins and Peter F. Vallone, the Council Speaker, and are expected to become law.
The measure on book vendors will designate several chronically crowded areas -- including parts of 125th Street in Harlem, Fifth Avenue in midtown Manhattan and Fulton Street in Brooklyn -- as restricted areas.
Book vendors could walk there to sell material, but could not set up display tables.


Kodak Fills Vacancy; Board Backs Chairman
The Eastman Kodak Company named a longtime executive as its temporary chief financial officer yesterday, and the outside directors issued a statement expressing limited support for the embattled chairman, Kay R. Whitmore.
Mr.
Whitmore said he had already begun interviewing candidates to replace Christopher J. Steffen, whose resignation last week as chief financial officer touched off a furor among investors and sent the price of Kodak shares tumbling.


Rise in Asthma Deaths Is Tied to Ignorance Of Many Physicians
THE death rate from asthma has more than doubled since 1978 in the United States.
And worried officials of the National Institutes of Health attribute the trend in part to the lack of education and training of the primary-care doctors who treat the overwhelming majority of asthmatics.
Dr.
Michael A. Kaliner, chief of the allergy section at the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, did not mince words in criticizing the medical care that most asthmatics receive and the lack of understanding by many doctors about new treatments for the disease.


Minnesota Mining &amp; Manufacturing reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Lincoln National Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


CHRONICLE
BOB DOLE, the Senate minority leader, stepped onto the elevator in the Metropolitan Club in Manhattan on Monday evening, headed for a Bond Club of New York dinner, where he was to give a speech.
There, he encountered MATTHEW RICH, who evidently knows how to seize an opportunity.
He was the publicist for the "Stars in Our Crown" dinner given that evening at the club by Victoria magazine.
Mr.
Rich was on his way to the V.I.P. cocktail party preceding the magazine dinner.
"I think you are to follow us," he said to the Senator, "and you might enjoy meeting our guests of honor."


Review/Television; Opinions on Pornography: Pro, Con and a Bit of Each
To say that "Patently Offensive: Porn Under Siege" is even-handed is a gross understatement.
This program has more hands than a sexy Indian deity and distributes pronouncements, from First Amendment absolutism to calls for censorship, like alms.
The arguments find academics cheek to cheek with flesh peddlers and religious rightists in bed with radical feminists.
Unfortunately, although many views are advanced, few are joined.
The hour is a grab bag of opinions, adorned by pictures of a sort that do not usually show up on the tube until after midnight, and almost never on public stations.
And it is stitched together by a machine-made narration: "Perhaps the most controversial genre of pornography is that group of representations known as sadomasochistic. Complex in its implications, sadomasochistic imagery. . . ." The juxtaposition of textbook lingo and randy pictures could make a "Saturday Night Live" routine.


Kinder-Care Learning Centers Inc.(NSC) reports earnings for Qtr to April 2


CHRONICLE
JEROME ROBBINS was named a chevalier of the French Legion of Honor yesterday in ceremonies at the French Embassy on Fifth Avenue.
The award was presented to the choreographer by Jacques Andreani, France's Ambassador to the United States, for the work he has done with the Paris Opera Ballet and for his lifetime achievements.


Pride Petroleum Services (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Cable Stocks Jump After F.C.C. Defines New Rules
Cable television analysts said yesterday that the Federal Communications Commission's new regulations on cable rates were not as onerous as many in the industry had feared, and stock prices for cable companies climbed sharply.
But cable industry executives cautioned that the impact of the rules, which fill almost 500 pages, was still unclear.
Some even expressed surprise at the stock market's reaction.


Senator Who Saw War Up Close Doesn't Want to See Another
Senator John S. McCain of Arizona is a conservative Republican and a war hero, a medal-spangled Navy pilot in Vietnam, the son and grandson of admirals in a family whose fighting lineage extends to George Washington's Continental Army.
If politicians were thoroughbreds and bloodlines dictated performance, Mr.
McCain might be the Secretariat of Senate militarists.
But anyone who wagered that Mr.
McCain would favor United States intervention in Bosnia's war would lose his shirt.
As President Clinton and lawmakers ponder the prospect of air strikes to counter Serbian aggression or the despatch of thousands of American troops to enforce a cease-fire, Mr.
McCain has been sounding the Senate's most persistent and most urgent alarms on the question of involvement in a European war.
Far Too Many Ifs
"We need to be honest about one central fact: We have no way to predict the size, length and casualties of a peacemaking effort," he told the Senate on April 21.


Corrections
An article in Business Day on Thursday about the nomination of Arthur Levitt Jr. to be chairman of the Securities and Exchange Commission misidentified one of the S.E.C. commissioners.
She is Mary Schapiro.


Dell Names Executive to Its New No. 2 Post
The Dell Computer Corporation named Joel J. Kocher president of worldwide sales, marketing and service operations today, creating a second-in-command to the 27-year-old chairman and chief executive, Michael S. Dell.
The filling of the new position ended a competition and prompted the president of the Dell International unit, Andrew R. Harris, 37, to resign.
Mr.
Kocher (pronounced KOE-her), 36, was president of Dell USA.


Report Links Time Spent in Jail to Risk of Tuberculosis Infection
A new study that traced tuberculosis cases in New York City jails has found a strong link between the length of time an inmate is jailed and the risk of TB infection.
The authors of the study, which appears in this week's Journal of the American Medical Association, said that their research confirmed for the first time the widely held suspicion that the city's jails are routinely contributing to the city's tuberculosis epidemic by spreading the germ that causes the disease.


Arkla Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Integrated Waste ServicesInc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


After Moral Debate, Voters Shape Schools' Future; Issues Like Sex Education Obscure Concerns Over Poor Test Scores and Crowding
After the most fiercely disputed campaign in memory, New Yorkers turned the city's community school board elections yesterday into a referendum on sex, lies and ideology.
Some voters expressed fears that the schools taught too much about sex, too quickly.
Others warned that without a housecleaning, more lies and corruption like the bribery scandal that erupted last week in District 12 in the Bronx would further weaken the system.
And others anguished about a takeover by what they described as extremists.


Baby Sitter Charged With Shaking Baby to Death
A Queens woman was charged yesterday with killing the 8-month-old boy she cared for by shaking him violently and then throwing him onto a couch, the Queens District Attorney's office announced.
The woman, Nancy Chang, 38, of 89-48 70th Road in Forest Hills, was indicted on charges of manslaughter, criminally negligent homicide and endangering the welfare of a child.
She faces up to 25 years in prison if convicted.


A New Designer At Anne Klein
THERE is no more dramatic sign of the changing point of view of American sportswear than Richard Tyler's being named yesterday to replace Louis Dell'Olio as the designer at Anne Klein &amp; Company.
While both are the same age -- 44 -- Mr.
Tyler is a West Coast designer, tanned and with wavy rock-star hair, and has developed a young Hollywood clientele.
Mr.
Dell'Olio is a child of Seventh Avenue, beginning his career at 24 at Anne Klein, working alongside Donna Karan until she left to start her own house.
Frank Mori, the president of Takihyo Ltd., which owns Anne Klein and half of the Donna Karan Company, and Tomio Taki, the chairman, went to great pains to emphasize that Mr.
Dell'Olio's decision to leave was his own and that they would even consider financing him in his own venture if he can get primary investors.
But they don't try to hide their enthusiasm for Mr.
Tyler either.


LACROSSE
Tournaments
A dozen teams will be selected Sunday for the National Collegiate Athletic Association's Division I tournament by a committee of seven whose chief is Willie Scroggs, the retired North Carolina coach.
The weekly rankings by the Intercollegiate Lacrosse Association give clues as to the selections, and in Division I there are three key games remaining that can affect the important matter of byes.
One is today, No. 5 Brown at No. 8 Massachusetts.


First State Financial reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


A TOP SPY'S TRIAL OPENS IN GERMANY
A German court opened the trial of the chief of Communist East Germany's spy service today on charges of treason and espionage against the country that absorbed his own in 1990.
In a statement calling his trial part of "the last campaign of the cold war," the defendant, Markus Wolf, did not dispute that he had run espionage operations against West Germany in the 33 years he ran the East German intelligence service.
But he repeated his argument that he was a loyal East German and that his activities did not constitute treason against a country that had been East Germany's adversary.


Reconstruction of Eastern Parkway a Longish Job: Six Years


JSB Financial (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Public &amp; Private; The Rescuers
When the word went out among the good people of occupied Copenhagen that the Germans were preparing to round up their Jewish neighbors, Jorgen Kieler was a 23-year-old medical student working with the resistance.
In the space of two days, he and his friends helped organize 13 fishing boats, "our little fleet," that carried more than 800 Jews to Sweden and safety.
Jorgen Kieler went on to have his skull fractured during an interrogation, to spend time in two concentration camps and eventually to become director of the Danish Cancer Research Institute.
Last night the Jewish Foundation for Christian Rescuers honored him, his sister and the other Danes who saw to it that all but a few hundred Jews escaped the Germans.
"It could not," said Dr.
Kieler, "have been otherwise."


BankUnited Financial Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Benefits of Federal Spending on Infrastructure; 'Borrow-and-Spend'
To the Editor:
As Bob Dole repeatedly called upon President Clinton to come up with the money beforehand to pay for his (very modest) $16 billion jobs-stimulus package (later compromisingly reduced to $12 billion), one could only wonder where Senator Dole was for the past 12 years, while three successive Republican Administrations requested funds to run up our national debt to 200 times that mere $16 billion figure -- yes, by roughly $3,200 billion -- to the more than $4 trillion where it now stands.


Marathoner Seeks Arbitration To Overturn Drug Suspension
A marathon runner from New York City has demanded an arbitration hearing in an effort to overturn a four-year ban she received for using a drug she says was treatment for Lyme disease.
Gordon Bloch, who placed sixth over all and was the best American female finisher at the New York City Marathon on Nov. 1, 1992, has asked the American Arbitration Association to set a hearing, which could allow her to compete in the world championships in Stuttgart, Germany, in August.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
The Government's main economic forecasting gauge plunged 1 percent in March, the biggest drop since the middle of the 1990-91 recession.
But economists said the data did not constitute a trend, and that there were signs of a resurgence in April.  [ Page D1. ]
Sales of domestic vehicles surged in April, as automotive demand rose for the third consecutive month.  [ D5. ]


First Federal S&amp;L -East Hartford reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Prompt Military Reprisal Unlikely If Serbs Shun Pact, U.S. Aides Say
Even if the self-designated Bosnian Serb parliament rejects an international peace plan when it meets on Wednesday, there will be no immediate American military intervention in the Balkans, senior United States officials said today.
The officials said the Clinton Administration expected the parliament to approve the peace plan, negotiated by Cyrus R. Vance and Lord Owen, which it rejected only 10 days ago.
One of them said the White House thought the odds were 2 to 1 in favor of approval, but the Administration is far less sure that the fighting between Serbs and Muslims will actually stop as a result.


Nerco Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


The Term 'Ethnic Cleansing' Obscures Reality
To the Editor:
How ought we deal with the term "ethnic cleansing"?
The headline on your April 21 news article said: "Vicious 'Ethnic Cleansing' Infects Croat-Muslim Villages in Bosnia." The quotation marks around "ethnic cleansing" help prevent the term's being accepted as a description of normal, if regrettable, practice.
I congratulate you on such care, but warn against repeated use of the term.


Centerbank (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


U.S. Inquiry Into a New Jersey Bond Deal Highlights a Business Dominated by Politics
A Federal investigation that began with a huge bond issue by the New Jersey Turnpike Authority has cast a harsh light on a business often shot through with political favoritism.
Government officials and Wall Street financiers concede that political alliances and campaign donations often influence the awarding of hundreds of billions of dollars in bond underwriting assignments that last year were worth about $2 billion in fees for the financial community.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  American League
DETROIT TIGERS -- Purchased the contract of Dave Johnson, pitcher, from Toledo of the International League.
Designated Mike Munoz, pitcher, for assignment.


Classical Music in Review
Chamber Music Society of Lincoln Center  Alice Tully Hall
The Chamber Music Society of Lincoln Center offered its concert last Wednesday evening as a tribute to Kitty Carlisle Hart, who was honored both for her career as a singer and for her efforts as chairwoman of the New York State Council on the Arts.
As a performer, Mrs.
Hart moved easily between high art and populism: she studied with Grace Moore and sang at the Met, but was also the ingenue in the Marx Brothers' film "A Night at the Opera." The society did not hit those extremes in putting together its concert for her, but it did offer an unusually dignified combination of populism and abstraction.


Review/Theater: Angels in America; Millennium Approaches; Embracing All Possibilities in Art and Life
"History is about to crack open," says Ethel Rosenberg, back from the dead, as she confronts a cadaverous Roy Cohn, soon to die of AIDS, in his East Side town house.
"Something's going to give," says a Brooklyn housewife so addicted to Valium she thinks she is in Antarctica.
The year is 1985.
It is 15 years until the next millennium.
And a young man drenched in death fevers in his Greenwich Village bedroom hears a persistent throbbing, a thunderous heartbeat, as if the heavens were about to give birth to a miracle so that he might be born again.
This is the astonishing theatrical landscape, intimate and epic, of Tony Kushner's "Angels in America," which made its much-awaited Broadway debut at the Walter Kerr Theater last night.
This play has already been talked about so much that you may feel you have already seen it, but believe me, you haven't, even if you actually have.
The new New York production is the third I've seen of "Millennium Approaches," as the first, self-contained, three-and-a-half- hour part of "Angels in America" is titled. (Part 2, "Perestroika," is to join it in repertory in the fall.) As directed with crystalline lucidity by George C. Wolfe and ignited by blood-churning performances by Ron Leibman and Stephen Spinella, this staging only adds to the impression that Mr.
Kushner has written the most thrilling American play in years.


Mediq Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Jefferson Bank reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


EAB reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Slow but Sure on National Service
President Clinton promised voters "a domestic G.I. Bill that will pledge college assistance to any student who wants it." But the national service plan he recently announced falls short of that lofty goal.
Only a handful of students will participate, and they will receive a fraction of what it takes to attend private colleges.
Some are urging the President to move faster.
But in the current political vortex faster is probably wrong.
Mr.
Clinton is already trying to ram three major bills -- the budget, health care reform and the Mexican trade pact -- through Congress this summer.
Moreover, Congress needs his strong leadership to strengthen and pass the campaign finance legislation expected to be unveiled later this week.
To add an ambitious national service plan to the Congressional agenda risks overload -- and gridlock.


US Facilities Corp. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


The Term 'Ethnic Cleansing' Obscures Reality
To the Editor:
Today you dropped the scare-quotes from the euphemism "ethnic cleansing" (news article, April 22), indicating that you accept it as a legitimate term for that which it is meant to evade, that is genocide.
It is disheartening that Orwell's insights into this kind of acquiescence remain, 47 years after he wrote them down, largely ignored.
I refer to his "Politics and the English Language," in particular the following passages:


Regulator Says Connecticut's Largest Power Company Harassed Worker
Northeast Utilities, Connecticut's largest power company, persecuted one of its engineers because he called a safety problem at a nuclear reactor to the company's attention, the Nuclear Regulatory Commission said yesterday.
Moreover, it said, Northeast delayed reporting the problem even though it could have affected the safety of other reactors around the country.


Sports of The Times; Dale Hunter Could Have Missed Year
IF it had been up to me, Dale Hunter would be up in Ontario right now, winterizing his cabin for his year's sabbatical from hockey.
How do I know he's got a cabin up in Ontario?
He must.
All hockey players have cabins in Ontario.
It's where they go when the season ends.
Hunter's 1993-94 season would have ended yesterday if I were commissioner, but I guess that's why they chose Gary Bettman.
They wanted somebody who would be tough and contemporary and rational all at the same time.


Lucygate
They loved Lucy.
In fact, administrators in the Bronx school district where Lucy Cruz was a powerful school board member loved her so much that they tended her flower garden and checked the electricity at her Bronx and Westchester homes.
That, of course, was Lucy's story.
But love had nothing to do with the personal favors she received.
As a report by the Board of Education's special investigator, Edward Stancik, shows in painful detail, Ms.
Cruz and her colleagues used the District 12 board as a patronage operation, doling out school jobs in exchange for favors.
To heck with education.


Green Mountain Power reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Borg-Warner Security Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Galveston-Houston reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


T HQ Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Columbia First Bank reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Carlesimo to Coach Team USA
P.
J.
CARLESIMO, the Seton Hall basketball coach, will be named today as head of a new program, Team USA, under the USA Basketball umbrella.
Carlesimo will coach 12 elite college players, who will tour Europe and face several national teams.
Carlesimo was the assistant to CHUCK DALY for the United States team at the Olympics in Barcelona, Spain, and coached the American team at the World University Games two seasons ago.


A.T. &amp; T. Sues, Saying Blue Cross Inflated Hospital Bills, Pocketing Money
American Telephone and Telegraph has accused Empire Blue Cross and Blue Shield of defrauding A.T.&amp; T.'s medical benefits plan for nearly a decade by sending the company inflated hospital bills and pocketing the difference.
The charges were made in a lawsuit in Federal District Court in Newark, which A.T.&amp; T. filed after Empire repeatedly blocked attempts by A.T.&amp; T. auditors to examine Empire's records.
The lawsuit also names six other Blue Cross organizations for which Empire handled billings.


Marbella Journal; From Beachhead, Combative Mayor Eyes Madrid
Along a sunny Mediterranean coastline crowded with resorts catering to beer-swilling tourists and sherry-sipping retirees from northern Europe, Marbella long managed to remain exclusive, a place where the rich or famous could gather to meet other rich or famous.
But by the late 1980's the town, west of Malaga in southeast Spain, was losing its appeal.
It was dirty, drug addicts begged on its streets, crime was on the rise and the local town council, paralyzed by infighting, did nothing.
Soon, "For Sale" signs began to appear outside luxury villas.
Even worse, there were no takers.


Timetable Outlined for Trade Pact
The nation's top trade official said today that the Administration hoped to complete a tentative agreement on reducing tariffs and eliminating quotas by early July.
The ambitious goal reflects a quietly growing enthusiasm among Administration officials for a global trade pact but could complicate efforts to push the North American Free Trade Agreement through Congress.
Mickey Kantor, the United States trade representative, said he hoped to strike the deal on access to foreign markets before President Clinton goes to Tokyo in early July for a meeting of the heads of state from the Group of Seven leading industrialized nations.
Such a compromise would clear away the biggest remaining obstacle to the completion of the global free-trade talks to broaden the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade.


Florio Bans Sale of Bonds Without Bids
Gov.
Jim Florio today signed an executive order requiring all state agencies and authorities to accept competitive bids on bond underwriting and any other professional services.
Mr.
Florio's actions outlawed a long-tolerated and long-criticized practice in New Jersey politics, the awarding of contracts to bond underwriters, financial advisers, bond counsels, engineers and architects and the leasing of state office space without taking public bids.


Snapple Beverage Corp.  (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


First Liberty Financial reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Food Notes
Cookbook Awards
On Monday, the James Beard Foundation announced its awards for cookbooks published in 1992.
These awards were given about two weeks after the International Association of Culinary Professionals gave its prizes, and this year the two groups agreed on the cookbook of the year: "The Splendid Table: Recipes From Emilia-Romagna," by Lynne Rosetto Kasper (William Morrow, $30).
The Beard foundation honored three other books also selected in the same categories by the culinary association:


Why Do So Many Women Have Breasts Removed Needlessly?
WHEN Betsy Lambert, a New York lawyer, was told she had breast cancer two years ago, her surgeon advised her to have a lumpectomy, removing only the tumor from her breast, followed by six weeks of radiation treatment.
But Ms.
Lambert, terrified by the disease, sought two more opinions, one from another surgeon and another from a radiologist.
Both urged her to have a mastectomy, removing the entire breast.


Spaghetti Warehouse Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to April 4


First Banks Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Democrat Wins Aspin's Seat
A Democratic state legislator won an election yesterday to fill the Wisconsin Congressional seat vacated by Defense Secretary Les Aspin.
With 99 percent of precincts reporting, the Democrat, State Representative Peter Barca, had 50 percent of the votes, and the Republican, Mark Neumann had 49 percent.
Three other candidates were far behind.


Economic Indicators Fall 1%, Casting Doubt on Recovery
The Government said yesterday that its main economic forecasting gauge plunged 1 percent in March, the biggest drop since the middle of the 1990-91 recession.
It was the latest report to raise questions about the strength and durability of the economic expansion.
President Clinton used the portent of possible future weakness that was suggested by the index of leading indicators to urge Congress to adopt his budget plan without delay.
The Senate Republican leader, Bob Dole of Kansas, labeled the report "a wake-up call for the White House to drop its tax-and-spend campaign."


Cable TV Group Names 3 Finalists
The National Cable Television Association said yesterday that it had narrowed the review on its $5 million account to three agencies from seven.
The account was handled by Bozell New York for the last two years.


Vornado Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Union Bancshares Ltd. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Wine Talk
REPEAT after me: chenin blanc, colombard and chasselas; seyval blanc, scheurebe and semillon; muscat, marsanne and Muller-Thurgau.
The next time someone says chardonnay is boring but there isn't much else around, recite this list.
Each of the names on it represents a white wine available in this country.


Lone Star Industries reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Investigators Puzzle Over Last Moments of a Cult
From the ashes of the Branch Davidian compound, investigators say they have found mounting evidence that as many as two dozen cult members, including the leader, David Koresh, were shot as fire began to consume the compound on April 19.
But among the many mysteries lingering from the tragedy, these investigators say, is whether the shootings were part of a planned mass suicide or whether people began shooting themselves -- or were shot by fellow members -- to escape the pain and horror of death by fire.


Duff &amp; Phelps reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Seacoast Banking (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Where the Humble Pickle Finally Earns a Place of Honor
IT was a good week for pickles.
Not only did a pickle star in a new movie, but for the first time ever, the people who make pickles held a formal pickle tasting.
The movie, "The Pickle," went for laughs but the tasting was as serious as it would be for a rare Bordeaux.
But one whiff of the second floor of the Union League Club in Manhattan, where the tasting was held, and there was no mistaking this for a wine tasting.
The aroma suggested a pickle barrel on Essex Street, not a distinguished business club.


MBIA Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Classical Music in Review
Elizabeth Rich  Pianist Alice Tully Hall
The piano fantasy, a notated flight of fancy perfected by German Romantics of the 19th century, formed the basis for Elizabeth Rich's recital on Thursday night.
Running the gamut from Haydn's Fantasy in C to Brahms's Opus 116 Fantasies, the program demonstrated the imaginative vitality and also the technical discipline of the form.
Ms.
Rich favors a highly emotive approach, somewhat mannered at times.
Her habit of rolling chords proved periodically distracting.
The Brahms Fantasies suffered from an excess of rubato and an occasional lack of rhythmic clarity.
While her technique was not effortless, she articulated the subtlest of dynamic shadings and showed an uncanny ability to elucidate harmonic movement.


Mortgage &amp; Realty Trust reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


COMPANY NEWS
CADBURY SCHWEPPES P.L.C., London, said that Coca-Cola and Schweppes Beverages Ltd. had signed an agreement with the Perrier U.K. unit of Nestle S.A. for the exclusive distribution rights for Perrier products in Britain.
NEW PLAN REALTY TRUST, New York, said it had purchased two shopping centers, one in Kentucky and another in Indiana, for $18 million in cash.


Mattingly And Maas Have Blast With A's
So what if it happened against Shawn Hillegas.
So what if the Yankees flexed some muscles against an enigmatic pitcher who was abominable as their teammate for three months last season.
There are certain games on the schedule that scream out to be snatched quickly and recorded as victories and this was one of them.
The Yankees did not disappoint and seized the moment.
There was Bob Wickman eschewing a long-sleeve shirt on the chilly night and easily subduing the Athletics on one run and three singles.
There was Don Mattingly hitting his first home run of the season as he sneaked one into the right-field seats.
There was Kevin Maas poking a three-run blast to nearly the indentical spot to bury the A's and catapult the Yankees to a 4-2 victory last night at Yankee Stadium.


Horizon Financial reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


CB Bancshares Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


DIVORCE LAWYERS ASSAILED IN STUDY BY ALBANY PANEL
A committee appointed by New York State's highest court issued a report today that sharply criticized divorce lawyers, asserting that some of them rely on pressure tactics to secure fees, overbill their clients and keep them uninformed about their cases.
Most of the divorce lawyers singled out in the report represented female clients, who had contended that they had been taken advantage of in an emotionally wrenching time in their lives.
The women said that in some instances their lawyers even pressured them to give up their assets, often their houses, to pay their legal fees.


Eritrea, an Inspiration for Other Peoples
To the Editor:
In your editorial of April 28, "Eritrea's Harder Test Is Peace," you presented a challenge for Eritrea to establish a "generous peace with Ethiopia." This is truly an important test for Eritrea.
However, it is an equally important challenge for Ethiopia to make peace with Eritrea.


Cathay Bancorp Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Authentic Fitness Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to April 3


Forest Laboratories reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


BCE Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Esco Electronics Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Classical Music in Review
Leonard Slatkin  Conductor Avery Fisher Hall
On consecutive evenings Leonard Slatkin brought appropriate music to two very different ensembles.
Last Wednesday he conducted the Juilliard Orchestra, harnessing some excellent individual skills and an almost frightening level of energy.
With Stephen Gosling to race and bang his way through the solo part, a student group enjoyed itself thoroughly with John Corigliano's Piano Concerto, an excercise in gaudy virtuosity that goes to any length to keep the listener's attention.
In "Le Sacre du Printemps," Mr.
Slatkin's precise gestures led young players through a Stravinskian maze of metric change, and with this kind of support, personal ambition and joyous extroversion leapt from the wind and brass sections.
The result turned "Le Sacre" into an interesting anatomical study: seldom will one hear individual detail so clearly rendered or overall blend so subverted.


Gateway Federal reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


A Bowe Cramp Is Disclosed
Riddick Bowe, who will defend his heavyweight crown May 22 against Jesse Ferguson, suffered a cramp while training last Thursday when "he threw a punch from a funny angle," his manager, Rock Newman, said last night.
The cramp had an effect on Bowe's breathing, Newman said, but the manager added that Bowe was back in training.


Electronics Replacing Coaches' Clipboards
A sports quiz:
Three teams -- the New York Knicks, the Chicago Bulls and the Los Angeles Lakers -- got off to the best start in the professional basketball playoffs that began last week, each winning its first two games.
What else do these teams have in common?
Sheer coincidence, probably, but they are known as three of the most ardent users of computers in the National Basketball Association.
In the last two years, pro basketball has become a test bed for mobile computing, and the Knicks, Bulls and Lakers have enthusiastically embraced the technology.


BRITISH PRESSING IRAQI ARMS INQUIRY
A judge today stepped up the investigation into Britain's sales of arms-making equipment to Iraq in the years before the Persian Gulf war, opening public hearings to determine if officials knowingly violated their own ban on military exports to President Saddam Hussein.
Lord Justice Scott, a High Court judge who was appointed by Prime Minister John Major in November to conduct a wide-ranging inquiry into the sales, is expected to hear testimony in coming months from Mr.
Major and his predecessor, Margaret Thatcher, who led the Government for more than 11 years until late 1990.


Books of The Times; Of Holocaust Survivors and Palestine
The Seventh Million The Israelis and the Holocaust By Tom Segev Illustrated.
Translated by Haim Watzman. 593 pages.
Hill &amp; Wang. $27.50.


A Brighter Night for Contemporary Art
Yes, collectors, there is a contemporary-art market.
Few would have thought so after Monday night's sale at Sotheby's, but at Christie's last night, quality works sold, and sold relatively well, considering that the market is still trying to inch its way out of a two-year slump.
Of the 60 works up for sale, 38 found buyers, for a sale total of $10.6 million.
While the sum was less than the auction house's estimate of $13.3 million to $17.8 million, nobody at the Christie's was complaining.
After Sotheby's sale on Monday night made only $8.8 million, less than half its estimate of $18.4 million to $24.7 million, experts at Christie's were quietly relieved.


Security National Financial Corp. reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Corrections
A news analysis article in Business Day on Thursday about the recent rise in gold prices misstated the total Russian gold production in 1992 and the drop in production in the first quarter of this year.
The Russian Government said that its mines produced 129.5 metric tons of gold in 1992 and that production fell by 6 metric tons in the first quarter of 1993.


Corrections
A brief report in the Company News column of Business Day on Saturday about layoffs at the Philips Lighting Company referred incorrectly to the work to be moved to Monterrey, Mexico.
Two production lines will be moved.


United States Banknote Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Allen-Farrow Trial Ends in New Round of Old Charges
It was, from start to finish, a trial of extraordinary acrimony, a bitter confrontation between two famous New Yorkers for all the world to witness.
From testimony about a couple's conversations with psychotherapists, to a daughter's watching secretly as her sister made love, it exposed details, both trivial and painfully intimate, of the lives of a famous and troubled family.
And when it drew to a close yesterday in a Manhattan courtroom after more than a month of dramatic, sometimes theatrical testimony, the Woody Allen-Mia Farrow custody trial ended much as it began: With angry charges and counter-charges.


A Vote Perhaps as Much on Moral as Educational Issues


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt  *
BellSouth Telecommunications Inc., a unit of BellSouth Corp., is offering $450 million of 6 1/4 percent debentures due in 2003 at 99.57 to yield 6.31 percent through Morgan Stanley &amp; Co.
The noncallable debentures are rated triple-A by Moody's, Standard &amp; Poor's and Duff &amp; Phelps.


Talley Industries reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Dinkins Budget Pleases Many Arts Institutions
While holding out the possibility of cutbacks in a number of city services, the budget announced on Monday by Mayor David N. Dinkins brought cheer to the Department of Cultural Affairs and many arts institutions.
The Mayor's proposed $31.4 billion budget, which is subject to City Council approval, adds $3.6 million to the Cultural Affairs expense budget (increasing it to $85.3 million for fiscal year 1994), and provides $6.3 million to match a grant from the State Legislature to rescue the financially troubled New-York Historical Society.


Corrections Corp. of America (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


ARX Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Bonilla Leaves Mets Stranded in L.A.
The dire details were multiple.
There was a start by Frank Tanana that ended prematurely.
There was another bullpen meltdown.
When it was over, when the Mets had made their way to the clubhouse, owners of the second worst-record in the National League, there was one image that burned relentlessly: Bobby Bonilla at the plate, his big swing complete, his dividends in the clutch zero.


CHRONICLE
It was an evening of bittersweet memories as members of the theater community gathered this week in Washington for an annual rite: the presentation of the Helen Hayes Awards, given Monday for the first time since Miss Hayes's death in March at age 92.
Her absence was felt throughout the evening at the Warner Theater, beginning with the opening tribute, a series of photographs of her on a 400-square-foot screen as a pianist played "They Can't Take That Away From Me."
"She felt these awards presented in her name were in many ways her living legacy," her son, JAMES MacARTHUR, said.


Rodman &amp; Renshaw Capital Group Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 26


Sterling West reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Pittway Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


After Starks Goes Goodbye, It's Hello to Game 4
A foolish flagrant foul by John Starks deflated the Knicks, inspired the Indiana Pacers, and sent New York reeling to a costly defeat.
Baited by the trash-talking of Reggie Miller, Starks head-butted the Pacers' shooting guard and was ejected with 8 minutes 42 seconds left in the third quarter of tonight's playoff game.
The head-butting was a senseless loss of composure by Starks that triggered a 30-11 Indiana run and in turn buried the Knicks, turning what could have been a series-clinching victory into a 116-93 defeat at Market Square Arena.


Starrett (L.S.) (N) reports earnings for Qtr to March 27


Summit Bancshares-Texas reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Review/Television; Beatles' Songs Sung by Anyone But
Over the last 30 years, Beatles songs have been symphonized, jazzed up, recited, bluegrassed, funkified, Muzaked, punk-rocked, sung along with and blasted into heavy metal.
"A Beatles Songbook," to be broadcast at 9 tonight on WNET (and at 8 P.M. on many other PBS stations), goes a step further, with a rendition of "Yesterday" on musical saw by one Prof.
Hokum W. Jeebs.
"Yesterday" is part of a hodgepodge of Beatles songs recorded in concert at the Kentucky Center for the Arts by a seemingly random assortment of performers: Los Lobos, Buddy Guy, Dr.
John, Kathy Mattea, Nils Lofgren, the Bobs and the I.S.O.  dance-theater troupe.
If there's a point beyond catering to baby-boomer nostalgia, it seems to be that the English band's songs have become roots-rock for Americans.
The finale, "Let It Be," winds up in self-congratulatory sing-along.


Book Notes
Clinton on Robert Kennedy
President Clinton has written a foreword for a new book on Robert F. Kennedy.
"Robert Kennedy: The Last Campaign," with photographs by Bill Eppridge and text by Hays Gorey, is to be published on June 4 by Harcourt Brace &amp; Company to coincide with the 25th anniversary of Kennedy's death.
The foreword was a last-minute addition to the book, and several people familiar with the project said Mr.
Clinton had agreed to write his essay only on condition that the publisher not try to capitalize on his involvement by using his name in advertisements and promotions.


Anderson Exploration Ltd. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Buffalo's Four-Term Mayor Says He Won't Run for Re-election
Hours after renewing wedding vows with his wife on their 25th anniversary, Mayor James D. Griffin surprised this city today with a somewhat cryptic announcement that he would not seek re-election to the office he has held for the last 16 years.
Mr.
Griffin, 63, a conservative Democrat, said he had made his decision in consultation with his family.


One-Dish Menu For Busy Cooks
COOKS sometimes look over one-dish menus, like this one for soft-shell crabs and salsa, and say, "Too many ingredients." But combining the crab and salsa recipes into one, admittedly with 12 ingredients, produces a complete meal -- and one that is easy for both parts to be ready at the same time.
And ease is the name of the game.
Cooking a meal as quickly as possible, with as little fuss as possible, is what everyone wants after working all day.
It explains why so many people prefer to pick up something frozen or something already prepared for dinner.
But those who want something better, along with control over what is put in their food, are willing to spend a small amount of time doing it from scratch.


First AmFed Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


American Pacific Corp.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Dr. Leo Srole, Director of Surveys On Urbanites' Mental Health, 84
Leo Srole, a sociologist who directed landmark studies on the mental health of urban Americans, died on Saturday at his home in Queens.
He was 84.
The cause was a heart attack, his family said.


In Addition to Buying Space in Established Magazines, Some Marketers Become Publishers
ALTHOUGH brand names may be losing in the supermarket, they're gaining on the coffee table.
A growing number of marketing giants are doubling as publishers, distributing glossy magazines virtually indistinguishable from titles produced by established media companies.
The magazines, which supplement conventional advertising in mainstream publications, create friendly environments for marketers to enhance their brand and corporate images.


American Medical Response Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Hyde Athletic reports earnings for Qtr to April 2


Reno Moving to Reverse Stiff Sentencing Rule for Minor Drug Crimes
Emboldened by support from a growing number of Federal judges, Attorney General Janet Reno has begun to take the first steps toward reversing the policy of meting out tough criminal sentences for minor drug offenses.
In recent days, she has told some groups that she will soon order a review of the Federal sentencing guidelines with an eye toward eliminating the long mandatory sentences for low-level drug crimes, like possession of small amounts of narcotics.
She is expected to discuss the review on Friday at a conference on national drug strategy attended by officials from the Reagan, Bush and Clinton Administrations.


Sigma-Aldrich Corp. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


First Merchants Corp.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Value Merchants Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 30


William Parker Memorial
A memorial service for the baritone William Parker is to be held on Saturday at 3 P.M. at the Church of the Ascension, Fifth Avenue at 10th Street.
Mr.
Parker, a leading interpreter of art songs and new American music, died on March 29 at the age of 49.


Republicans Balk on Plea From Dinkins
Mayor David N. Dinkins, lobbying here for more state aid to balance his budget, found that he first had to placate Republicans angered at his apparent suggestion that help for New York City be linked to help for Long Island.
Mr.
Dinkins was here today seeking the $280 million in new aid from the state that he is counting on in the $31.4 billion budget he proposed Monday.
Governor Mario M. Cuomo and legislative Democrats, who control the Assembly, were sympathetic in general to Mr.
Dinkins's requests if noncommittal on details.


European Gypsies Issue Call For Human Rights at Meeting
At a time of ethnic warfare in the Balkans and of growing ethnic tensions elsewhere in Europe, the continent's most widely dispersed minority, the Gypsies, have begun to seek international recognition and protection.
For the majority of Europe's estimated eight million Gypsies, who live at a bare subsistence level, the highest priorities are enough food for the day and shelter from the elements.


Citizens National Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Lawsuit Is Filed by Shot-Putter
An athlete filed a lawsuit seeking more than $15 million in damages from defendants that include U.C.L.A. and its track and field coach.
BRENT NOON, a shot-putter, charged in the lawsuit, filed in San Diego Superior Court last month, that Coach ART VENEGAS spread false rumors that Noon used steroids.


New Hint of Trouble In the U.S. Economy
The Government's main economic forecasting gauge plunged 1 percent in March, the biggest drop since the middle of the 1990-91 recession.
It was the latest report to raise questions about the strength and durability of the economic expansion.


Dundee Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Beyond the Jug Factor
In a famous cartoon, a pie-eyed hobo clenching a glass tells another, "It's a good wine -- but not a great wine."
That critique describes the best red and white premium wines overseen by Julio Gallo, who died Sunday, and his brother Ernest.
The cautious cognoscenti thus love to hate E. &amp; J. Gallo's jug and varietal wines in public -- and drink them in private.


Dow Dips Slightly on Economic Concerns
The stock market floundered yesterday, thrown off an already uncertain course by more bad news on the economy.
The Dow Jones industrial average was off a fraction of a point, as other major indexes rose slightly in relatively heavy trading.
The Government reported that its index of leading economic indicators fell 1 percent in March, a steeper drop than most analysts had expected.


Institutes of Health Close Fraud Investigation Unit
The National Institutes of Health this week will officially shut the offices and seize the files of two of the nation's most prominent investigators of scientific fraud, saying they went beyond the purview of one of its institutes.
The pair, Dr.
Walter Stewart and Dr.
Ned Feder, will be assigned to other jobs at the National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases, where they had carved out unusual roles as self-styled investigators of fraud in the last decade.


Mass Today for Valvano
A memorial Mass for Jim Valvano, the basketball coach who died on April 28, will be celebrated at 2 P.M. today at St.
Patrick's Cathedral at Fifth Avenue between 50th and 51st Streets.


The Tragedy of Sri Lanka
When Sri Lanka became independent in 1948, it was called Ceylon and seemed to have it all: reasonable prosperity, a stable parliamentary system, habits of nonviolence and a landscape of bewitching beauty.
Now Sri Lanka, its official name since 1972, is synonymous with strife and tragedy.
Last Saturday its President and two dozen others were blown to bits by a suicide bomber.
This followed the murder of the President's chief rival and leader of the opposition.
The cycle of retribution seems certain to continue.


Classical Music in Review
Boston Symphony Orchestra  Carnegie Hall
"A symphony must be like the world," Mahler said.
"It must embrace everything." And he made his case by creating a number of gargantuan, all-encompassing, highly individual examples.
Not surprisingly, few conductors have mastered them all; most would-be Mahlerians do well to excel in one or two.
Seiji Ozawa has generally succeeded in the more or less ceremonial symphonies, the Second and the Eighth.
But the Third, with its mix of dark mystery and cherubic simplicity, tends to elude his grasp, as it did last Wednesday evening.


Crown Heights Riots: A Lingering Question
To the Editor:
Although your editorial "Justice for Yankel Rosenbaum" (April 26) deals with the Justice Department's responsibility to determine whether Mr.
Rosenbaum's civil rights were violated, you have so far ignored an aspect of the 1991 Crown Heights riot in Brooklyn: the city's obligation to determine why for close to four days it permitted a pogrom to take place without having taken adequate steps to deal with it at its earliest stage.


Jurors Weigh Fraud Case Against Armand D'Amato
The jury began deliberations here this morning in the mail-fraud trial of Armand P. D'Amato after a Federal prosecutor gave a stinging rebuttal to the defense's closing argument.
Mr.
D'Amato is accused of defrauding the Unisys Corporation, a Long Island military contractor, by accepting $120,500 for consulting services prosecutors say he did not perform.
The Government contends he was actually hired by a rogue Unisys employee to provide access to his brother, Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato.


Nathan Milstein Memorial
A memorial service for the violinist Nathan Milstein is to be held on Friday at 11 A.M. at the Walter Reade Theater, 165 West 65th Street, at Lincoln Center.
Mr.
Milstein died at the age of 88 on Dec. 21.
The tribute will include highlights from Christopher Nupen's two-hour film "Nathan Milstein: Master of Invention," which features his last public recital, as well as a discussion of his life and his relationship with music.
His daughters, Jill Spalding and Maria Theodoli Braschi, will speak.
Doors open at 10:30 A.M.


On Libel and the Literati: The New Yorker on Trial
He was a boastful young psychoanalyst who dared to challenge the deacons of his profession and was thus dismissed as the curator of the Freud Archives.
She was a writer for The New Yorker, a master of pitiless prose who flattered him by proposing a profile in her esteemed magazine at just the moment he was seeking vindication.


Pacific Enterprises reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Ace Limited reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Loyola Capital (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Bridge
Circumstances alter cases, in bridge as in other activities.
The normal way to play a suit combination may be wrong in light of the bidding.
The diagramed deal from the New Year regional tournament in Reno, Nev., reported by David Treadwell of Wilmington, Del., makes the point.
North-South climbed to the no-man's land of five hearts after an unusual auction.
The rare rebid of four diamonds by North showed, in the partnership style, a raise to four hearts with four-card support and diamond length.
South moved toward slam, but subsided in five hearts when the Roman Key-Card Blackwood response of five hearts indicated that the partnership was missing one key card and the heart queen.


Corrections
A picture caption last Wednesday about the Canadian Defense Minister's race for Prime Minister misidentified her.
She is Kim Campbell.


Pacificorp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


PennFirst Bancorp Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Suns Hold Off Lakers And a Quick Ouster
A rotund player kept the Phoenix Suns alive tonight -- and it was not Charles Barkley.
Oliver Miller, a 300-pound rookie from Arkansas who spent part of this season popping diet pills, was an unexpected force tonight in the Suns' 107-102 playoff victory over the Los Angeles Lakers.
Miller, who had played a mere 14 playoff minutes before tonight and was inserted simply to throw his beef around, converted two important free throws in the final minute and then corraled a huge rebound with 26 seconds left.
That seemed to secure the Suns' victory, but Dan Majerle, whose free throws are usually automatic, badly missed two foul shots with a 103-100 lead.
It was not until Vlade Divac airballed a 3-point shot with the Lakers trailing by 105-102 with 8.1 seconds left that the Suns could relax.


Delay Sought in Law Meant to Trim Welfare Rolls
The Clinton Administration asked Congress today to postpone the effective date of a law passed under President Ronald Reagan that would require states to find jobs or job training for tens of thousands of married welfare recipients or face a loss of Federal welfare funds.
The request to the House Ways and Means Committee came as the committee began public discussion of the tax and spending bill that is the core of President Clinton's deficit-reduction plan.


Market Place; The growth in trading in natural gas futures may be here to stay
SO many traders have swarmed into the natural gas futures pit in the last few months that the New York Mercantile Exchange is about to move them into a remodeled, expanded trading area.
The exchange is acting none too soon.
More contracts were traded for natural gas on April 27 than for any other futures contract that day for a physical commodity on the New York exchange, even more than crude oil.
It was the first time that natural gas had led the pack in trading volume since the exchange introduced gas futures contracts in April 1990.


ICF International Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Year to Feb 28


Solar Financial reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28


Sunrise Energy Services Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


60-Minute Gourmet
THE term parmigiana may seem terribly outdated today, conjuring memories of veal or chicken breasts drowning in red sauce under a shiny lid of molten cheese.
There is no reason this age-old dish has to be stodgy, for the combination of ingredients is quite tasty.
The recipe below uses pork loin, which is lean, moist and versatile.
When I first tasted veal parmigiana, the red sauce was always thick, pulpy and supercharged with oregano.
In the contemporary style, the ingredients are cooked for a relatively short time, which yields a sauce that is brighter and lighter.


Execufirst Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Target Therapeutics (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Japanese Is Slain in Attack on U.N. in Cambodia
A Japanese policeman assigned to the United Nations peacekeeping force in Cambodia was killed today and another critically wounded in a rocket attack that appeared to be the work of Khmer Rouge guerrillas intent on sabotaging this month's United Nations-sponsored elections.
Seven other Dutch and Japanese peacekeepers were wounded in the ambush on a United Nations convoy in a rebel-held area of northwestern Cambodia, near the Thailand border.


Boyfriend of One Victim Is Charged in 6 Slayings
An angry boyfriend stabbed Maria Rodriguez to death after an argument in her East Harlem apartment on Saturday, the police said yesterday.
Then, they said, he bludgeoned, strangled and stabbed her three children and her mother, slept overnight in the blood-drenched apartment, went to a Yankees baseball game and finally killed her mother's companion the next day.
And before going to work on Monday morning, the police said, Ramon Concepcion spread paint thinner around the three-bedroom apartment and set it afire.


Evolution of a Not-Too-Remote Island
TAKING our lead from Margaret Mead, we set out for Roosevelt Island (pronounced ROSE-velt EYE-land) to examine the mores and culture of its people.
Though the 8,000 natives live just one subway stop from Bloomingdale's, or just 4 1/2 minutes by aerial tram from Second Avenue, we discovered that the islanders have evolved a way of life different from what prevails on Manhattan, the larger island across the East River.


Coral Gables Fedcorp Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Seder Cuisine
To The Living Section:
Ask, say, a Moroccan Jew what he or she eats at the Passover seder and you will most likely not hear about gefilte fish or sponge cake  [ "Puck's Seder at Spago: As Traditional as Gefilte Fish With Cayenne," March 31 ] .


The Pop Life
Udder Confusion
Some people are judging Aerosmith's new album, "Get a Grip" (Geffen), by its cover.
The artwork for the album, which entered Billboard's top albums chart at No. 1 this week, features the back end of a cow whose udder has been pierced with a ring.
Keith Garde and Tim Collins, the group's managers, say that the cover art is computer generated and that the cow was not hurt.
Nonetheless, they say the cover has generated telephone calls and letters from people whose "blood is boiling," as Mr.
Garde put it.
In London, transportation officials even decided against putting up advertising posters for it in the subways.
They said the decision was based on the "potentially disturbing nature of the design, which may cause offense amongst sections of the underground audience."


Global Natural Resources reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Serbs Appear to Step Up Pressure on Bosnia Muslims as New Fighting Rages
Serbian forces appeared to be stepping up their pressure against Muslim enclaves in eastern Bosnia today, with reports of a fierce new attack against Zepa and no resumption of water supplies to besieged Srebrenica.
The unconfirmed reports of a new Serbian offensive comes one day before a crucial vote by the so-called parliament of the Bosnian Serbs on whether to accept the international peace plan for Bosnia.
The Bosnian Serbs' leader, Radovan Karadzic, signed the peace plan at a meeting in Greece on Sunday, subject to ratification by his parliament.


Gibraltar Mines reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Burlington Industries reports earnings for Qtr to April 3


Continental Savings of America reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Woman Named Hartford Athletic Director
PAT MEISER-McKNETT was named athletic director at the University of Hartford yesterday, becoming the 12th woman to head a Division I athletic program in the country.


100 DEAD IN INDIA IN RELIGIOUS STRIFE
Fighting between Hindus and Muslims continued for a second day in the remote northeastern state of Manipur today, with the death toll rising to more than 100.
Reports from the area told of villages and neighborhoods set on fire and hundreds of wounded.
"The police have fanned out into villages to locate more bodies and the toll could be much higher," said Joychandra Singh, an editor and trade union leader in Imphal, the Manipuri capital, 1,100 miles east of New Delhi.


AT WORK WITH: Sharon Kleinbaum; 'Luckiest Rabbi In America' Holds Faith Amid the Hate
HOW often do rabbis get obscene phone calls from yeshiva students?
If the rabbi is Sharon Kleinbaum, the answer is too often.
As the spiritual leader of Congregation Beth Simchat Torah, a predominantly gay and lesbian synagogue in Greenwich Village, Rabbi Kleinbaum spends her days fighting Goliaths everywhere, most disturbingly, perhaps, other Jews who believe that the sexual orientation of her congregation's 1,200 members places them outside traditional Judaism.
She and her congregation recently won a wobbly victory in their battle to march in Sunday's Salute to Israel parade on Fifth Avenue: they were invited to march with the Association of Reform Zionists of America behind a banner that will include the congregation's name but will not identify it as gay and lesbian.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-17  NO IMMEDIATE ACTION ON BOSNIA  Even if Bosnian Serbs reject a peace plan anew, there will be no immediate military response from the United States.
The Administration seems certain that the plan will be approved, but less sure that any pact will end the fighting.
A1  A CHANGE IN PLANS?
Secretary of State Warren Christopher and French leaders agreed to send United Nations peacekeepers to Bosnia quickly if the Bosnian Serbs prove they are serious about a peace plan, but he acknowledged that more consultations will be necessary and that the United States may have to modify its plan.
A16


Suspect in Baby Death Seeks Removal of Monitor


City's Bicycling Laws Aren't Enforced
To the Editor:
After at least 10 misses by wild-driving New York City bicyclists, I am writing in the hope that something may be done to enforce the rules on bicycle drivers, and to make some new ones.


Bold Leap Into a Minority: Whites at Black Colleges
On his second day as a student at Morehouse College, Michael Davis found himself called onto a stage with the director Spike Lee to address what many students took to be a serious problem at the school: Mr.
Davis's presence there.
Thus began Mr.
Davis's career as the only white student at Morehouse, the elite black men's school here whose graduates include Mr.
Lee and the Rev.
Dr.
Martin Luther King Jr.


Review/Dance; Ballet Theater, Crisis Surmounted, In 'Sleeping Beauty'
Rebirth was in the air when American Ballet Theater opened its six-week season at the Metropolitan Opera House on Monday night.
There was no better symbol of the company's comeback from a crisis involving financial uncertainty and a change in leadership than this splendid performance of "The Sleeping Beauty" led by Amanda McKerrow and Wes Chapman.
As Aurora, the beloved princess who awakens after a hundred-year nap, Miss McKerrow was the embodiment of the mythic maiden whose purity heralds a new dawn.
Ballet Theater, for its part, has a new hope in a new artistic director, Kevin McKenzie, who was named in October to succeed Jane Hermann.


Hunter's Attack Costs Him the First 21 Games
Dale Hunter of the Washington Capitals was suspended by the National Hockey League today for the first 21 games of next season as punishment for last Wednesday's unprovoked attack against Pierre Turgeon during a playoff game.
The Islanders' leading scorer and best player suffered a separated right shoulder when Hunter crashed him into the boards and glass while Turgeon was celebrating a goal at Nassau Coliseum in the sixth and final game of their first-round playoff series.
He is out for at least the length of the Islanders' second-round series, which resumed here tonight against the Pittsburgh Penguins.


METRO DIGEST
METRO DIGEST  A.T.&amp; T. ACCUSES EMPIRE OF FRAUD
A.T.&amp; T. has accused Empire Blue Cross and Blue Shield of defrauding A.T.&amp; T.'s medical benefits plan for nearly a decade by sending the company inflated hospital bills and pocketing the difference.
A1.
DIVORCE LAWYERS SHARPLY CRITICIZED
A committee appointed by New York State's highest court issued a report that sharply criticized divorce attorneys, asserting that they relied on pressure tactics to secure fees, overbilled clients and kept them uninformed about their cases.
Most of the divorce lawyers represented women, who charged that they had been taken advantage of at an emotionally wrenching time in their lives.
A1.
NEW YORK CITY


Accounts
*
Brooklyn Bottling Corp., Brooklyn, to Marketing Communications Corp., Essex, Conn., to handle its Best Health's All Natural Gourmet Beverages and Tropical Fantasy brands, previously at the Zak Agency, New York.
Billings were estimated at $2 million.
Marketing Communications previously handled the Snapple Natural Beverages account, now at Kirshenbaum &amp; Bond, New York.


Moog Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Bosnia's Serbs Weigh a Familiar Choice
The Bosnian Serbs' parliament, a self-proclaimed assembly of ardent nationalists, militia leaders and local political bosses, is to make a choice on Wednesday that could make the difference between peace in the Balkans or prolonged war.
Delegates to the parliament share an almost mystic conviction that all Serbs, wherever in the Balkans they find themselves, have a historic right to live under Serbian rule.
But if they vote on Wednesday to accept the international peace plan for Bosnia, it will be principally out of deference to the President of Serbia, Slobodan Milo sevic, and his judgment that the peace plan will do less harm to the dream of a Greater Serbia than the threatened military intervention and tighter economic sanctions that would be the international response to continued Serbian defiance.


U.S. and Europeans Create Program to Lower Cost of Study Abroad
The United States is creating a new college student-exchange program with the European Community to expand opportunities for study abroad to middle- and low-income students and to improve on existing exchange programs.
The program would send about 200 students to Europe in the 1994-95 school year, said Charles H. Karelis, director of the Fund for Improvement of Postsecondary Education at the Department of Education.
It is not yet clear how many Europeans will study here.


Horizon Bank reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


No Rest For Nets' Starters
Don't get too close to the Nets.
You might catch a cold, or something worse.
Coach Chuck Daly said that backup Rick Mahorn won't play in Game 3 against the Cleveland Cavaliers on Wednesday at Byrne Meadowlands Arena as doctors try to determine just what is wrong with him (they think it's some form of the flu).
His absence means the Nets will once again face the Cavaliers short-handed.
That didn't hurt them last time.
In Richfield, Ohio, Mahorn didn't play and the weary Nets pulled off a masterpiece to tie the three-of-five-game series at 1-1.


Lemieux Sits and Watches, but the Islanders Stumble
Mario Lemieux isn't ready to play yet for the Pittsburgh Penguins.
Derek King still isn't scoring for the Islanders and neither is anyone else on the New York power play.
So, after two games, the Patrick Division playoff title is up for grabs following Pittsburgh's 3-0 victory tonight at Civic Arena.
The triumph evened the four-of-seven-game second-round series at one game each.


Benefits of Federal Spending on Infrastructure
To the Editor:
During the debate on President Clinton's job stimulus package, I sometimes wondered if the Republicans ever gave a thought to the young lives that their filibuster may have impacted.
I am a 69-year-old woman whose whole life has benefited from Federal spending during the Great Depression, even though that spending was not directed specifically toward me or my family.
I can remember the strikes, the bread lines and the many hungry people who came to our door asking for food.
I can also remember the jokes about the Works Progress Administration.


New York Games Pass Baton For Sponsorship to Reebok
The New York Games, a brave and beleaguered outpost on the international track and field circuit since 1989, passed quietly into oblivion yesterday and were instantly resurrected as the Reebok New York Games.
Carl Lewis, Jackie Joyner-Kersee and dozens of other top athletes will compete in the games at Columbia University's Lawrence A. Wien Stadium on May 22.
If they provide a fraction of the drama and suspense as the effort to rescue the games, the 17-event Mobil Grand Prix meet should be worth every penny of the $5 to $35 admission, not to mention the $500,000 or so Reebok is paying for the title sponsorship.


P.B.A. Head Misses Mollen Commission Meeting
Phil Caruso, the president of the police union, refused to attend a meeting yesterday with the mayoral commission investigating police corruption, amid indications that Mr.
Caruso intends not to cooperate with the commission.
Officials of the union, the Patrolmen's Benevolent Association, said that Mr.
Caruso did not attend the meeting because he believed his loyalties lay with Police Commissioner Raymond W. Kelly, who has begun separate efforts to root out corruption.


TRM Copy Centers (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


For Borg, Joy Is Back But Intensity Is Gone
His hair still hits his shoulders, and it is all the more flamboyant for being flecked with gray, but make no mistake, the older Bjorn Borg is not the old Bjorn Borg.
Tennis doesn't make him tick.
"I used to be like that, but not anymore," he said yesterday from the depths of a lounge chair at TennisPort, where he was on hand to publicize the Manhattan Masters, a senior men's tennis competition that opens tonight in the armory at 26th Street and Lexington Avenue.
For Borg, senior men's tennis has become a way of life rather than a warm-up for his realignment with the regular circuit after a 10-year estrangement.


INSIDE
Florio Orders Bids on Bonds
Gov.
Jim Florio is requiring New Jersey to accept bids on bond underwriting, a move appeared aimed at lessening the impact of a Federal investigation on a bond sale.
Page B1.
Unearthing Secret Files
In a directive ordering a sweeping review of cold-war rules on Government secrecy, President Clinton has begun taking steps to declassify millions of documents.
Page A18.
Persistence of Mastectomy
Many women with breast cancer still choose mastectomy, although lumpectomy is usually as effective.
For some at high risk, mastectomy is a preventive step.
Health, page C13. 'Angels' on Broadway
Part 1 of "Angels in America," Tony Kushner's play about AIDS and the 1980's, had its New York premiere.
Frank Rich's review is on page C15.


Corrections
A picture caption on Sunday about Muslims in America misidentified the mosque at which women were shown in their reserved prayer area.
It is the Islamic Center of Southern California.


Cincinnati Milacron Inc. reports earnings for 12wks to March 27


Inquiry Stalls Commerce Nomination
The appointment of John A. Rollwagen, the computer executive whom President Clinton has selected to be a key architect of Federal technology policy, has been delayed because of a lingering inquiry over insider trading.
Neither Mr.
Rollwagen nor the company he formerly headed, the supercomputer manufacturer Cray Research Inc., has been accused of wrongdoing.
But the Senate Commerce Committee has postponed confirming Mr.
Rollwagen's nomination as Deputy Secretary of Commerce because the Securities and Exchange Commission is asking new questions about stock sales in 1991 of the Cray Computer Corporation, a spinoff of Cray Research.
Mr.
Rollwagen was chief executive of Cray Research at the time.


President Moves to Release Classified U.S. Documents
President Clinton has taken the first step toward declassifying millions of secret Government documents, some kept under lock and key since World War I.
A Presidential directive issued April 26 ordered a sweeping review of cold-war rules on Government secrecy with an eye to opening the nation's bulging secret archives and reducing the number of highly classified military and intelligence programs.


BOGOTA DRUG WAR SET BACK BY COURT
The Colombian Government's campaign against drug traffickers has suffered a setback after a high court declared that the chief prosecutor's policy of promising reduced sentences to informers with criminal records was unconstitutional.
There was no official reaction to the decision on Monday, although justice authorities said they would abide by it.
Senate President Tito Rueda said Congress would be willing to work with President Cesar Gaviria Trujillo to "work around the vacuum left by the ruling."


Kimco Realty Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Uncertainty on Bosnia Complicating U.S. Plans
Uncertainty over whether there will be peace or more war in Bosnia has severely complicated the American mission to win support for President Clinton's contingency plan for the use of force to help bring an end to war in the Balkans.
In meetings today in Paris, Secretary of State Warren Christopher and French leaders agreed to send a large United Nations peacekeeping force to Bosnia quickly if the Bosnian Serbs prove they are serious about adhering to an international peace accord, but the French and the American sides put off a decision about what to do if they reject it.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
6.50
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
3.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
2.95
3.01
3.77
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
2.86
2.88
3.60
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
2.95
2.98
3.74
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
5.48
5.51
7.13
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
6.79
6.85
7.99
TELEPHONE BONDS
7.70
7.80
8.95
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
5.86
5.88
6.71
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


George Spota Is Dead; Theater Producer, 75
George Spota, a writer, a producer and a talent manager, died on Friday at his home in Los Angeles.
He was 75.
The cause was cancer, said Peter Hyams, his son-in-law.


Mining Services reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Corrections
An article on Friday about a lawsuit by Coretta Scott King against Boston University over custody of the papers of her husband, the Rev.
Dr.
Martin Luther King Jr., and a correction in this space on Saturday, rendered the name of a former adviser of his incorrectly.
The adviser is Harry H. Wachtel.


Petro-Canada reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


West Mass Bankshares Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Power Agency Prices Offering
The Northern California Power Agency initially priced a $256.6 million bond offering yesterday with a maximum yield of 5.9 percent for a serial bond due in 2010.
Underwriters were led by Smith Barney, Harris Upham &amp; Company.
The refunding revenue bonds are for Geothermal Project No. 3 and are rated A by Moody's Investors Service and A- by Standard &amp; Poor's and Fitch Investors Service.


Kansas Sets Highway Issue
The Kansas Department of Transportation is offering $250 million of tax exempt highway revenue bonds with a maximum yield of 5.6 percent for an issue due in 2013 through underwriters led by Lehman Brothers.
Serial bonds with shorter maturities were offered at prices to yield from 4.45 percent in 1999 to 5 percent in 2003, 5.45 percent in 2088 and 5.55 percent in 2010.
Underwriters said the bond offering was rated double-A by Moody's Investors Service, Standard &amp; Poor's and Fitch Investors Service.


Metrobank reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


No Headline
"The intelligence community is the problem. Nothing personal, but they live off secrecy. Secrecy keeps the mistakes secret." -- SENATOR DANIEL PATRICK MOYNIHAN, talking about the millions of classified Government documents.  [ A18:6. ]


FNB Rochester reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


'Ain't Broadway' to Close
"Ain't Broadway Grand," a musical directed by Scott Harris with book by Thomas Meehan and Lee Adams, music by Mitch Leigh and lyrics by Mr.
Adams, is to close after the Sunday matinee at the Lunt-Fontanne Theater, 205 West 46th Street, Manhattan.
The matinee of the show will be the 25th regular performance; it had 27 previews.


Rating TV Chefs: Cooks Beware
COOKING programs are the soap operas of the 90's, in which poaching supplants passion.
Since the mid-1960's, when Julia Child warbled her way to America's hearts and the Galloping Gourmet demonstrated that clowning and cooking did indeed mix, these broadcasts have steadily grown in popularity.
On any weekend, dozens of cooking shows saturate the airwaves, showing everything from Amish cuisine to Zen vegetarianism.
The rewards are significant for those involved in the most popular shows.
Today's whisk-waving television heavyweight is Jeff Smith, whose program, "The Frugal Gourmet," has been among the top five programs on PBS for five years.
Aside from the money "The Frugal Gourmet" earns from commercial sponsors, Mr.
Smith's books related to the show have sold in the millions.
And cooking programs have a long life, as they are bought and sold by cable-television companies that keep them in reruns for years, and as they resurface for sale on videotape.
Moreover, industry spokesmen say their growth is certain to continue.
In November, the new Television Food Network will debut, featuring eight hours a day of food-related programming, including cooking shows.
In New York City this fall, WHM Communications Corporation plans to introduce Foodday Television, six-day-a-week, one-hour food and cooking packages that it hopes to syndicate to independent television stations around the country.


Republic Waste Industries (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Prothro Is Seriously Ill With Cancer
TOMMY PROTHRO, a former head football coach with the Los Angeles Rams, the San Diego Chargers, Oregon State and U.C.L.A., revealed he is seriously ill with cancer.
"I have cancer and nobody knows how it's going to go from there," Prothro, 72, said Monday.
"It's certainly nothing to give up on, but it's certainly something to worry about. I certainly don't intend to give in."


Corrections
An article in Business Day on Thursday about the nomination of Arthur Levitt Jr. to be chairman of the Securities and Exchange Commission misidentified one of the S.E.C. commissioners.
She is Mary Schapiro.


Benefits of Federal Spending on Infrastructure; Dole's Role Distorted
To the Editor:
Your April 23 editorial on "Mr. Dole's Selfish Strut" grossly misconstrues the Kansas Senator's leader ship of the successful Republican filibuster against President Clinton's economic stimulus package.
You paint a distorted picture of the Senator in three respects -- his position, his record and his motives.


Thorkild Jacobsen, Scholar, Dies at 88; Wrote of Cuneiform
Thorkild Jacobsen, an archeologist who was an expert on Sumerian tablets and conducted excavations in Iraq, died Sunday at a hospital in Lebanon, N.H.
He was 88 and lived in Bradford, N.H.
The cause was a ruptured tumor, his family said.


Personal Health
WHILE studies show that for many women with breast cancer mastectomy is not the recommended treatment, other women who have not yet been found to have cancer are nonetheless choosing to have their breasts surgically removed as a precaution.
Often their friends, medical consumer advocates and even some doctors regard their decision to have a so-called prophylactic mastectomy as bizarre, barbaric and unnecessary.
But to the women who choose this route, it is nearly always a path to a life less crippled by fear and frequent medical procedures.


Nuevo Energy Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Suspect Is Charged in East Harlem Slayings


Sales of New Cars and Trucks Surged Last Month
Sales of domestically built cars and trucks rose 10.1 percent in late April, as automotive demand rose for the third consecutive month, to the highest level in almost 30 months.
For all of April, figures released today by the auto makers showed an 11 percent increase.


Dolco Packaging reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Greiner Engineering Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


George Ward Whitney; Lawyer, 68
George Ward Whitney, a New York lawyer specializing in patent, trademark and copyright laws, died on Friday at his retirement home in Chapel Hill, N.C.
He was 68.
The cause was a heart attack, his family said.


Laurentian Capital reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


CBI Industries reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Hometown Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Rimage Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Rodman Critical of Pistons' Latest Moves
The Detroit Pistons made a mistake in firing Coach RON ROTHSTEIN and compounded it by hiring DON CHANEY, DENNIS RODMAN said in a newspaper report published yesterday.
Pistons officials, including Chaney -- who was named head coach on Monday -- said Rodman's comments to The Oakland Press only made it more likely that the National Basketball Association's leading rebounder will soon be traded.


Beyond the Fringe: The Boldly Bald
THE National Basketball Association playoffs, which started last Thursday and will last through mid-June, are more than a showcase of the players' athleticism, grace, muscle and trash-talking, more than a display of slam dunks, three-point shots, behind-the-back passes and reverse layups, and more than a clinic of savvy coaching maneuvers and last-second stratagems.
They will be a nightly tribute to the shaved head, for it seems that basketball players have embraced the shorn look more than any other athletic group or any other profession.


In Yen Windfall, U.S. Companies Prefer Profits
For all their complaints about how hard it is to do business in Japan, American manufacturers of cars, computers and chips are not trying to increase sales by cutting prices here after the big 10 percent surge in the Japanese yen against the dollar.
That could mean that the yen's appreciation, while making Japanese goods more costly in America, will not be as effective as Washington hopes in building up American imports to Japan and shrinking the United States trade deficit with Japan.


Xtra Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


A Network of Chefs
To The Living Section:
While I applaud the success of American chefs in the restaurant business and often enjoy their cooking, the apparent existence of an old-boy chef's network takes the edge off my appetite  [ "Family Tree Nurtures a New Generation of Chefs," by Trish Hall, April 14 ] .


Evergreen Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Denison Mines reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


First National Bank Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Marcade Group reports earnings for Year to Jan 30


U.S. Petroleum Data
In millions of barrels except refinery utilization
Apr. 30
Apr. 23
May 1
1993
1993
1992
Gasoline production, daily
7.2
6.9
7.1
Distillate production, daily
3.0
3.0
3.1
Gasoline stocks
223.1
222.7
216.4
Distillate stocks
100.1
99.9
93.3
Crude imports, daily
7.6
6.8
5.8
Product imports, daily
1.7
1.7
2.4
Crude stocks
347.6
345.4
352.9
Crude production, daily
6.9
6.9
7.0
Refinery utilization (%)
89.2
89.3
85.9
Source: American Petroleum Institute


Standard Set for Uniting Phones and Computers
The Intel Corporation and the Microsoft Corporation said today that they had agreed upon a standard way to integrate the telephone with the personal computer.
The development will find its first market in telemarketing and customer-service environments, and will later reach a broader base.
Intel and Microsoft said the standard had been reviewed and supported by approximately 40 companies, including major telephone-switch manufacturers, PC and peripheral manufacturers, software developers and network providers.


Clinton, in Compromise, Will Cut Parts of Childhood Vaccine Plan
Facing likely defeat in Congress, the Clinton Administration has agreed to drop crucial elements of its proposal for the Federal Government to buy up and distribute all childhood vaccine in the United States, Administration officials and lawmakers said today.
The Administration struck a compromise with Congressional Democrats under which the Government would provide vaccine for children in the Medicaid program and those for whom vaccine costs are not covered by private health insurance.


Imco Recycling Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


RESULTS PLUS
TENNIS  Chang Is Upset by German Local Favorite  Marc Goellner, a big local favorite, upset fifth-seeded Michael Chang, 5-7, 6-4, 6-3, in the second round of the $1.7 million German Open yesterday at Hamburg.
Ninth-seeded Wayne Ferreira of South Africa was beaten, 6-3, 6-4, by Sweden's Jonas Svensson and No. 12 Carlos Costa of Spain was eliminated by Andrei Chesnokov of Russia by 6-3, 4-6, 7-6 (7-5).
Goellner used a powerful forehand and moral support from an army of fans among the 10,000 spectators to defeat Chang.
Chang used his quickness to win most of the baseline battles, but the German's forehand and more daring shot selection helped him win the match in 2 hours 39 minutes. (AP) Sabatini Sends Qualifier Packing: Gabriela Sabatini began defense of her Italian Open women's title in Rome yesterday with a 6-0, 6-2 rout of Claire Wegink, a qualifier.
The No. 3-seeded Argentine needed only 58 minutes to dispose of her Dutch opponent, ranked 158 in the world.
Sabatini, who has won the Italian Open four times, came into this event without a tournament victory this year, and is caught in her longest dry spell since 1986. (AP) Patrick McEnroe and Heat Exhaustion Beat Woodforde: Top-seeded Mark Woodforde of Australia retired because of heat exhaustion yesterday, allowing Patrick McEnroe a first-round victory at the $260,000 U.S.T.A. men's clay-courts tournament in Tampa, Fla.
McEnroe was leading by 3-6, 7-6 (7-5), 4-0 and was on his third deuce of the fifth game when Woodforde sat down and buried his head in a towel.
"I felt like a furnace out there," said Woodforde, who had not played since March 31 in South Africa when he also retired with heat exhaustion. (AP)


Bay View Capital Corp.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Metropolitan Diary
FAXED from a woman we know who toils in the publishing industry:
The day was Take Our Daughters to Work Day and I walked down the hall into the office of one of our designers.
Her computer-literate 10-year-old daughter was pecking away on a Macintosh.
I walked over to see what she was doing and there, beautifully centered in an outline type font, she had written:
I have nothing to do  I have nothing to do  I am board  Only fifteen minutes till lunch.
. . .
A Lexington Avenue subway uptown train.
A man enters and starts the all-too-familiar spiel.
"Ladies and gentlemen," he says.
Most of the passengers look the other way as he continues.
"Permit me to introduce myself. My name is Dennis. I am homeless. I live in Bloomingdale's."
At this point the passengers look up.
"Now that I have your attention . . . . " the fellow says.
. . .
To be filed under T as in Tommy, or perhaps Telephone Conversation between a Manhattan man we know and his sister in California, as recounted by the man.
Her: So what terrific things have you been doing?
Him: I saw "Tommy" the other night.
Her: Who?
Him: Yeah, right.
Her: What do you mean, right?
Him: I saw the Who's "Tommy." It's a hit musical.
Her: Oh.
The confusion went on a bit longer but enough is enough.
At any rate, consider the conversation a shoo-in for this week's Who's on First award.
. . .
Dear Diary:
Luci and I were ushered across Seventh Avenue in the 50's by the aggressive young men with the walkie-talkies.
When we saw the lights, cameras and action among a horde of time-warped Afro-wigged people in 70's bell-bottoms and what appeared to be an electric truck, we had the usual questions ready.
But we had been anticipated, as this sign posted on the truck proved:
1. IT'S A MOVIE.
2. "CARLITO'S WAY. "
3. AL PACINO.
4. PENELOPE MILLER.
5. BRIAN DEPALMA.
6. ELECTRIC TRUCK.
7. NOW!
8. THEY'RE EXTRAS. -- ROBERT SULLIVAN
. . .
Dear Diary:
Playground season has arrived for us parents of small children, and with it skinned knees and banged heads.
Though I don't find such injuries laughing matters, I recently observed a father with a curious method for dealing with kiddie boo-boos.
His two sons were running helter-skelter across a Bronx playground when the older boy (about 6) tripped and skidded on the asphalt, lightly cutting his lip.
The child immediately set up a sustained wail not unlike an air-raid siren's.
Dad, though, was unimpressed; unhurried and smiling, he picked up his son and, during careful blood-stanching and kiss-it-and-make-it-better concern, delivered the following monologue (or as close to it as I recall).
"We will now present the Academy Award for the best performance by an actor in the role of an Injured Child. The nominees are: Enrique Guzman for his performance of 'I Hurt Myself at the Playground and I Cut My Lip and I Think I'm Going to Die.' There are no other nominees. May I have the envelope, please? And the winner is: Enrique Guzman for 'I Hurt Myself at the Playground.' H'ray!"
Enrique is by now smiling wanly through his tears.
Dad goes on in a mock-resonant tone: "Accepting the award for Mr. Guzman is ---- Enrique Guzman!"
The sniffling but fascinated child is deposited in his little brother's stroller and Dad switches to a breathless falsetto as they roll out the gate.
"I want to take this opportunity to thank my overindulgent parents. Without them, my performance would have been impossible. Thank you and God bless." And they're gone. -- LUIS GAMEZ
. . .
The scene is an East Loop bus, Long Beach, L.I.
A middle-age couple asks the driver to let them know when he reaches the 600 block on East Park Avenue.
The driver asks them which number they want in order to let them off at the correct corner.
"661," they reply.
"That's the deli," a male passenger chimes in.
"Such a nice boy runs it," a woman says.
"A wonderful boy," adds another. "Is he your son?"
It must be the sea air.


Mid Am Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Community First reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Wal-Mart Pickets Set
The United Food and Commercial Workers Union said today that its women's branch would picket 60 Wal-Mart stores nationwide on Wednesday to protest the sale of products made by children in Bangladesh.
The union said the Mother's Action Program of its Women's Network would make a Mothers' Day appeal for customers to take the profit out of child labor by refusing to buy clothing make in Bangladesh.
It said the pickets would hand out leaflets and display garments made in Bangladesh and sold at Wal-Mart.


Former French Prime Minister Is Buried


Royal Bank of Pennsylvania reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Seles Ready to Discuss Her Treatment
MONICA SELES will talk to reporters today about her treatment for the stab wound inflicted by a spectator at a German tournament.
IMG, the Cleveland company that manages Seles, announced the news conference yesterday at the Italian Open.
Seles dropped out of sight after leaving Hamburg, Germany, where a man leaned from the stands last Friday and stabbed her in the back during the Citizens Cup.


Central Louisiana Electric Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Clinton Proposes Assistance To Troubled Neighborhoods
The Clinton Administration announced today that its plan for improving the nation's most distressed neighborhoods would combine minor new spending, moderate tax breaks for businesses and a major new emphasis on the coordination of existing programs.
The program would assist 110 neighborhoods, chosen through a competitive process.
But the top 10, to be called "empowerment zones," would receive most of the advantages.
Six would be urban, three rural and one on an Indian reservation.


Leslie Gelb Will Direct Foreign Affairs Group
Leslie H. Gelb, a columnist for The New York Times, has been named president of the Council on Foreign Relations, the Council's board announced yesterday.
Mr.
Gelb, 56, succeeds Peter Tarnoff, who has joined the Clinton Administration as Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs.
Mr.
Gelb will leave The Times, and his last column is to appear on Sunday.


Campus Journal; Law Students Get Close To Human Rights Cases
The Lowenstein International Human Rights Clinic at Yale Law School is so little known that its phone number is not listed in the law school directory.
But the clinic's work is public.
Operating out of a small office at the law school are 10 to 17 law students, sometimes exhilarated, sometimes depressed, often bleary with fatigue.
The students are part of the team that filed suit in Federal District Court in Brooklyn in March 1992, challenging the United States' policy of detaining Haitian refugees at the Guantanamo Bay naval base in Cuba.


Biogen Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Canadian Travel Company Acquired by Thomas Cook
The Thomas Cook Group of Canada, part of the London-based Thomas Cook travel agency and financial services company, said yesterday that it had completed arrangements to acquire Marlin Travel, Canada's largest travel agency.
The purchase of the 265 Marlin agencies will give Cook a travel network in Canada of about 350 agencies and foreign exchange locations.
The purchase price is $22 million (Canadian), or about $17.3 million (United States), with an additional $3 million (Canadian) in performance-related payments during the next two years.


Basta Pasta!
Spaghetti Warehouse Inc., the national chain of Italian restaurants, has expanded rapidly, but its share price has not returned to its January 1992 peak of more than $26.
Yesterday, after reporting lower third-quarter profits, Spaghetti Warehouse established a new low of $12.875.


Woman in the News; Guerrilla Fighter for Civil Rights: Carol Lani Guinier
For more than a decade, the Justice Department's Civil Rights Division was, for Lani Guinier, the equivalent of enemy-occupied territory.
During that time, the former division official was involved in a guerrilla war with the Republicans in power, fighting them in courts throughout the nation as assistant counsel of the NAACP Legal Defense and Educational Fund Inc. and giving speeches criticizing their approach.


Reader's Digest Stock Falls On Report of 5% Profit Gain
The Reader's Digest Association reported a disappointing 5 percent profit rise yesterday, and its stock price tumbled $6 to close at $40.50, although analysts discounted any long-term significance.
The company had net income of $95.5 million for the fiscal third quarter ended March 31, on revenues of $737.6 million.
Both numbers were records.
Earnings per share rose 7 percent, to 80 cents.


Jets Juggle a Bit to Hold On to Hasty
The off-season maneuvering that has marked the advent of unrestricted free agency in the National Football League resulted in yet another unusual development yesterday when the Jets restructured Boomer Esiason's salary to match the Cincinnati Bengals' offer for James Hasty.
Hasty, a cornerback who is considered the Jets' top defensive player, was one of the club's transition players.
That means he could seek offers from other clubs, but the Jets had the choice to match his best offer.


Morris H. Saffron, 88, A Dermatologist, Dies
Dr.
Morris H. Saffron, a dermatologist who became an authority on colonial American medicine and archivist-historian of the New Jersey Medical Society, died on April 28 at his Manhattan home.
He was 88.
The cause was heart failure, said his niece, Lois Ballon of Manhattan.


Aon Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Oxford Health Plans Inc.  (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Sea Hero's Detour: A Workout at Belmont
Sea Hero, newly arrived after winning the Kentucky Derby, was reigning on the backstretch while 13 other colts prepared to open Belmont Park's new season this afternoon with the Withers Mile, a race that could produce another rival or two for Sea Hero in the Preakness.
The new season will open at 1 o'clock and will last 72 days, nine races a day, 37 of them stakes worth $5.6 million in purses.
Nine of the stakes will be Grade 1, or top of the line, notably the $500,000 Belmont on June 5, the third and final race in the Triple Crown series.


Expeditors International Washington (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Wallace on the Road to Recovery
RUSTY WALLACE, injured in a spectacular stock car crash on Sunday, went from one hospital to another yesterday in an effort to make certain he will be ready to race in less than two weeks.
The 36-year-old Wallace was released yesterday morning from Carraway Medical Center in Birmingham, Ala., and immediately flew to Indianapolis for an examination by Dr.
TERRY TRAMMELL, an orthopedic specialist.


CLINTON SEES NEED TO FOCUS HIS GOALS AND SHARPEN STAFF
Smarting from losses in early battles with Congress and from criticism of his first 100 days, President Clinton conceded today that his White House was "out of focus" and that his staff needed to be better organized.
Mr.
Clinton, overburdened by his own crowded agenda, admitted his dissatisfaction in remarks to reporters in which he outlined a new effort to focus his Administration.


Unlicensed Driver Charged in Pedestrian's Injury
A day after the police announced a crackdown on motorists driving with suspended licenses, a young man whose driver's license was revoked a year ago and suspended four other times struck and seriously injured a 74-year-old woman in Queens yesterday, the police said.
The police had also arrested 10 other people throughout the city yesterday under the new procedures announced by Commissioner Raymond W. Kelly on Monday.
The procedures, which took effect yesterday, require officers to arrest anyone found to be driving with two or more suspensions arising from separate incidents, rather than merely issuing a summons.


Eating Well
IS it possible to eat brunch without bacon and eggs, sausage and pancakes, waffles and butter?
Of course.
But is it possible to enjoy such a brunch?
What do you substitute for quiche?
How good can grits be without cheese?
If these foods are altered or eliminated, does it mean that tofu must be used?


Prime Hospitality Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


North Side Savings Bank reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Classical Music in Review
Hong Hong Cantonese Opera  Taipei Theater
Oh, great!
Something else to worry about.
As a listener grows fonder of the various forms of Chinese opera, a fear for their continuing purity and ultimate survival begins to gnaw.
When Hong Hong's troupe appeared at Alice Tully Hall three years ago, everything about the rarefied genre and the performance itself seemed exotic.
But Chinese opera has since become more familiar in New York, chiefly through the good offices of the Taipei Theater, and on Thursday evening the Westernized aspects of Miss Hong's style crept to the fore: sequential melodies, jazzy syncopations, arpeggiations and the use of a cello amid indigenous instruments.


Saatchi &amp; Saatchi And Donnelley Deals
Two deals involving marketing services companies were announced this week.
The Saatchi &amp; Saatchi Company P.L.C. said that it would sell three in-store marketing subsidiaries to Markitstar Inc. in New York.
The three companies, which operate under unified management as the Howard Marlboro Group, consist of Marlboro Marketing Inc. in New York, Creative Displays Inc. in Chicago and HMG Europe B.V. in Ridderkerk, the Netherlands.
The sale is expected to be completed in August.


Sulcus Computer Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Test Results
U.S.
Alcohol Testing of America makes breath-analysis devices and other detection equipment.
The company has traded far below its May 1992 peak of $4.75.
But on Tuesday a unit got clearance from the Food and Drug Administration for a cocaine-detection device, which will eventually be adapted to detect other substances.
Since Tuesday, the stock is up almost 42 percent.


Bloc Development (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to April 3


Money Store (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Devils Sign Affiliate Pact
The Devils have signed a three-year agreement with Capital District of the American Hockey League to become New Jersey's top affiliate in the minor leagues.
The Devils said they would supply the players and the coaching staff for Capital District, which was the Islanders' top affiliate for the past two seasons.
The Devils used Utica of the A.H.L. as their top affiliate for the past six years.
They owned and operated Utica and are now in the process of selling that team, which they had moved from Maine.


Cancer-Causing Gene Found, With a Clue to How It Works
In findings expected to alter the direction of cancer research, scientists have discovered the existence and are near to pinpointing the location of a gene that causes several major cancers, and they have discovered a new way that aberrant genes cause the disease.
The gene, carried by 1 in 200 people, leads to colon cancer and a variety of other cancers, including uterine and ovarian.


Maria Tolstoy, 85, A Poet Who Taught Russian Language
Maria Tolstoy, a professor of Russian language and a granddaughter of the novelist Leo Tolstoy, died on Monday at home in Manhattan.
She was 85.
She had a brief illness, said Cynthia Whittaker, a friend.


Embattled Japanese Doctor Retains W.H.O. Post
A Japanese doctor, Hiroshi Nakajima, was re-elected yesterday as head of the World Health Organization, a United Nations agency, despite an extraordinary last-minute effort by the United States and European countries to block his re-election.
Dr.
Nakajima won a second five-year term in a 93-to-58 vote at the annual meeting of the World Health Assembly in Geneva.


CHRONICLE
ROBERT MacNEIL, executive editor and co-anchor of "The MacNeil/ Lehrer Newshour," has been elected chairman of the board of the MacDowell Colony, the 86-year-old artists' and writers' retreat in Peterborough, N.H.
He succeeds VARTAN GREGORIAN, the president of Brown University and former president of the New York Public Library, who has been chairman of the colony for three years.


CAE Industries Ltd. reports earnings for Year to March 31


Economic Scene; Group of 7 Nations: Suddenly Pals, But Can They Coordinate?
DID the finance ministers of the industrial powers really have nothing to squabble about at their meeting in Washington last week -- or did someone spike the punch bowl with LSD?
Not to worry: The psychotropic drug of choice, at least in the northwest quadrant of the capital city, remains power.
One reason sweetness and light prevailed, Shafiqul Islam of the Council on Foreign Relations suggests only half-jokingly, is that all seven ministers had been embarrassed by their governments' barroom rhetoric on trade issues.
Perhaps more important, there is strong agreement on two paramount issues: the need to stimulate global economic growth and the collective interest in keeping a pro-Western government at the helm of the Russian Federation.
It is possible, then, that it will be back to sniping-as-usual -- perhaps even by the economic summit meeting in July.


Foreign Affairs; Two Magic Peace Words . . .
There is an old and wise rule of thumb about Arab-Israeli negotiations.
If they seem to be getting better, just wait a while and they'll almost always get worse.
Yet in the current round of talks in Washington, Israelis and Palestinians are actually making progress for the first time.
And while Syrians and Israelis haven't gone forward, they haven't gone backward either.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
6.50
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
3.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
2.83
2.95
3.71
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
2.88
2.86
3.59
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
2.99
2.95
3.72
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
5.47
5.48
7.09
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
6.78
6.79
7.96
TELEPHONE BONDS
7.73
7.70
8.90
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
5.85
5.86
6.70
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Canadian Foremost reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Safeway Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 27


Third World Population Explosion Demands Western Response
To the Editor:
The juxtaposition of two articles on the front page April 25 reveals, as in a lightning flash, the fundamental problem confronting humankind at this juncture: the ongoing population explosion.
I refer to the report on the Chinese effort to control it, and the article on our immigration service's being swamped by a seemingly uncontrollable influx of asylum seekers.


Mankiewicz Tribute
A memorial tribute to Joseph L. Mankiewicz is to be held at 6 P.M. on Monday at the Walter Reade Theater, 165 West 65th Street, at Lincoln Center.
Seating is limited.
Mr.
Mankiewicz, the Hollywood writer, director and producer, died on Feb. 5 at the age of 83.


Bowmar Instrument reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Kodak Chief Wins Support of Key Investor
The chief executive of the Eastman Kodak Company received some limited support yesterday from an important investor, the California Public Employees Retirement System.
Representatives of Calpers, as the group is known, met with the chief exeuctive and indicated they would not initiate any shareholder action before September to give him time to draft a turnaround plan for the company.
Dispute at the Top
Investors became increasingly concerned about the Rochester company last week, when Christopher J. Steffen, the chief financial officer for just three months, quit amid speculation that Kay R. Whitmore, the chief executive, was not moving fast enough to cut costs and bolster earnings.


Julius N. Cahn, Top Senate Aide And a Publishing Executive, 70
Julius N. Cahn, a publishing executive and former top aide to Vice President Hubert H. Humphrey, died yesterday at a hospital in Washington.
He was 70 and lived in Potomac, Md., and Manhattan.
The cause was cancer, his family said.


COMPANY NEWS
BSN S.A., Paris, has bought 100 percent control of Aliments Delisle Ltd., a Canadian yogurt manufacturer.
Terms were not disclosed.
BROOKLYN UNION GAS CO., New York, said it had bought natural gas producing wells in the Arkoma Basin of Arkansas from Exxon Corp. for $20 million.


Ogleby Norton Co. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Manufacturers and Farmers Oppose Clinton Energy Tax
Manufacturers and farmers organizations declared war on President Clinton's proposed energy tax today, while at the same time opponents in the Congress said it would hurt industry and agriculture.
On the day the House Ways and Means Committee took up the energy tax, the National Association of Manufacturers and the American Farm Bureau announced that they had formed a coalition of more than 900 companies and associations that would fight the tax.


D'Amato Jury Ends Day of Deliberations
The jury in the mail-fraud trial of Armand P. D'Amato, the brother of Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato, concluded its second day of deliberations today without reaching a verdict.
Armand D'Amato, a prominent Long Island lawyer, is accused of accepting $120,500 in consulting fees from a military contractor, the Unisys Corporation, for work that prosecutors say he did not perform.
The Government says Mr.
D'Amato was actually hired by a rogue Unisys employee, Charles F. Gardner, to provide access to his brother.


CHRONICLE
The American Ballet Theater performs at the Metropolitan Opera House, and the New York City Ballet at the New York State Theater.
And rarely do the twain meet across the plaza of Lincoln Center.
But a spirit of cooperation in the name of fund-raising and a good party will prevail when the American Ballet holds its major gala of the season on May 17.
It will be a tribute to Sir Kenneth MacMillan, the choreographer and former director of the Royal Ballet, who died in October.


INSIDE
Big Shift by Treasury
The Treasury Department announced a radical plan to shift to short-term Government borrowing, surprising the bond market.
Page D1.
Afrikaners Seek Homeland
South African separatists have united and will demand an Afrikaner homeland in the Transvaal.
Page A3.
North Korea Ruse Feared
Monitors fear North Korea may be preparing to divert uranium to a nuclear arms project.
Page A7.
New Labels on Meat
The Government said it would require cooking and handling instructions on meat and poultry.
Page A18.
Irving Howe Dies at 72
Irving Howe, the literary critic, socialist and founding editor of Dissent magazine, is dead.
Page D22.


Fitzhugh Dodson, 69, Child-Rearing Expert
Fitzhugh Dodson, a clinical psychologist who wrote about child-rearing, died Sunday at the Alamitos Belmont Rehabilitation Hospital in Long Beach, Calif.
He was 69.
He died of cardiac arrest, his family said.


A Closed Shop Is Remembered
Although Levine, Huntley, Schmidt &amp; Beaver of New York has been closed for a year and a half and many of its staff have moved on to other shops, the once-hot agency is seeking former employees to attend a second annual reunion.
The event is scheduled to begin at 6 tonight at the Art Directors Club, 250 Park Avenue South, Manhattan.
The agency was closed in November 1991 by its parent, Grey Advertising Inc., after the loss of key accounts, like Subaru of America Inc.


Texaco Canada Petroleum reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


No Headline
"I think under the terms of common decency that he has the right to exercise the option of staying here to die." -- JOHNIE O'NEAL, the Oklahoma lawyer of a man convicted of murder both there and in New York.  [ A1:5. ]


Big Brother and the Computer Age
Can the nation trust its secrets to its spies?
That question underpins a fierce debate over a recently disclosed plan by the Clinton Administration to secure the privacy of the nation's phone calls and computer data with a standard set of computer codes.


Books of The Times; The View Depends On Where You Stand
Eclipse Fever  By Walter Abish  335 pages. Alfred A. Knopf. $23.
Walter Abish's rich, fascinating new novel, "Eclipse Fever," might be described as a comedy of cultural imperialism, if the word comedy is taken in its more formal sense, not as a story that makes the reader laugh, but rather as a drama in which the leading characters solve their major problems instead of being overcome by them.


U.S. Officials Hold Back On Reaction to Serb Vote
Senior Administration officials said tonight that they were holding back a formal reaction to the decision by Bosnian Serbs to reject an international peace plan until they could study the Serbs' final decision and consult with the allies.
But the vote by the Bosnian Serbs' self-styled parliament to reject the plan would seem to leave the Administration with few options other than the use of force to compel the Serbs to accept the agreement.


Garden Q.&amp; A.
Boxwood Background
Q.
Having seen exquisite boxwood planters in Williamsburg, Va., I wished to grow some myself.
Can you tell me about this plant, and which ones survive the cold? -- Elizabeth MacDougal, Alleghany, Pa.
A.
The Moors edged their harem gardens with boxwood.
Ancient Greeks used its finely grained wood for musical instruments.
And the Bible has many references to the plant that Mary Plowden-Wardlaw called "man's oldest garden ornamental."


PANEL IN CONGRESS SEEKS A NEW IMAGE
Prompted by voter criticism of pork barrel spending, a Congressional panel widely viewed as a prime offender today adopted economic criteria for judging future projects.
"This represents a change in our thinking, a change in our way of doing business," said Representative Bob Carr, the Michigan Democrat who heads the panel, the Appropriations subcommittee on transportation.
The subcommittee oversees more than $30 billion in Federal money for highways, airports, railroads and mass transit.


Exar Corp. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


U.S. Robotics (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to April 2


Man Rescued After Entering Lions' Den
A 32-year-old man climbed into a lions' den at the Bronx Zoo yesterday and emerged with only superficial wounds after the police and zookeepers managed to distract two 350-pound African lions and rescue the man.
As the man's mother shrieked outside the exhibit, one lion reared up, rested its paws on the man's shoulders and swiped at his head.
Then the man, identified as Alfredo Rias of the Bronx, curled up in a fetal position at the orders of the police.


Corrections
An article on Tuesday about "Muslims in America" misidentified the architect of a mosque under construction in Sharon, Mass.
He is Ilhan Zeybekoglu of Zeybekoglu Nayman Associates Inc. of Cambridge, Mass.
Bora Pervane, who is also an architect, was a member of the mosque's building committee but not its designer.


Two Committees Pass Legislation On Strike Hiring
Senate and House Democrats gave committee approvals today to legislation that would prohibit employers from hiring permanent replacements for strikers.
The measure is organized labor's biggest demand from this Congress.
Although the Clinton Administration has strongly endorsed the bill, the prospects for enactment are uncertain because Senate Republicans are expected to lead a filibuster against it.
Last year, supporters of the measure fell three votes short of the 60 needed to shut off debate.


Tasty Baking reports earnings for Qtr to March 27


Compania Cervecerias (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Clinton Again Delays Announcing His Campaign-Finance Plan
Still struggling to win Congressional support for President Clinton's campaign-finance package, the White House today put off announcing the measure, at the request of House Democrats who wanted more time to negotiate over the proposal.
The postponement, from Thursday to at least Friday, is the latest of several delays in the timetable that Administration officials had set for producing a political package.
Mr.
Clinton had pledged to move quickly after taking office to unveil legislation that would curb the soaring costs of running for office and the dominance of special interests in campaigns.


Placer Dome Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Disney Link To the F.B.I. And Hoover Is Disclosed
From 1940 until his death in 1966, Walt Disney served as a secret informer for the Los Angeles office of the Federal Bureau of Investigation, according to documents that have come to light under the Freedom of Information Act.
Details about the film maker's F.B.I. connection emerge for the first time in "Walt Disney: Hollywood's Dark Prince," an unauthorized biography by Marc Eliot to be published in July by Birch Lane Press.


13 Indicted In Oil Scheme Laid to Mob
Thirteen members of the Mafia and of Russian organized crime were indicted today on charges of collaborating in a scheme to evade $60 million in Federal and state taxes on the sale of gasoline and fuel oil, Federal officials said.
The United States Attorney for New Jersey, Michael Chertoff, called it the largest tax-evasion conspiracy of its kind, part of a larger problem nationwide that defrauds the Government of more than $2 billion a year.
The figure is an estimate based on retail gasoline sales and intelligence from informants.


Rodman Still Wants Pistons to Trade Him
DENNIS RODMAN renewed his demand to be traded from the Detroit Pistons and planned to press his case yesterday at a meeting with the new coach, DON CHANEY.
Rodman missed the start of last season because of personal problems, including a divorce.
He also was shaken by the departure of Coach CHUCK DALY before the start of the season.


Citgo Petroleum Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


People
*
Jean Govoni was named to the new position of creative director at YAR Communications Inc., New York.
She was previously an associate creative director at McCann-Erickson New York. *
Matt Seiden was named to the new position of senior vice president in account management at Jordan, McGrath, Case &amp; Taylor Inc., New York.
He was previously senior vice president and director of client services at Ketchum Advertising New York.


Basin Exploration (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Home Video
Pay-Per-View Scoops
Just the idea is startling: suppose you could watch the next Arnold Schwarzenegger film on television even before it was released in movie theaters.
That flip-flop in Hollywood's established order of things is part of a deal announced recently between Carolco Pictures and Tele-Communications Inc., the country's largest cable company.
For the video industry, the implications are unsettling.
Under the agreement, Tele-Communications will invest as much as $90 million in Carolco in return for the right to show up to four new Carolco movies on its pay-per-view network three times on the weekend before they are released.
The first of the four films is expected to be shown late next year.


Transactions
Basketball  National Basketball Association
NBA -- Fined John Starks and the New York Knicks $5,000 each for a flagrant foul Starks committed against Reggie Miller of the Indiana Pacers in a playoff game Tuesday night.
United States Basketball League
USBL -- Announced the resignation of Terry Fiorito, head of officials.


Despite G.O.P. Boycott, Democratic Legislators Elect McCall as Comptroller
Democratic members of the Legislature elected H. Carl McCall as New York's State Comptroller today, but the Republican lawmakers who boycotted the process filed a lawsuit challenging the constitutionality of the vote.
Mr.
McCall, the first black to hold a statewide elective office in New York, took the oath of office immediately after the vote.
Although the Republican lawsuit puts his election in the hands of a judge, Republican officials said they were less interested in unseating Mr.
McCall than in changing the procedure for filling future vacancies and for managing the comptroller's office.


Montross Heads Team USA Lineup
ERIC MONTROSS of North Carolina heads a team of 12 college players selected yesterday to Team USA, which will represent the United States in international competition.
CHRIS WEBBER of Michigan was also selected, but three hours after the team was announced, the all-America sophomore announced he was giving up the remainder of his college eligibility to make himself available for the National Basketball Association draft.
That automatically dropped him from the team.
Team USA is promoted by USA Basketball as a means of giving top college players a chance to represent the United States since N.B.A. players make up the Olympic team.
Team USA will compete against four national teams from European countries as they get ready for the European championships.


Basketball Colleagues at Memorial for Valvano
It was planned as a sort of second-chance service, to give Jim Valvano's New York friends who could not make the funeral in North Carolina an opportunity to pay their respects to the former North Carolina State basketball coach turned broadcaster who died of cancer last week at 47.
Sure enough, among the few hundred at St.
Patrick's Cathedral for the memorial Mass yesterday afternoon were scores of his local friends and colleagues, from Bill Freese, a Manhattan air-conditioning man who went to high school with Valvano on Long Island and roomed with him at Rutgers, to the Seton Hall coach, P. J. Carlesimo.


Legg Mason Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Weather Vanes for Low-Tech Forecasts
YOU don't need a meteorologist, a newspaper weather map or the Weather Channel to know which way the wind blows.
Many people consult a weather vane, which is making a comeback as the decorative accessory of choice.
Weather vanes, which date to the ancient Greeks, arrived in America with New England's earliest settlers.
Paul Revere made weather vanes; his apprentice, Shem Drowne, created the fanciful grasshopper atop Faneuil Hall in Boston.


NBA Seeks Exclusions In TV Contract
The National Basketball Association's new $750 million, four-year contract with NBC restores a goal the league was barred by the Supreme Court from pursuing: the end of nationwide superstation cable telecasts of Chicago Bulls and Atlanta Hawks games.
Russ Granik, deputy commissioner of the N.B.A., yesterday confirmed that the contract included a provision that would bar two superstations -- WGN in Chicago and WTBS in Atlanta -- from showing games on cable nationally.
He would not elaborate.


Irving Howe, 72, Critic, Editor and Socialist, Dies
Irving Howe, the literary critic and founding editor of Dissent magazine, who spent a lifetime advancing the cause of humane, democratic socialism, died early yesterday morning at Mount Sinai Hospital.
He was 72.
The cause was cardiovascular disease, the hospital said.
Mr.
Howe had collapsed at his home in Manhattan.


Ray Schaffer, 82, Dies; Of A La Vieille Russie
Ray Schaffer, who owned A La Vieille Russie, one of the world's leading sellers of Russian art, jewelry and antiques, died on Tuesday at her home in Manhattan.
She was 82.
She had been ill for a long time, her family said.


National Forests Make Great Vacation Spots
To the Editor:
Robin W. Winks is right that our national parks are underfinanced ("National Parks Aren't Disneylands," Op-Ed, April 19).
While we await Interior Secretary Bruce Babbitt's reforms, may I suggest, as a transplanted New Yorker, that Easterners planning a Western vacation this summer avoid the national parks and head for the national forests.


In Italy, the Tray's the Thing
THE exhibition of "Trays by Fornasetti" was one of the not-to-be-missed stops at the Salone del Complemento d'Arredo, the accessories show that accompanied Milan's annual furniture fair.
The trays, covered with the prolific Piero Fornasetti's inimitable graphics, look fresher than ever before.
The trays -- rectangular, round, oval or square -- became a springboard for Fornasetti's boundless imagination: fish, screws, letters, spoons, arms, watermelon slices, maps, suns, streetscapes, jewels and coins are only some of the incongruous images that appear on the 500 trays the Milanese illustrator designed and produced from the 50's through the 70's. (He died in 1988.)


David Wheatland, 94, Ex-Curator and Writer
David Pingree Wheatland, founder and former curator of the Collection of Historical Scientific Instruments at Harvard University, died Tuesday at Emerson Hospital in Concord, Mass.
He was 94 and lived in Bedford, Mass.
A native of Salem, Mass., Mr.
Wheatland graduated from Harvard in 1922 and returned to the college as a researcher at the Cruft Library in 1928.
A visit to England in 1937 honed his interest in collecting early scientific books, especially those relating to electricity and magnetism.


Ogden Projects Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


LEVY ON PAYROLLS IS GAINING SUPPORT
Clinton Administration officials said today that they were seriously considering asking employers to pay a percentage of their payrolls in premiums to help finance health care for all Americans.
To raise more money, employees would also have to pay a portion of their earnings.
Employers would pay the premium to a regional health insurance purchasing group, which would buy coverage for hundreds of thousands or millions of people.
The "payroll premium" would apply to all companies that take part in the purchasing pool, including many small businesses that do not now provide health benefits to their workers.


Donald A. Berreth; Federal Health Official, 57
Donald A. Berreth, director of public affairs at the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, died yesterday at St.
Joseph's Hospital in Atlanta.
He was 57.
Mr.
Berreth, who lived in Atlanta, died from complications of a virulent staphylococcal infection that developed a few days ago, said Bob Howard, a spokesman for the centers.


Accounts
*
United States Tennis Association, White Plains, to Lintas New York, to handle its account, previously at Robert Towers Advertising Inc., New York.
Billings were not disclosed. *
USA Networks, New York, to Ahern New York, to handle trade advertising for the Sci-Fi Channel, previously in-house.
Billings were estimated at $3 million.


Ragan (Brad) Inc. (A) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


SunAmerica Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Chiat/Day Honored For Nynex Campaign
For the second consecutive year, Chiat/Day of New York has taken top honors at the annual Obie Awards show, sponsored by the Outdoor Advertising Association of America's marketing division.


Rocking Horse Child Care Centers of America Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Sungard Data Systems Inc.  (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


First Republic Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Corrections
Because of an editing error, a table on the Education page on Wednesday, with an article about salaries and benefits of university officials, referred incorrectly to H. Keith H. Brodie, president of Duke University.
He remains in office.


Executive Changes
ADAGE INC., West Chester, Pa., named Robert Holland, its chief financial officer, to the additional post of president and chief executive of its Allister Access Controls unit.
DOVER CORP., New York, named Thomas Reece president and chief operating officer.
Gary Roubos continues as the chairman and chief executive.


Sports of The Times; Getting The Knicks' Goat
QUICK now, in a word-association test, what do you connect "head-butt" with?
Goat, right?


Market Place; Medphone blames a messenger for its stock-price troubles.
THE Medphone Corporation had two options in explaining why its stock collapsed:
a) Because the Paramus, N.J., company was hemorrhaging cash, losing sales and hanging in such precarious financial condition that its own auditors doubted its survival.


Essay; What About Weld?
Republican William F. Weld, successor to Michael Dukakis as Governor of Massachusetts, is building a record in office that should be a conservative's dream:
"Balanced three budgets without raising taxes or borrowing," goes his resume.
"Held spending under inflation . . . received unprecedented triple upgrade in state bond rating . . . reduced Medicaid 'budget buster' rate of growth by 64 percent over a three-year period . . . cut taxes five times . . . proposed elimination of state capital gains tax for investments held for six years. . . ."


In Wee Hours, Mets Sink Slowly Out West
It is a millionaires club that can't win.
The Mets, who had a 5-2 lead with one of their aces on the mound tonight against the worst club in the National League West, wasted it all, losing to the Dodgers, 6-5.
The Mets, who went deep into the game with a tiring Bret Saberhagen in a desperate attempt to stay out of their bullpen, fell apart in the eighth.
With the Dodgers trailing, 5-4, Jose Offerman singled to start the inning off Mike Maddux.
Mitch Webster then walked when all he was trying to do was sacrifice.
Brett Butler's subsequent sacrifice got the deciding runs in place.
Maddux then walked Jody Reed to load the bases.


Pacers Are Impressed, but Not Overly So
Asked for his impression of the Knicks after Game 3, Donnie Walsh, the Pacers' general manager, did not mince words.
"I think New York's got a lot of class guys on that team -- Patrick Ewing, Charles Oakley, Rolando Blackman, Doc Rivers, Herb Williams -- and I'm sure I'm leaving guys out," Walsh said.
"And I think they want to win and they know how. But they've got a couple of guys on that team that are fools, and everyone has known that all year.


'Moonwalkers' Hit Streets Here on Earth
It was a comfortably cool, moonlit evening, a perfect night for a stroll in this serene, friendly city spanning the Lehigh River.
Peggy Gaul and three friends had car pooled from Catasauqua, some 10 miles away, to do exactly that.
Elizabeth Landis made the 30-minute drive from Allentown, Pa., and Chris Lupone came from nearby Whitehall.


C3 Inc. reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


San Diego Gas &amp; Electric Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Interco Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


PARENT &amp; CHILD
A FRIEND once told me that when he was a child, his father would occasionally bring home a live lobster and threaten to make him and his half dozen brothers and sisters eat it.
The children would shudder with revulsion at the crawling creature and beg their father to let them have egg salad sandwiches instead for dinner.
The parents were thus able to eat their special treat in peace and without breaking the family's food budget.
My friend didn't experience the joy of lobster until he was in college and had to pay for it himself.
Young children are notoriously finicky eaters.
Many parents find that a preschooler's idea of a gastronomic delight is bologna on white bread that has the crusts trimmed off and is cut diagonally -- never into rectangles!
School-age children may insist on peanut butter and jelly for lunch every day and will often declare anything green "yucky."


Clinton Welcomes U.S. Forces Returning From Somalia


Money Market Fund Yields Change Slightly in Week
Yields offered on tax-exempt and taxable money market funds were mixed in the latest week, with little movement in either direction.
IBC's Money Fund Report said yesterday that its survey showed tax-exempt money fund yields were down slightly in the seven-day period ended Tuesday after a sharp rise the previous week.


SCOR U.S. Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Texas Airport Refunding Priced
A $205.5 million tax-exempt bond refunding by the Dallas-Fort Worth Regional Airport was initially priced yesterday with a maximum yield of 5.10 percent for an issue due in 2002 through underwriters led by Bear, Stearns &amp; Company.
All the bonds are insured by the Municipal Bond Investor's Assurance Corporation, giving the financing a triple-A rating from Moody's and Standard &amp; Poor's.


RESULTS PLUS
TENNIS  Becker Finally Wins One on Clay  After struggling on clay all season, Boris Becker finally won on that surface yesterday when he beat Carl-Uwe Steeb, 6-4, 6-2, in the $1.7 million German Open in Hamburg.
Top-seeded Stefan Edberg, fresh from Sunday's tournament victory in Madrid, also breezed into the third round by eliminating Marcelino Filippini of Uruguay, 6-3, 6-3.
Ivan Lendl, seeded No. 3, also reached the third round by edging Alberto Mancini of Argentina, 6-2, 0-6, 6-2.
The Olympic champion, Marc Rosset of Switzerland, was forced to withdraw from his second-round match against Francisco Clavet of Spain because of tonsillitis. (AP) A Day for Teen-Agers: Jennifer Capriati overcame an aching elbow and more than 20 unforced errors and beat Sandra Cecchini, Italy's top female player, 6-3, 6-2, in the Italian Open in Rome.
But the 17-year-old American had to take runner-up honors for the day's thrills to Francesca Bentivoglio, a 16-year-old qualifier from Italy.
Cheered on by a large center court crowd at the Foro Italico, Bentivoglio upset seventh-seeded Jana Novotna, 7-5, 7-6 (7-5).
The victory by the youngster, ranked 329th in the world, kept alive Italy's slim hopes in the clay-court classic, which has not been won by an Italian since Raffaela Reggi in 1985. (AP)


SERBS REJECT BOSNIA PACT, DEFYING FRIENDS AND FOES, AND INSIST ON REFERENDUM
Ignoring appeals from both friends and foes, delegates to the Bosnian Serbs' assembly voted overwhelmingly today to reject the plan to end the war in Bosnia and instead to put the peace accord to the people in a referendum.
Voting at the end of a 17-hour session at which the leaders of Serbia and Yugoslavia and the Greek Prime Minister joined the assembly's leader in pleading for acceptance of the peace plan, the delegates voted 65 to 1, with 12 abstentions, to call a referendum of all Bosnian Serbs on May 15 and 16 to ratify their rejection of the plan.


Another Outsider Is Appointed at I.B.M.
As Louis V. Gerstner Jr. has started overhauling I.B.M.'s top corporate staff this week, the people he's bringing in look a lot like Lou Gerstner: outsiders to the computer industry but well-traveled finance experts with experience in turning around troubled enterprises.
The company announced yesterday that Gerald M. Czarnecki, chairman of Bank of America's Hawaiian subsidiary, would become the International Business Machines Corporation's senior vice president for human resources and administration.


Don't Let New York's Mentally Ill Fall Through Medicaid Crack
To the Editor:
The report of New York's Commission on the Quality of Care for the Mentally Disabled on care for discharged psychiatric patients underscores issues of which mental health providers and New York's Office of Mental Health are aware (news article, April 29).
However, an important piece is missing.


Romeo Gigli's Couture Rugs
ROMEO GIGLI, the Italian fashion designer, thought up the idea for his own line of kilim rugs while on vacation last year on a Greek island, said Christopher Farr, director of a London-based rug company.
"He based them on his primeval feelings on the creation of the universe," Mr.
Farr added.
Mr.
Farr's partner, Matthew Bourne, and Mr.
Gigli's assistant, Claire Joseph, trekked to what Mr.
Farr described as "the remote wilds of Anatolia," in Turkey, to keep an eye on the production of the hand-woven tapestry rugs that are made with specially dyed wool.


Don't Let New York's Mentally Ill Fall Through Medicaid Crack; Friendship Helps
To the Editor:
"Follow-Up Care for Mental Patients Is Criticized" (news article, April 29) highlights the mentally ill's inability to gain access to community-based services.
Particularly important are findings by New York's Commission on the Quality of Care for the Mentally Disabled that informal support systems were significantly associated with a mentally ill patient's successful transition from the hospital to the community as well as with preventing rehospitalization.


Atcor Resources reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Clinton's Refocusing
When President Clinton confessed on Tuesday that the White House needed "tighter coordination" because it had lost clarity of purpose, he said he planned to fix things by reorganizing his staff.
It may take more than that.
The President is part of the problem, in the view of many senior staff members, because of his own native ebullience, the type of experience he brought to the job and the kinds of people he chose to surround himself with.
He needs to learn to discipline himself, the associates say, as well as strengthening the structure built to serve him.


Du Pont, Struggling With Costs, Revamps Units
E.I. du Pont de Nemours &amp; Company, which has struggled to cut costs, yesterday announced a reorganization of its chemical and manufacturing operations that would further reduce employment and, if it worked as planned, speed decision-making.
The company said it would eliminate its six business sector organizations, like fibers and chemicals, and instead group its related businesses in five new organizations it called strategic business units.
A spokesman for Du Pont said the reorganization was part of a previously announced program to improve financial performance by $2 billion.
The changes would take effect on June 1.


Bottom Third Bushwhacks Perez in Top of the Second
The eruption was sudden and surprising.
Melido Perez was breezing by the California Angels, putting the fans at Yankee Stadium to sleep with consistency.
Three straight strikeouts bridging the first and second innings?
Maybe the fans should sneak a quick nap before the Yankees batted in the second.
Before anyone could snooze, the second inning had turned disastrous because the bottom third of the California order chipped and chopped away for three runs off Perez.
A walk, a bouncing single and Gary DiSarcina's startling three-run homer, all with two outs, powered the Angels to a 6-2 victory last night.


State-O-Maine Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28


Horsham Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Expansion Teams Feeling Expansive
A funny thing happened on the way to the second month of the season.
The expansion teams forgot their place.
Thirty days after major league baseball started up again, some of the deans of the National League -- the Mets, the Reds, the Dodgers -- find themselves either looking up or looking sideways at the neophyte Rockies and Marlins, while Colorado and Florida look longingly at fourth place in their respective divisions.


Starbucks Corp. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 28


Elbow Surgery for Mavericks' Davis
Dallas Mavericks forward TERRY DAVIS will undergo surgery Saturday in hopes of salvaging motion in his shattered left elbow and allowing him any chance at rescuing his basketball career.
Davis was injured in an auto accident Sunday when he drove his car off a road in his hometown of South Boston, Va.
A passenger was killed.


On the Bike, Young Rider Is Own Toughest Critic
In bicycle racing, where athletes often get better with age, the favorites in the Tour Du Pont are 29-year-old Raul Alcala of Mexico, 31-year-old Atle Kvalsvoll of Norway, 31-year-old Malcolm Elliott of Britain, 34-year-old Mike Engelman of Santa Cruz, Calif., and Junior.
Junior is what friends call 21-year-old Lance Armstrong of Plano, Tex., a professional for only eight months.
On the bike, he is aggressive, daring and punishing.
Off the bike, while life is still a lot of laughs, he is brutally demanding of himself, always suspecting he should do better.
He was bitterly disappointed with his 14th-place finish in last summer's Olympics.


Vincent Rao, Judge In Criminal Cases, Is Dead at Age 79
Vincent P. Rao, a retired New York City judge and former assistant United States attorney, died on Tuesday at home in Hawthorne, N.J., at the age of 79.
The cause was Parkinson's disease, his family said.


Bancflorida Financial reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Now Bowie Goes Out and Nets May Soon Be Following
Chuck Daly might as well park an ambulance near the court at Byrne Meadowlands Arena and leave the back door open.
Sooner or later someone on the Nets will need medical attention.
Daly himself must have got an ulcer tonight when center Sam Bowie was helped off the court with a sprained left ankle.
Another injury, another loss, this time by 93-84 to the Cleveland Cavaliers in Game 3 of their playoff series.
Bowie injured the ankle in the second quarter after stepping on Brad Daugherty's foot.
X-rays of the ankle did not reveal a break.
Although his status for Game 4 here Friday was uncertain, the chances of Bowie playing are slim.
Doctors placed Bowie's foot in a cast to try and keep the swelling down.
He is scheduled for more tests on Thursday.


F.C.C. Asked To Deny Bid To Buy Post
In the first of what is expected to be a series of efforts to stop Rupert Murdoch's attempt to buy The New York Post, a Connecticut businessman who bid for the paper in March asked the Federal Communications Commission yesterday to block the acquisition.
The petition was filed by Mahmoud Wahba, owner of Champion Holdings in Greenwich, who argued that his bid for the paper was never given serious consideration by the bankruptcy court overseeing The Post's assets.


CompUSA Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 27


Russia Ready to Supply More Troops for the U.N.
As part of its campaign to forge a new relationship with the West, Russia promised today to contribute troops to an international peacekeeping force in Bosnia and Herzegovina if a peace agreement goes into effect there.
[ Moscow made the commitment just hours before the Bosnian Serbs' assembly voted early Thursday to reject the plan offered by United Nations and European Community mediators. ]


Low Voter Turnout Found In School Board Election
In the most heralded New York City school board elections in a generation, an election billed as the battleground of the religious right and the secular left, most people voted with their feet -- and simply stayed home.
While the Board of Elections had not completed the count of how many people took part in the cumbersome paper balloting, election officials said yesterday that the turnout appeared extremely low, though somewhat higher than the 7 percent recorded in the last election.


Theater in Review
American Lesion  Playground Theater 230 East Ninth Street East Village A play in three parts by Tom Gilroy; production design by H. G. Arrott; lighting by Raymond J. Reehill; costumes by Chelsea Maruskin; produced by Fernando Gomes; stage manager, Michael Kang; action coordinator, Rick Sordelet; sound by David Ferdinand and Hamish McKaye.
Presented by Machine Full.
COLLATERAL DAMAGE, directed by Lili Taylor.
WITH: Tom Gilroy, Fernando Gomes and Chris Rossi MICROWAVE RECIPES, directed by Mark Williams.
WITH: Tom Kopache and John Ventimiglia HUNG, directed by Michael Imperioli.
WITH: Steve Mark Friedman and Maggie Low
The future of Western civilization and in particular the English language, is decidedly bleak in "American Lesion," three thematically related one-act plays by Tom Gilroy.
"Nothing works," as a bored and frustrated husband says in the last of the short pieces.
This is the way the world ends, with whiners and whimperers.


Sybase Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Corrections
A picture caption yesterday about a suspect in a mass murder in East Harlem, shown in a baseball club photo, pointed him out incorrectly in some copies.
He was seated second from the left, not third.


Treasury Maturities Shortened
The Treasury Department surprised the bond market yesterday by making a big change in its debt management policy, shifting its emphasis to shorter-term borrowing.
The Treasury announced that it would increase the sale of two- and three-year notes and shorter-term Treasury bills, so it can reduce its borrowing through issues with maturities of five years and over by 45 percent.
In the process, the Treasury eliminated the seven-year note, a favorite tool in the corporate and mortgage markets.


Anacomp Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Oneita Industries reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Corrections
An article yesterday about Senator John S. McCain referred incorrectly to the end of the Vietnam War, in which he served and was a prisoner of war.
It was in April 1975; what occurred in January 1973 was the cease-fire agreement.


Behind Dinkins Fiscal Squeeze: Cost Spiral
Mayor David N. Dinkins says there are many reasons why he is once again struggling to close a large, looming budget gap.
But the Mayor's critics and some fiscal experts contend that the problem is simple: the city's expenses are growing faster than its revenues.
The experts have insisted for the last three years that this fundamental structural imbalance is at the core of New York City's fiscal distress, and they have warned repeatedly that budget gaps and service reductions will plague Mr.
Dinkins and his successors unless the city takes bold action.


United Industrial reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Review/Television; White Brothers, Victims of Apartheid
From this distance, the four Watson brothers look like ideal establishment South Africans.
Good rugby players, successful businessmen and, of course, white, they are photogenic enough to pose for "Visit South Africa" posters.
Their only problem over the years has been their friendship with black South Africans and their affinity for the African National Congress.
Gavin, Ronnie, Valence and Dan Watson are the heroes of "Burning Down the House," a strong documentary from Britain that accuses South African security forces of plotting to destroy the lives of these nonconformists.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
The Administration is considering requiring employers to pay a percentage of their payrolls to help finance health care.
The money would go to a health insurance purchasing group, which would buy coverage for millions of people.  [ Page A1. ]
President Clinton's tax plan is under fire from some who say it would sabotage the Tax Reform Act of 1986 by creating new loopholes and rewarding tax shenanigans.
News Analysis.  [ D1. ]


Maclean Hunter reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


50's Futurism Reigns Again
HOLD on to your hot plate and your Kelvinator.
The kitchens that were making news at the Eurocucina fair were, well, old-fashioned.
In Roberto Lazzeroni's Fly kitchen for Gandi, the 1950's reigned.
The refrigerator, above, was a cool-looking, free-standing affair.
Striped fabric, hung like little curtains, charmingly replaced Binova's cabinet doors.


U.S. to Use Agents to Detect Mortgage Bias
The Clinton Administration, granting a wish long held by consumer groups and housing activists, has decided to begin the widespread use of undercover agents to test whether mortgage lenders are illegally discriminating among borrowers.
Advocates of tough enforcement of the fair housing and lending laws have long called for the use of testers.
But in the past, Federal banking authorities have resisted.
Bankers strongly oppose the use of testers, calling the tool unreliable.


Ms. Holtzman's Ethical Stumble
Elizabeth Holtzman seems unburdened by any obligation to keep an eye on her own books, a rather odd stance for New York City's proudly self-righteous Comptroller.
She explains an apparent impropriety in her campaign financing practices by claiming ignorance.
If her claim is true, she was not only uninformed but sloppy.
Part of the same banking company that lent Ms.
Holtzman $450,000 in last year's Senate campaign was later named -- on her office's recommendation -- an underwriter of city bonds.
Nobody on her staff ever disclosed the campaign connection.
And she says she knew nothing about it.


Communications Systems Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Dr. Hayim Leaf, 79, Hebrew Scholar, Dies
Dr.
Hayim Leaf, a Hebrew scholar and writer and professor emeritus of Hebrew literature at Yeshiva University, died on Sunday at the Jewish Home and Hospital for the Aged in the Bronx.
He was 79 and a resident of the Bronx.
The cause was complications from a stroke he had suffered late last year, Yeshiva said.


Clinton's 100 Days: First Down, Not Game!
To the Editor:
I am sick, tired and disgusted with all the talk about the first 100 days of the Clinton Presidency ("President Asks for Time and a Little Tenderness," news article, April 26).


Art Imitates Furniture
ON view at the Design Gallery Milano was Alessandro Mendini's latest collection of artifacts. (Somehow it doesn't seem appropriate to call a chest of drawers that looks like a stack of boxes and is crowned with a bonsai tree, below, or cabinets topped with glass fish, simply "furniture.") Even those visitors who claimed to be tired of art furniture could not help be charmed by what they saw.


Ailing Fernandez Sent Home
Sid Fernandez, who has suffered from countless ailments during his career, was sent back to New York today by the Mets to have a painful right knee examined by the club's doctors.
Fernandez, who first reported discomfort in the knee Tuesday, was set to undergo a magnetic resonance imaging examination Thursday in Manhattan.
The left-hander will miss his scheduled start on Friday against the Florida Marlins.
The Mets wouldn't rule out putting him on the disabled list.


Whaler Post for Lake Superior Coach
JEFF JACKSON, who coached Lake Superior State to the 1992 N.C.A.A. hockey title and a second-place finish last season, is joining the Hartford Whalers as an assistant coach.


Budapest Tries to Sell Hungarians on Capitalism
All over the Hungarian capital, a little boy in the red fez, the trademark of an Austrian grocery chain, beckons buyers.
In addition, a German clothing chain's outlets and American candy shops compete for space along the Great Ring Road in Budapest with fast food franchises like Pizza Hut, Kentucky Fried Chicken and Dunkin' Donuts.
But the market economy that has brought variety to store shelves in the Hungarian capital has also brought the prospect of new monopolies.


Citizens Utilities reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Golden Names of Earlier Era Begin Masters Tournament
Owen Williams built it -- a tidy tennis arena within an old armory -- and they came, in modest numbers.
The event, the Manhattan Masters tournament, began last night in the armory at Lexington Avenue and 26th Street, where four decades ago the Knicks played many of their home games.


Megafoods Stores Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to April 3


Serene Show House: Balm for the Frazzled
IT'S probably a good thing that it takes some time to get out to the bucolic Connecticut suburbs from midtown Manhattan.
Some harried New Yorkers might need the time to relax before meandering through rooms decorated just to be, well, pretty.
And livable. And done up just so, but not too much.
The 17 designers, 12 landscape designers and 1,000 volunteers from the community who have joined forces to produce the first Southport show house are a congenial group, too.
And that includes a couple of big guns in the decorating establishment.


Bowe Suffers Injury to Ring Finger
In the latest explanation of what's wrong with RIDDICK BOWE,his manager, ROCK NEWMAN, said last night that the International Boxing Federation and World Boxing Association heavyweight title holder dislocated a finger in a sparring accident last Thursday.
Newman said Bowe would return to sparring today and be ready to face JESSE FERGUSON on May 22.


Women's Group Shows Its Support for Central Park at Gala Luncheon


Cavco Industries reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Aptargroup Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Corrections
An article on Friday about the strangulation of a 24-year-old woman at the Grand Hyatt Hotel in midtown Manhattan included an erroneous occupation for the suspect, Gerald Ardito, supplied by the police.
He was working for Creative Network Systems at the time of his arrest.
He is not the owner of Prompt Temporary Agency.


Sun Television &amp; Appliances (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28


Key Issue for U.S. and U.N.: Who Leads the Peacekeepers
Even as the Bosnian Serbs debated the peace plan for Bosnia and Herzegovina, the United States and the United Nations were at odds today over who would control the troops enforcing it.
For the moment, the matter is moot, because the assembly of Bosnia Serbs voted late tonight -- early Thursday morning in Bosnia -- to reject the peace plan.


Vencor Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Continental Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Bronx Hospital Is Criticized Over Hazards
A routine inspection of North Central Bronx Hospital this winter found a variety of problems that threaten patient care, according to a report released yesterday by the New York State Department of Health.
In one case, a patient died after a combination of improper treatment and a delay in emergency resuscitation caused by a broken elevator.
The hospital also suffers from equipment shortages and improper charting and reporting practices, the report says.


British Leader's Compromise Delays European Pact Again
Prime Minister John Major's timetable for ratification of the treaty on European union suffered an almost certain setback today, after he gave in to political opponents threatening him with an embarrassing political defeat in Parliament.
Only two weeks ago, members of Mr.
Major's Conservative Government were boasting that they had escaped a bewildering series of procedural ambushes laid by a rump group of Tory rebels determined to wreck the treaty.


An Old Florio Aide Returns But Is Haunted by Inquiry
Joseph C. Salema, Gov.
Jim Florio's old friend, most trusted aide and all-purpose chief adviser, seems to find himself in a recurring bad dream: He rushes to help his friend and instead threatens him with scandal.
When Mr.
Salema became Mr.
Florio's chief of staff 30 months ago, he returned to Mr.
Florio's side after earlier criticism forced him to withdraw as an adviser.
Mr.
Salema's problem then, as now, was his highly successful business dealings as a financial consultant with a list of lucrative government contracts that reached from the gritty streets of Camden to bond desks of Wall Street.


South African Rightists Rally Behind Ex-Generals
Under the leadership of four retired generals, almost all of South Africa's white separatist political parties, labor unions, farm organizations and paramilitary groups have coalesced for a last-ditch resistance to black rule.
Leaders of the group, which plans to unveil itself on Friday as the Afrikaner People's Front, demand that an Afrikaner homeland be carved from the northeastern province of Transvaal as an independent refuge for South Africans who share their language and conservative values.


A Livery-Cab Driver Refuses to Be Robbed
Jorge Francia, who had emigrated from Peru and had ended up driving a livery cab 14 hours a day to support his family, felt the barrel of the gun against his neck early yesterday morning in Queens.
"Take off your ring, the watch, give me your money," said the voice of the man in the back seat.
"And get out of the cab."


Barcelona Reclaims Miro, An Expatriate Native Son, With Centenary Exhibitions
Joan Miro was born here 100 years ago, but he spent most of the 1920's and 30's in Paris and then settled in Palma, Majorca, where he died in 1983.
Indeed, until he established the Joan Miro Foundation in Montjuic Park overlooking this city in 1975, Barcelona had few of his works.
For the centenary of his birth, however, Barcelona has reclaimed its native son with a passion, not only mounting a major retrospective of his paintings in the Miro Foundation's own spacious museum, but also organizing dozens of smaller exhibitions focusing on ceramics, engravings and other aspects of his work.


Orion Capital Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Contrary to Rumor, Mothers Are Happy
GOOD news in time for Mother's Day: Two-thirds of American women say they feel closer to their mothers now than they did when they were growing up.
That is among the findings of a national survey published this week by EDK Associates, a public opinion research company in New York City.


Squaring Off on Taxes; Clinton Proposals Are Drawing Fire From Supporters of 1986 Reform Law
As Congress takes up the President's tax plan in earnest this week, the Clinton proposals are coming under fire from many supporters of the Tax Reform Act of 1986, who say parts of the plan will sabotage that much-praised law.
Admirers of those reforms say President Clinton's proposals will violate the spirit of '86 by creating new loopholes and rewarding tax shenanigans.
They say the plan could encourage creative lawyers and accountants to play the type of tax-avoiding games the 1986 law sought to stamp out.


Utah Medical Products Inc.  (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


National Western Life Insurance Co. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Unit Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Creativity and Commitment Are Hallmarks of 10 Educators
They are New York City's newest group of prize-winning educators: 10 principals and teachers honored for bringing creativity and commitment to their work in elementary and middle schools in the city's poorest neighborhoods.
Now they will be contributing something else: money.
Each winner gets $2,500 for personal use and another $2,500 to promote a teaching program.


Rouse Co. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Ho Chi Minh City Journal; How's Vietnam Doing? Doctor Expresses Disgust
"We fought for freedom, independence and social justice," said Dr.
Duong Quynh Hoa, Health Minister in the underground Communist Government of South Vietnam from its founding in 1969 until its merger with North Vietnam in 1976.
"Now all is money."
"All values have been turned upside down," she said in an interview in her office at the Center for Pediatrics, Development and Health, which she heads.
"You can count on your fingers the revolutionaries who still believe in ideals."


New Line Cinema Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Doctor Held In a Sex Case Had a Record
A doctor who was arrested and charged yesterday with fondling a patient in an Upper East Side medical office was permitted to practice medicine in New York State even though state regulators knew that he had been convicted of sexually assaulting a patient in New Jersey four months ago.
Dr.
Dennis Kleinman of Demarest, N.J., pleaded not guilty yesterday to a single count of sexual abuse at an arraignment in State Supreme Court in Manhattan.
If he can post bail, state health officials said, he will remain free to practice medicine.


Florida Rock Industries reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


A Hawkish Shadow in Israel's Political Wings
One school of thought holds that Benjamin Netanyahu's election a few weeks ago as leader of Israel's opposition Likud Party was the best inducement in a long time for quick agreements in the Middle East peace talks.
The reasoning goes like this:
A collapse of the negotiations under way in Washington could quickly lead to a collapse as well of the present Labor-led Government, which is committed to land-for-peace arrangements rejected by Mr.
Netanyahu and others on the Israeli political right.


Cardinal Undergoes Surgery to Relieve Enlarged Prostate
John Cardinal O'Connor underwent surgery at St.
Vincent's Hospital in Manhattan yesterday morning to relieve an enlarged prostate, and by midafternoon he was feeling well enough to work from his hospital bed, church and hospital officials said.
"He's already working again as best as anyone can in a hospital setting," Joseph Zwilling, a spokesman for the Roman Catholic Archdiocese of New York, said at a news conference in the hospital's lobby.


Elderly Trapped by Pride and Their Ties to the Past; State Repair Money Can Be Scarce for Dilapidated Houses of the Aged in the Catskills
Violet Brown, 73, first saw the old house that is her home when the road in front was only a cow path and she was just 12 years old.
She tagged along with her older brother when he came to the neighborhood to visit his new in-laws, and met the shy boy who would one day become her husband.
Now her longtime home, 200 years old, is in serious disrepair.
She treads gingerly in the bathroom, for fear of falling through the floor, and she hurt herself trying to stop the water cascading through a crack in her living room wall during a recent rainstorm.


CHRONICLE
The actress JESSICA LANGE has taken up the cause of orphans in Romania.
She appeared yesterday at a news conference in Washington with Representative BART GORDON, a Democrat from Tennessee, who sought to broaden support for linking preferred trade status for Romania with efforts to help the orphans.
Describing her own efforts, Miss Lange said that on a recent visit, she had tried in vain to bring out a 5-year-old girl who has been blind since birth, The Associated Press reported.


NORTH KOREA STIRS NEW A-ARMS FEARS
Experts monitoring North Korea say they are increasingly concerned that the country may be preparing to use 50 tons of uranium now fueling a large reactor as raw material for nuclear weapons.
The diversion, under the guise of a long-planned change of fuel in the reactor, seems likely to come within weeks or months of June 12, when North Korea officially withdraws from the treaty to halt the spread of nuclear weapons.
If efforts to persuade North Korea to respect the treaty fail, the country's hard-line Communist leadership would be free on June 12 to convert the spent fuel into plutonium, the element at the core of nuclear bombs.


Lockheed Plans Launcher
Hit hard by the post-cold war decline in military spending, the Lockheed Corporation said Tuesday that it would build midsize rockets to send both military and civilian payloads into space.
The Lockheed Missiles and Space Company, based in Sunnyvale, Calif., a division of the aerospace company, said the new solid-fuel launchers would accommodate payloads ranging from 2,300 to 8,000 pounds.
The civilian customers that Lockheed hopes to attract include telecommunications companies that are launching larger numbers of small satellites.


Moore Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


At Belmont, a 10-1 Shot Scorches the Withers Mile
Belmont Park opened its 72-day spring and summer season yesterday with a burst of speed that matched one track record and broke another but that probably produced no major new candidate for the Preakness Stakes next week.
In the day's most memorable demonstration of speed, the 10-1 long shot Williamstown, a son of Seattle Slew, outran a band of favorites and won the 118th Withers in faster time than any other horse in the track's history had run one mile.
He shot the distance on a fast but moist track in 1:32 3/5 with Craig Perret riding and, like everybody else in the race, carried 124 pounds.
He sliced two-fifths of a second off the record of 1:33 set in 1982 by Conquistador Cielo, who was carrying only 111 pounds at the time.


A Sensible Vaccine Compromise
When, soon after his inauguration, President Clinton announced an initiative that would guarantee free immunization to every preschooler, his heart was in the right place.
But he is under rising pressure to control Government expenditures and is rightly urged to pick his fights carefully.
So he is probably wise to scale down his plan to buy up the pharmaceutical industry's entire vaccine production, then distribute it gratis to public clinics and private doctors.
By targeting his program only on those most at risk, he can still reach the most important goal -- insuring that all preschoolers gain access to the needed vaccines.


METRO DIGEST
2 STATES BATTLE OVER A KILLER'S FATE
In a highly unusual dispute between two states, New York and Oklahoma are battling for the custody, and the life, of a man whom both have convicted of murder.
In both states, the man strangled an elderly neighbor with electrical wire.
But Oklahoma wants to execute him, while New York is insisting that he first serve out the rest of his 20-years-to-life prison sentence.
A1.
NEW YORK CITY  CENTRAL PARK RESERVOIR'S ROLE TO END
Dinkins administration officials have decided to stop pumping drinking water from the 131-year-old Central Park Reservoir by the end of the summer.
City officials said they no longer needed the reservoir and were under pressure from environmental officials concerned about the potential for contamination.
A1.


Canadian Pacific reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Did Only White Men Take Daughters to Work?
To the Editor:
I applaud your coverage of Take Our Daughters to Work Day, conceived by the Ms.
Foundation for Women, to build self-esteem among girls, but also express my concern that your most prominent photographs were confined to white men at work with their daughters (front page, April 29).


Santa Anita Cos. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Hornets Oust Celtics In Down-to-Wire Style
The embattled Boston Celtics, already reeling from the potentially career-ending heart condition of Reggie Lewis, suffered a final, bitter defeat of their season when Charlotte's 104-103 victory gave the Hornets a three-games-to-one triumph in the franchise's first playoff series.
Alonzo Mourning made a 17-foot jump shot with 0.4 seconds to play, after a quick inbounds pass from Dell Curry along the left baseline, to overcome Boston's desperate rally from a 19-point deficit.
Mourning, who scored 33 points and blocked 6 shots, took one dribble to his right and lifted the shot just beyond the late lunge of Celtics forward Xavier McDaniel.


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt  *
Arizona Transportation Board is offering $187.4 million of tax-exempt highway revenue refunding bonds through underwriters led by Smith Barney, Harris Upham &amp; Co.
The issue was initially priced to yield from 2.60 percent in 1994 to 4.40 percent in 1998, 5.05 percent in 2003 and 5.57 percent in 2009.
The bonds are rated Aa by Moody's and AAA by S.&amp; P.
*
County of Hawaii is offering $86.7 million of tax-exempt general obligation bonds through Dean Witter Reynolds.
The bonds were initially priced to yield from 3.40 percent in 1995 to 5.65 percent in 2013.
The bonds are insured by the Financial Guaranty Insurance Co. and are rated triple-A by Moody's and S.&amp; P.


Catalina Marketing reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Did Only White Men Take Daughters to Work?; The Missing Women
To the Editor:
The three front-page photographs of fathers and daughters accompanying "For Girls, a Time to See the Workaday World" (April 29) ironically fail to capture the symbolism of the day.
Only in the middle of the Metro Section is there a photograph depicting a working female, a judge with her daughter adorned in her mother's robe.


The Surest of All Signs of Spring: House and Garden Tours
ROOMS, houses, apartments and gardens for this year's tours and show houses, many of them fund-raising events for civic groups and charities, are being made ready for visitors.
Here is a sampling in the New York City area and the Northeast.
New York City
Brooklyn Heights, Saturday -- Five houses built between 1846 and 1900, including a two-story carriage house and an Italianate frame house, will be open from 1 to 5 P.M.
There will also be guided tours of the Plymouth Congregational Church of the Pilgrim at 3:30 and 4:30 P.M.
Tickets on the day of the tour, $20, at 122 Pierrepont Street (Clinton Street).
No children under 13 except infants in front carrying packs.
Information: (718) 858-9193.


Big Jet Pacts For Hasty And Baxter
The Jets and James Hasty split the difference in their contract dispute yesterday, and the cornerback wound up as the highest-salaried defensive back in the National Football League.
Hasty's lawyer, Lamont Smith of Denver, said he signed a two-year deal "worth almost $2 million a year."


Lawyers Offer Clashing Pictures Of B.C.C.I.'s Tie to a U.S. Bank
In the fraud and bribery trial of Robert A. Altman, prosecution and defense lawyers yesterday painted sharply different pictures of the ties between the Bank of Credit and Commerce International and First American Bank of New York, a subsidiary of the bank holding company that Mr.
Altman is accused of helping B.C.C.I.  acquire.
The defense lawyers sought to show that Mr.
Altman had been open about the ties and that he had not concealed anything from bank regulators as the prosecution charges.
To that end, they produced a 1986 New York State bank examiner's report acknowledging some ties between the banking companies but concluding that there had been no violation of pledges to keep them separate.


Ben Franklin Retail Stores Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Lobbyists' Gifts To Be Disclosed, Senators Agree
The Senate succumbed today to ethical bombardment by a Minnesota Democrat and voted to bare one of its most tightly held secrets: the size and worth of the gifts, free meals and other perks showered on its members by lobbyists.
If the action survives a series of votes that lie ahead, as appears likely, lobbyists will be required next year to publicly report any benefits exceeding $20 -- in cash, valuables, trips or anything else -- that they give to senators or members of their staffs.
Smaller gifts to a senator would still be disclosed if their total value exceeded $50 from any source in one year.


Bridge
Ask an average player, or even an expert, to define a nonmaterial squeeze and you will probably collect a blank stare.
One of these rare supernatural birds, first analyzed by the late Geza Ottlik of Hungary, occurred two weeks ago.
It was played in the Thursday night Imp Pairs game at the Town Club, 9 East 86th Street in Manhattan, which has one of the country's busiest rubber bridge programs.
The South player was Ira Herman, who eventually chose to play six no-trump rather than six spades.
He would have had an easy time after a routine heart lead, but West was inspired to lead a club.
Notice that against six spades East would have had to be even more inspired and lead the club eight.


Reviews/Television; A Movie Queen and Her Serious Side
This year's recipient of the American Film Institute Award for Life Achievement, bestowed on March 11 at a dinner in Beverly Hills, Calif., is Elizabeth Taylor.
As might be expected, she puts her own distinctive spin on the occasion, now condensed to a one-hour tape that can be seen on ABC tonight at 9 as "The American Film Institute Salute to Elizabeth Taylor."
Ms.
Taylor is not your ordinary recipient.
Entering the ballroom to the traditional standing ovation, she positions herself at the table of honor between her latest husband, Larry Fortensky, and Michael Jackson, who appears giddy with excitement.
Watching clips from her movies and listening to tributes from friends and colleagues, Ms.
Taylor alternates between throwing friendly winks and kisses to the anointed of her inner circle and looking rather suspiciously amused at everyone else.


Khmer Rouge Said to Attack Chinese Peacekeepers
The United Nations said today that Khmer Rouge guerrillas had attacked Chinese and Polish peacekeepers in central Cambodia in an expansion of a terror campaign intended to disrupt elections this month.
The two-hour attack on Tuesday night in city of Kompong Thom, about 85 miles north of Phnom Penh, could signal a final break between the Khmer Rouge and China, which had long been the chief ideological and financial patron of the Khmer Rouge.


New York Battles Oklahoma Over Custody of a Murderer
In a highly unusual dispute between two states, New York and Oklahoma are battling for the custody, and the life, of a man whom both have convicted of murder.
The man, Thomas Grasso, 30 years old, committed similar crimes in both states, strangling an elderly neighbor with electrical wire in each case.
But the two states have vastly different intentions for him.
Oklahoma wants to execute Mr.
Grasso, possibly by the end of the summer.
But New York, which does not have the death penalty, is insisting that he first serve out the rest of his 20-years-to-life prison sentence here.


TBC Corp. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Man Held in Bombing but Is Not Charged, Lawyer Says
A 27-year-old Palestinian man, who arrived in this country last September with a forged passport and a suitcase full of books on explosives, has been held for two months by Federal officials and is being questioned in connection with the World Trade Center bombing, according to law-enforcement officials and documents filed by his lawyers in court this week.
The status of the man, Ahmad Muhammad Ajaj, came to light at a news conference yesterday called by his lawyers to protest his detention.
They said he was being unfairly held at the Metropolitan Correctional Center because no charges have been filed against him.


U.S. Can Corp. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to April 4


The Elements of Stress in Parenting, 101
WELCOME to "Family Life," a drama in two acts.
Act I. Morning.
The Parent in Charge rolls out of bed, rouses the children, firmly grips the family megaphone and begins barking orders:


U.S. Intends to Require Label on Meat's Cooking
For the first time since the Federal Government began regulating the safety of the American food supply, the Department of Agriculture announced yesterday that it would require all raw meat and poultry to have labels with cooking and handling instructions.
The outline for the new regulations, which would apply to products sold in bulk and at retail outlets, was included in a legal document settling a lawsuit brought against the department by a consumer group and others.


Daniel Industries reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


INFECTION LINKED TO TAINTED CIDER
A study published today has documented an outbreak of bacterial infection in southeastern Massachusetts caused by fresh-pressed apple cider.
The study by researchers at the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention in Atlanta showed that the bacteria, Escherichia coli 0157:H7, had been found in the cider and that it had caused severe diarrhea, abdominal cramps and other ailments in 1991.


Preferred Health Care reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Review/Dance; Looking Deceptively Simple Inside Stage Frames
Trisha Brown can be trusted not to do anything the easy way these days.
"One Story as in Falling," a premiere presented by the Trisha Brown Dance Company on Tuesday night at City Center, is a case in point.
There is that mysterious title, for one thing.
And the dance is built around a 16-minute phrase of movement that the choreographer then re-used in "Another Story as in Falling," a hit of this Brown season.
But "One Story" has a deceptively simple look.
The choreography is set, in contrast to the trickily improvisational "Another Story." It is repetitive, with components that are clear and clearly joined, perhaps because "One Story," choreographed for the Compagnie Bagouet of Montpellier, France, was Ms.
Brown's first creation for dancers other than her own.
The French dancers performed the piece and will repeat it on Friday night.
What matters is not so much the dancing, it seems, but the imposing stage picture and the relationship of moving and still objects in that chill rectangle.


Critic's Notebook; Inspiring Compassion, if Not Action
Most of the maunderings committed on the subject of television imagery have focused hard on its power to influence policy.
It was assumed that the impact of the stunning scenes from China, Romania, Somalia, Los Angeles on so many millions of Americans must make itself felt in pressure on Washington to do something decisive to relieve the victims and punish the perpetrators.
Whether that should be a source of satisfaction or concern was less obvious.
For a year the "images of horror," as they were described on one of Sunday's interview programs, have been coming from Bosnia like shells in a nonstop assault: children dying, women raped, villages ravaged, cities blasted, with, as someone else said, not too originally, "the whole world watching." And network correspondents like Peter Jennings of ABC and Bob Simon of CBS added their own indignation to the nightly displays of ethnic cleansing.
The coverage has amounted to a prolonged plea that something be done and a reprimand to those who were failing to do it.


Donegal Group Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Marten Transport (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Review/Ballet; A Night of Balanchine and More Balanchine
It is true that quality, not quantity, is what counts in art, and certainly George Balanchine's genius is not in doubt.
Nonetheless, two months devoted exclusively to the performance of 73 Balanchine ballets do not an ordinary season make.
On the 10th anniversary of the New York City Ballet co-founder's death, his company has embarked on the most intensive crash course in one man's dance esthetics that Americans have ever seen.
No other choreographer has ever received so large-scale a tribute.
Above all, it is a season, running through June 27, that promises new connections among familiar works and rarely performed ballets when seen in new contexts.
Typically, even the black-tie gala opening of this "Balanchine Celebration" on Tuesday night at the New York State Theater featured a surprise, one that set up the thematic associations that will weave through the entire festival.


Review/Music; A Requiem for a Russian
Matthew Greenbaum's "Requiem for Vladimir Mayakovsky" -- the piece that ended Friday's mostly literary, partly musical centennial celebration of that Russian poet's birth -- provided an unwitting metaphor for the event as a whole.
Half buried in its electronic moans and swirls lay the tinny recorded voice of Mayakovsky himself, deliberately muffled and distorted and offering the impression of a suppressed personality wanting to be let out.
In much the same way, Mayakovsky's presence on Friday at Lehman College in the Bronx was more or less muffled by another Russian poet, Yevgeny Yevtushenko, who for several hours ate up the stage with extroverted poetry readings (mostly poems by Mr. Yevtushenko), loud asides and athletic, audience-milking shtick.
Through the haze of bombast, traces of Mayakovsky's striking imagination did seep into view.
The poet died in 1930 and left behind some of the century's most interesting and extravagant imagery.


Lancaster Colony (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


When Designers Get the Giggles
FOR the last few years one has come to expect the wittiest tabletop designs from Alessi.
This year, the mood is even more lighthearted.
Especially fun are Alejandro Ruiz's extraterrestrial creature-like salt and pepper shakers; and Massimo Morozzi's bottle opener, shaped like a baby rattle, above, in black, white, or baby blue or pink.
Of course.


New York Times Revamps Management in Advertising
The New York Times announced a reorganization of its advertising department yesterday, naming three executives of The New York Times Company as vice presidents for advertising.
Arthur Sulzberger Jr., publisher of the newspaper, said the appointments would be effective June 1.
Valerie B. Salembier, now senior vice president and publisher of Family Circle, which is owned by the Times Company, will be responsible for the newspaper's advertising sales in the retail, entertainment, corporate, financial, media and book classifications.


HOME IMPROVEMENT
MOST homeowners eventually find they need a ladder, especially for outdoor repairs.
But shopping for one can be confusing and costly.
Here are some guidelines that may help you find a ladder that meets your needs.
All ladders carry a load-rating label that indicates how much weight the ladder will bear.
Type 3 ladders are rated for loads up to 200 pounds and are sometimes designated light-duty or household ladders.
Type 2 ladders are rated for up to 225 pounds and are sometimes called medium-duty or commercial ladders.
Type 1 ladders are for heavy or industrial use and are rated for up to 250 pounds.
Type 1A ladders are designated extra-heavy industrial and are rated for up to 300 pounds.


Starks Is Fined, Then Tries to Shift Some Blame
Unable to provide a rational explanation for his irrational actions on Tuesday night, John Starks was fined $5,000 by the National Basketball Association today for head-butting Reggie Miller.
Starks expressed regret for his behavior, but how could he not feel bad?
His third-quarter ejection Tuesday night helped send the Knicks reeling to a crushing 116-93 loss to the Indiana Pacers in Game 3 of their playoff series.
Starks's teammates and coaches were angered and surprised that he would allow himself to be needlessly ejected from a playoff game.


Burlington Coat Factory reports earnings for Qtr to March 27


Ogden Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Arbour Gives Team a Rinkside Chat
It wasn't exactly a fireside chat in the Franklin Delano Roosevelt tradition, but Coach Al Arbour eschewed the physical side of practice this afternoon and instead assembled his Islanders in their steamy locker room for a pep talk.
The subject of what Arbour referred to as "just a standard little playoff chat" was how to beat the Pittsburgh Penguins in three easy lessons.
With their Patrick Division series knotted at one game apiece, and with the knowledge that they have already defeated the two-time defending Stanley Cup champions four times this season, the Islanders were receptive to Arbour's address.


Where the Biggest News Is Something From 1778
THE monument to the battle of Chestnut Neck is hard to find, despite its 50-foot height that pushes a resolute figure of a granite Continental Army soldier above the tops of surrounding pin oaks and scrub pines.
Most travelers come upon it by chance, just as they might stumble across Port Republic, a town walled off along with its 350 years of history because of an unintentional partnership between conservationists and traffic engineers.


Calendar: Plant Sales In Bloom, Tra-la!
Spring Shopping  New York Botanical Garden, 200th Street and Southern Boulevard, Bedford Park section of the Bronx; (718) 817-8777.
Roses, orchids, trees, ferns, herbs, vegetable plants and perennials are among the thousands of plants that will be for sale on Friday and Saturday, from 10 A.M. to 4 P.M.
No charge with grounds admission fee of $3; students, those 65 and older and children 6 to 16, $2.
Focus on Design  Cooper-Hewitt Museum, 2 East 91st Street; (212) 860-6862.
Two exhibitions start Tuesday and run through Sept. 26.
More than 40 dining implements, from the 18th century to the present, will be used to chronicle the history of tableware design.
Contemporary fabrics are included in a show illustrating the new technologies used in fabric production.
On May 18 at 6:30 P.M., there will be a panel discussion about fabrics and production technology.
Tickets, $15; members, $10.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-17  CONDITIONS SEEN ON BOSNIA  The self-declared parliament of Bosnia's Serbian nationalists prepared to vote this morning in favor of a peace plan, but they planned to attach conditions that raised questions about whether they intended to live up to the plan's terms.
A1  U.S.
LEERY OF CONDITIONS  Administration officials said it was unlikely they would accept any conditions that the Bosnian Serbs may attach to their acceptance of the Balkan peace plan, but were holding back any formal reaction.
A16


Milgray Electronics reports earnings for Qtr to April 4


McCall Elected by Democrats as New York State Comptroller


W. J. Dorvillier, 85; Founded Newspaper And Won a Pulitzer
William J. Dorvillier, founder, editor and publisher of The San Juan Star, who won the Pulitzer Prize in 1961 for distinguished editorial writing, died yesterday at Concord Hospital in New Hampshire.
He was 85 and lived in Concord.
He died of cancer, said his daughter-in-law, Deanna Inez Dorvillier.


131-Year-Old Reservoir Is Deemed Obsolete
Dinkins administration officials have decided to stop pumping drinking water from the 131-year-old Central Park Reservoir by the end of summer.
The 40-foot-deep reservoir, carved by a small army of 1,000 Irish immigrants out of the glinty schist, has been rendered obsolete by changing technology.
City officials say they no longer need the reservoir and are under pressure from Federal environmental officials who are concerned about the potential for contamination in an open reservoir in the middle of the city.


Instrument Systems Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Atmos Energy reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Rochester Bank Gets Buyout Bid
The Rochester Community Savings Bank said yesterday that it had received an unsolicited acquisition offer, apparently in response to its recent efforts to find a buyer for its problem loans.
Bank officials declined to name the potential bidder or comment further until "a more definitive course of action has been established."


Fed Cites Improvement In Economy for April
The Federal Reserve said today that there was "generally modest improvement" in the economy in April after the storm-related slowdown in much of the country in March.
In its survey of economic conditions, known as the beige book, the central bank said "shopper traffic and retail sales were reported to have rebounded modestly" last month.


Rothschild Memorial
A memorial tribute to Judith Rothschild, the artist and philanthropist who died on March 6 at the age of 71, is to be held at 4 P.M. on Monday at the New York Society for Ethical Culture, 2 West 64th Street, Manhattan.
Neil L. Rudenstine, the president of Harvard University, is to make the opening and closing remarks.
Anne d'Harnoncourt, the president of the Pennsylvania Academy of the Fine Arts, is also to speak.


Theater in Review
Buya Africa  John Houseman Theater 450 West 42d Street Clinton Musical director, Emma; musician, Valerie Naranjo; stage manager, Margo Barkdall; house manager, Robert Meyer.
Presented by Eric Krebs Theatrical Management.
WITH: Thuli Dumakude.
In "Buya Africa," her spirited one-woman show of songs, stories and chants, Thuli Dumakude, a singer and actress of formidable charm and vitality, offers an impressionistic portrait of the changing black South African mood.
Partly autobiographical and partly told in the voices of others, the show presents a very rough chronology of the struggle against apartheid as experienced by everyday black South Africans.
The stories are seasoned with informative tidbits of South African folklore.


Did Only White Men Take Daughters to Work?; Sexist Stereotypes
To the Editor:
By excluding boys, the Ms.
Foundation's Take Our Daughters to Work Day became another act of sex discrimination ("For Girls, a Time to See the Workaday World," front page, April 29).
By allowing only girls to discover careers and to see how men and women can work together, we make unfair assumptions: that boys would learn nothing from seeing women and men in nontraditional roles and that boys already know their career options.


To Ban Nuclear Tests, Stop Now
To curb the proliferation of nuclear arms it is important to stigmatize them -- and end all research on perfecting them.
But try telling that to the nuclear labs and the Pentagon.
They want to resume nuclear testing.
And they want to negotiate a comprehensive test ban that is neither comprehensive nor a ban.
They propose to allow an unlimited number of tests under one kiloton of explosive force -- the equivalent of 1,000 tons of TNT.
The professed goal is to make safer, more reliable warheads.
But there is also a hidden agenda: The labs want to stay in the business of making and testing new warheads.


Student Loan Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


In Cattle-Raising West, a County Wants to Help U.S. Manage Federal Lands
In the last four years Catron County here in southwestern New Mexico has been a thorn in the side of environmentalists and Federal agencies.
The county has been filing lawsuits against the Federal Government and passing its own land-use ordinances in a struggle to gain more authority over how Federal forest and grazing lands within its boundaries are managed.
Now the county, home to 2,600 people and a $21 million cattle industry, wants Washington to let it help manage Federal lands under a contract with the Government.
And while many environmental groups are suspicious of the county's motives, Interior Secretary Bruce Babbitt may have no choice but to give the plan a hearing.


Sunrise Medical Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to April 2


Moscow Policeman Dies of Injuries From Rioting
A 25-year-old riot policeman, wounded during clashes between the police and pro-Communist demonstrators on Saturday, died in a Moscow hospital today, becoming the first victim of political violence in the capital since the failed coup in August 1991.
The death of Vladimir Tolokneyev, a member of the Interior Ministry's special OMON unit who was crushed between two trucks during the rioting, is bound to raise tensions in Moscow as the city prepares for another major political demonstration on Sunday, the anniversary of the Soviet victory over Nazi Germany.


State Auto Financial Corp.  (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


An Exhibition of Indian Quilts Inspired by the Morning Star
In the 19th century, when the buffalo began to disappear from the Northern Plains, the Indians lost the animal whose meat they ate, whose sinews they used as thread, and whose hide they turned into robes and used to wrap around themselves and to shroud the dead.
In place of buffalo robes, the Indians made quilts.
"Morning Star Quilts: Quilting Traditions of the Northern Plains Indians," an exhibition of 15 quilts, is part of the Great American Quilt Festival, which will run from May 12 through 16 at Pier 92 in Manhattan.
The festival, which is sponsored by the Museum of American Folk Art in Manhattan, will include 5,000 quilts from 100 dealers, along with lectures, workshops and tours.


Dave Gotkin; Basketball Player, 83
Dave (Java) Gotkin, a high-scoring St.
John's guard from 1932 to 1936, died on Tuesday at a hospital in Plantation, Fla.
Mr.
Gotkin, who lived in East Rockaway, L.I., was 83.
The cause of death was septic shock, said his son, Michael.


Terry Langer, Doctor And Heart Expert, 52
Dr.
Terry Langer, director of clinical cardiology at Presbyterian Medical Center in Philadelphia since 1985, died Tuesday at the Hospital of the University of Pennsylvania.
A resident of Cherry Hill, N.J., he was 52.
The cause of death was liver failure, his family said.


Energy Dept. Submits To Oversight on Safety
After years of resisting any control over it by other Federal agencies, the Energy Department said yesterday that it would voluntarily submit to supervision of worker safety by the Occupational Safety and Health Administration, among other steps to improve safety.
The decision covers about 150,000 contract employees engaged in the perilous task of cleaning up decades of contamination from nuclear weapons production.
The chore is so big and complicated that it will take three to five years for the safety agency just to gear up, the department said, and will take "at least dozens" of inspectors.


General Re Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


CFS Group (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Clean Up the Divorce Bar
The breakup of a marriage is painful enough without having to endure unscrupulous lawyers and New York's sluggish and expensive approach to resolving divorce cases.
A thoughtful new report by a committee of both judges and divorce lawyers offers a road map for reform.
The 10-member committee was appointed by the state's highest court after New York City's Department of Consumer Affairs detailed serious abuses, mostly against women clients.
Litigants told of lawyers who applied pressure tactics to collect fees and drove up their prices by delaying tactics.


Clinicom Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


China Breaking Missile Pledge, U.S. Aides Say
United States intelligence agencies have compelling evidence that China has shipped missile parts to Pakistan in violation of its pledge not to export such technology, Government officials said today.
The classified reports seem to conflict with the official position that there is no proof China has broken its promise.
The reports, which have begun to circulate in Congress and the Clinton Administration, could lead to a decision not to renew China's beneficial trade status.


Sahara Resorts (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


2 Beverage Giants Plan New Products
Two large American beverage marketers have assigned two of their longtime agencies additional product accounts.
The Coors Brewing Company of Golden, Colo., and Lion Nathan of New Zealand said that Tatham Euro RSCG of Chicago had been named to handle advertising in the United States for Lion Nathan's Castlemaine XXXX, a popular Australian beer.
Coors and Lion Nathan recently formed a joint venture to import the beer to the United States.
Tatham, which already handles Coors brands like Coors's Cutter nonalcoholic brew, was awarded the assignment without a review.
Billings have not yet been determined.


P.&amp; G. Sacrifices White Cloud in Battle of Brands
Another familiar brand name is disappearing from supermarket shelves in a further display of the fundamental changes roiling the nation's consumer product marketers.
The Procter &amp; Gamble Company, continuing to pare its broad offering of brands, said that White Cloud, a popular brand of bathroom tissue it has sold since 1958, was being discontinued.


ARABS TO EXTEND TALKS WITH ISRAEL
In a signal of possible progress in the Middle East peace talks, Arab delegates to the negotiations have decided to extend the discussions with Israel at least into the latter part of next week, a Syrian official said today.
Mowaffak Allaf, head of the Syrian delegation to the talks, told reporters that the decision to extend the talks was made Tuesday night at a meeting of the heads of the Arab delegations.


Altering A Kahn: Protest Widens
A two-year campaign to protest construction of an addition to the Salk Institute for Biological Sciences, the landmark building in La Jolla, Calif., designed by Louis I. Kahn, reached a new stage yesterday, as the institute's head, Dr.
Brian Henderson, said through a spokesman that he would not meet with an advisory committee of distinguished architects that includes Philip Johnson, Frank Gehry, James Ingo Freed, Kevin Roche, Robert Venturi and Richard Meier.
"The institute has carefully considered the suggestions that have been made and feels that now is the time to proceed," said Anita Weld, the Salk's communications director.
Bulldozers have been digging trenches on the site for the last two weeks.


International Research &amp; Development Corp. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Panel Investigating Police Policy Sees Gaps in Hostage Guidelines
A panel investigating how the New York City Police Department handles hostage situations has concluded that there are gaps in training and departmental guidelines, a member of the panel said yesterday.
The investigation was ordered by Police Commissioner Raymond W. Kelly after a woman was killed by the police on the Upper West Side in January when a bank robber grabbed her on a sidewalk to use as a human shield.


AMID THE WILDFLOWERS WITH: Lady Bird Johnson; Spreading the Natural Colors of a Great Society
IT'S easy to miss the sign for Ranch Road, which turns off the state road north of Johnson City, especially if you're looking for Texas bluebonnets along the way.
It's a flat road, Ranch Road, but it winds gracefully along the Pedernales River, where Lyndon B. Johnson's registered Herefords -- his initials are on each pair of horns -- graze beneath the live oaks.


Puerto Rican Cement Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Dow Rises 2.91 Points in Narrow Trading
The stock market advanced in tentative trading yesterday, with all major indexes rising.
The Dow Jones industrial average remained in a stubbornly narrow trading range, apparently unaffected by the Government's much-anticipated announcement on Treasury bond sales.
Investors did not have an immediate interpretation of the news, so huge amounts of money did not flow into bonds from stocks.


Electric Utility Prices Offering
The Philadelphia Electric Company priced through competitive bidding yesterday a bond offering consisting of $450 million in first and refunding bonds with 10-year and 30-year maturities, respectively.
Goldman, Sachs &amp; Company won the right to underwrite both maturities, taking $200 million of 10-year bonds and reoffering them to the public with an interest rate of 6.5 percent and a price of 99.60 to yield 6.555 percent, or about 64 basis points more than a Treasury security with this maturity.
A basis point is one-hundredth of 1 percent.


Cost to Clean Poisoned Lake Staggers County
Most residents in Onondaga County do not remember when people could fish and swim in Onondaga Lake.
Helen Bailey, 71, does.
"Everyone was there," Mrs.
Bailey said, recalling her teen-age years when trolleys ferried people from Syracuse to an amusement park at Longbranch Park.
"But even at that time, you would come out of the lake after swimming and you felt like you'd had a soda bath because of what was in there."


13 DIE IN AMBUSH OF CAMBODIA TRAIN
The United Nations said today that more than 100 gunmen believed to be Maoist-inspired guerrillas of the Khmer Rouge ambushed a train in western Cambodia late Wednesday and killed at least 13 passengers.
Seventy other passengers were reported hurt in the attack in the western province of Battambang, which occurred along one of the most heavily traveled rail lines in Cambodia.


Investment Credit in Trouble, Clinton Seeks Alternatives
With the proposed investment tax credit in deep trouble in Congress, Administration officials said today that they were considering several other options to spur the economy, including new tax breaks for small business and a smaller increase in the corporate income tax.
Another option under consideration, officials said, would be to delay the proposed increases in personal and corporate income tax rates so that they take effect on Jan. 1, 1994, instead of being retroactive to this past Jan. 1.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
6.50
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
3.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
2.86
2.90
3.74
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
2.84
2.88
3.58
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
2.95
2.99
3.70
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
5.51
5.47
7.10
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
6.80
6.78
7.96
TELEPHONE BONDS
7.73
7.73
8.88
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
5.84
5.85
6.69
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Uh Oh, Suns Are Even, And Now They Go Home
The Phoenix Suns are almost sad to leave this place.
Winless and quite ordinary last week in two home playoff games, the Suns again thrived here tonight and evened their series with the Los Angeles Lakers at 2-2 with an undramatic 101-86 victory.
The Suns have their two biggest bodies, Charles Barkley and his mirror image, rookie Oliver Miller, to thank.


Don't Judge Military By Tailhook Misdeeds
To the Editor:
Your editorial "Officers and Gentlemen? Hardly" (April 26) charges that "sexism . . . has permeated the military culture." That statement is unfair to those who risk their lives for our country.


Factory Output Up In Quarter
The productivity of American factories soared in the first quarter, an upbeat sign for profits and another indication that the drive to make American manufacturing leaner and more competitive has continued into the 1990's.
Spurts in the production of computers and cars helped push up output per hour in the manufacturing sector, which makes up about a fifth of the economy, at an annual rate of 4.8 percent in the quarter, the Bureau of Labor Statistics reported yesterday.


No New Bomb-Making Material Found in Iraq; Undeserved Listing
To the Editor:
The Wisconsin Project continues its annual "list of items" (Op-Ed, April 26) illegally obtained by Iraq in developing its unlawful nuclear program.
The project insures that companies make certain "dual-use" technologies aren't surreptitiously obtained and misapplied.


Bruce Fiigen, 39, Dies; Warner Bros. Lawyer
Bruce G. Fiigen, the chief entertainment lawyer for Warner Brothers Inc., died on April 29 at his home in the Bel Air section of Los Angeles at the age of 39.
The cause was Kaposi's sarcoma and other complications of AIDS, said David Hebert, his companion.


Voice of America Should Remain With U.S.I.A.
To the Editor:
I disagree with your editorial "New Voices for a Changed World" (April 26), that the Voice of America "would gain in vigor if it were removed from direction by a political appointee and managed instead by an independent, Presidentially appointed board."
Voice of America has consistently, vigorously and creditably adhered to its charter to broadcast reliable and authoritative international, regional and United States news; to present a balanced and comprehensive projection of significant American thought, institutions, and United States policies, as well as responsible discussion and opinion on these policies.
Most recent proof of its success has been in China where all audience surveys establish Voice of America's primacy over other foreign broadcasters in providing listeners with news, information and background they require in their quest for freedom and democracy.


Domestic-Abuse Law: An Accuser's Painful Choice
When the pop singer LaToya Jackson and her husband, Jack Gordon, quarreled violently one night last month in their Manhattan apartment, the police arrested him and she was treated in a hospital for bruises.
By the next evening, the two were back together.
And so, prosecutors wanted to know, what legal remedy did Ms.
Jackson wish to pursue?
Because the incident occurred in New York State, the decision that Ms.
Jackson faced is unexpectedly tangled and, critics say, one that can ratchet up the tension in a household that is already under severe stress.


Review/Film; Buzzing Off After Grandpa
"The Beekeeper," a bleak and turgid 1986 film by the estimable Greek director Theo Angelopoulos, wastes Marcello Mastroianni in its title role.
Mr.
Mastroianni appears as a solemn, uncommunicative schoolteacher who retires from his job, leaves his wife and newly married daughter, and embarks on a lonely bee-tending journey of seemingly epic proportions.
Following in the footsteps of his father and grandfather, he travels through Greece in the early springtime, setting up hives and keeping a sporadic journal.
Entries like "I am constantly losing my colonies" are meant to provide the film's few verbal indications of what Spyros (Mr. Mastroianni) is going through.
Late in the film, in a moment of uncharacteristic talkativeness, he evokes the film's morose spirit in telling himself: "Someone will ask me, a woman, perhaps: 'Who are you? What do you want?' Nothing. Nothing. I was just passing by."


Broken Windows Prompt Investigation of Office Building in Newark


CONFLICT IN THE BALKANS: The Overview; CLINTON PUSHES A BOSNIA PLAN OF ARMS SUPPLIES AND BOMBING
Confronted by the Bosnian Serbs' unexpected rejection of an international peace plan, President Clinton redoubled the pressure on his European allies today to join "quickly and decisively" in tougher measures on Bosnia.
Senior officials said the measures included arms shipments to the embattled Muslims and air strikes to keep the Bosnian Serbs at bay until the arms arrive.
But the President said he wanted "to see what happens over the next few days" and suggested that the Bosnian Serbs might yet change their minds.


Review/Film; Recalling The King Of Kung Fu
"Dragon: The Bruce Lee Story" is an enjoyably hokey, big-budget theatrical film with a lot of kicks and the soul of a television movie.
It's exactly what it announces itself to be and won't offend (or surprise) anyone, except those fans who would rather see a real Bruce Lee film, one with a more hysterical plot, more gangsters, more kung fu choreography and fewer demands on the heart.
For those who came in late, Bruce Lee was the Chinese-American martial-arts expert who, after a short career in American television playing Kato in "The Green Hornet," went to Hong Kong, where he made of succession of hugely successful action films.
At the time of his death of cerebral edema in 1973, the 33-year-old actor was on the verge of cashing in on his cult fame in the United States and Europe to become a major motion-picture star with international clout.


Review/Film; At Festival, a Portrait of Serbs
"Who is the liar who dares say Serbia is small?" asks the chorus of a militant folk song from World War I that is sung today by Serbian nationalists waging what they see as a holy war for sovereignty.
"She is not small! She is not small!" the lyrics insist.
"She has been to war three times!"
As the documentary film "Serbian Epics" shows, the song is one of many threads in a bizarre tapestry of myth and folklore used by Serbian nationalists to justify their terrorism in Bosnia in pursuit of what they call "ethnic cleansing."


China Steps Up Spending To Keep U.S. Trade Status
China has been on an American shopping spree in recent months, ordering more than $1 billion of airplanes, cars, telecommunications and oil equipment, fertilizer and more.
Driving the deals has been a June 4 deadline by which President Clinton must decide whether to extend China's most-favored-nation status, which offers low tariffs and other trade privileges comparable to those of other United States trading partners.
If China is denied the low tariffs it now enjoys, those deals would collapse, and the Chinese are determined to show the value of their market to the United States.


Muslims in America
While a resurgent Islam is at center stage in much of the world, Muslims in the United States tend to focus on issues much closer to home, and sometimes in the home.
Many analysts think the growing Muslim presence in America will strengthen conservative causes.
Last of four articles, page A20.


Chavez Drawing Power Faces Heavyweight Test
Julio Cesar Chavez must save Don King.
King, the self-appointed "intimate of God," aspires with all the free electrons in his hair that the World Boxing Council lightweight champion's appeal will be the primary lure of tomorrow night's pay-per-view boxing card in Las Vegas, Nev.
He'd better be right, that Chavez's title fight against Terrence Alli will, oddly enough, add biceps to the main event, the W.B.C. heavyweight title bout between the champion, Lennox Lewis, and Tony Tucker.
How many times has the undercard been counted upon to carry the overcard on a pay-per-view card?


CONFLICT IN THE BALKANS: Military Planning; U.S. Sees Air Raids Curbing Guns but Not Ending War
Military officials involved in planning air strikes against the Bosnian Serbs believe that air attacks would be effective in suppressing the Serbian artillery fire that has fallen on Sarajevo and other Muslim or Croatian-held towns and cities in Bosnia.
But the officials do not believe that air strikes alone would necessarily lead to an end of the fighting in Bosnia.


School in Boston Is Shut for Week After Race Fight
South Boston High School, the most bitter battleground of Boston's fight two decades ago over court-ordered school busing, was ordered closed for the week today after a street fight between black and white students.
Amid simmering racial tensions, about 200 students walked out of the school at midday, began shouting racial epithets, and then throwing rocks and bottles at each other.


Torborg and Harazin Have Friends High Up
The cries for the heads of the Mets manager Jeff Torborg and Al Harazin, the team's general manager, may be reaching a crescendo on sports-talk radio and draining the ink wells in the print media around New York.
Yet what appears to others to be the most trying time for Torborg and Harazin may well be their most secure because the team owners, Nelson Doubleday and Fred Wilpon, still believe strongly in the two men and will not act simply for expediency.
"Look, I'm a patient man," said Wilpon, who owns 50 percent of the team.
"I'm also a businessman and I've seen business cycles. And I generally believe that you do your planning and stick to your game plan and change only when it's appropriate to change. And change for change's sake is not a plan. That's a reaction."


Job Loss in Recession: Scratch Those Figures
Having declared last June that the recent recession had eliminated many more jobs than anyone realized, the Labor Department is now canceling that view.
The department says it overstated by 540,000 the number of jobs that were created in the late 1980's.
And then it overstated, by the same amount, how many jobs disappeared in the recession.


Review/Music; Beethoven Revelations In Recital by Brendel
When Alfred Brendel finished playing Beethoven's "Waldstein" Sonata in Carnegie Hall on Wednesday night, one's first reaction was not to be impressed with the pianism; I mean that as a compliment.
This work -- along with the other Beethoven Sonatas that the pianist offered -- has the status of a sacred text in our music culture.
It has been so often studied and interpreted and annotated and analyzed that the natural reaction in hearing even so accomplished a musician as Mr.
Brendel play it is to demand something new and original or, at the very least, an execution meant to impress with its coloration and virtuosity.


Art in Review
'The Studio Museum in Harlem' '25 Years of African-American Art'
PaineWebber Art Gallery  1285 Avenue of the Americas (near 52d Street)  Through next Friday
This show, organized by Valerie J. Mercer, celebrates the 25th anniversary of the Studio Museum in Harlem with a display of nearly five dozen works from its permanent collection.
Some of the artists are familiar, others are not; together, they offer an impressive span of interests and styles.


Florio's Allies Are Strong in Municipal Bonds
The financial firms that Gov.
Jim Florio's chief aide and another Florio ally established eight years ago have grown to become the biggest and most influential advisory concerns in New Jersey's municipal bond business.
The two men, Joseph C. Salema, Governor Florio's chief of staff, and his associate, Nicholas H. Rudi Jr., a former Camden County Administrator, have built a small giant that in its own New Jersey world has far outpaced the performance of such better known rivals as Merrill Lynch, Lehman Brothers and Goldman, Sachs &amp; Company.


A Giant Answer
The way LAWRENCE TAYLOR was telling it yesterday, God does some of His best work by not answering prayers.
Taylor was honored by the March of Dimes yesterday as the athlete of the decade at a luncheon where CHRIS EVERT received a lifetime achievement award and RIDDICK BOWE was honored for sports achievement.


Owners to Study Schedule That Offers Interleague Play
In the next couple of weeks, the baseball owners' committee studying changes in league alignment and post-season playoffs will examine its first schedule for interleague play.
The mock schedule would provide for 16 or 20 games between teams in the corresponding divisions in each league.
The schedule is one of six the committee has commissioned for its study and for a presentation to the 28 owners at their meeting in Denver next month.


Executive Changes
ALLIANCE CAPITAL MANAGEMENT L.P., New York, named John D. Carifa president and chief operating officer.
CARTER HAWLEY HALE STORES INC., Los Angeles, appointed Elayne M. Garofolo executive vice president for marketing and sales promotion.


Review/TV Weekend; Nureyev on Nureyev In a 2-Year-Old Portrait
Nureyev," a "Great Performances" presentation tonight on PBS, is not the definitive biographical essay that one of the greatest dancers of this century so richly deserves. This 90-minute portrait, constructed around an extended interview with the superstar, was produced in 1991. Rudolf Nureyev died of AIDS on Jan. 6 this year. A sense of incompletion, not to mention evasiveness, pervades the piece.
Nevertheless, there is more than enough here to fascinate not only lovers of dance, but also students of human nature.
Relaxing on his own island off Italy, a property once owned by the dancer and choreographer Leonid Massine, Nureyev talks about himself, sometimes candidly, more often warily.
Born in 1938, the son of Muslim Tatars, he grew up in Ufa, a small town between Moscow and Siberia.
His childhood is recalled in terms of Dickensian poverty.
He speaks of having to go to school without shoes and wearing his older sister's clothes.
Not stressed: these were the years of World War II when suffering and deprivation were widespread in the Soviet Union.


Corrections
A brief article on Tuesday about the 42d annual Capezio Dance Award misstated its value.
The award, which went to Dance/USA, a national service and lobbying organization for nonprofit professional dance, was doubled this year, to $10,000.


Retailers Report Slow Sales Growth
Shoppers cut back on visits to stores in April, depressing sales growth for most retailers.
Industry analysts attributed the cutbacks by consumers to everything from lower tax refunds to dread about costs for a national health care program.
Whatever the cause, the tepid sales of spring merchandise reported by most major retailers yesterday are likely to translate into higher than expected markdowns.
Slow Second Quarter Seen
That will erode second-quarter profits somewhat, analysts said, although most retailers have kept a tight grip on inventories.
The Kmart Corporation and the Dayton Hudson Corporation have already warned Wall Street that their first-quarter performance, the results of which will be released in the next two weeks, will not match last year's results.


Review/Art; Cubism From the Perspective of Eastern Europe
A distinguished but little-known chapter in the history of modernism unfolded in Prague in the second decade of this century.
It is the subject of a show well worth seeing called "Czech Cubism: Architecture and Design, 1910-1925," at the Cooper-Hewitt Museum.
Does it sound provincial?
It is, but in giving Cubism a Bohemian slant, Czech architects and designers were actually developing an appealing provincialism.
They seem to have taken from France only the surface of what Picasso and Braque had invented: a vocabulary of folded, angular forms that made the Czechs' designs for buildings and furniture look weird and agitated without being fully Cubist in their reorganization of space.
At the same time, their forms bring to mind the pointy Gothic spires and the steeply gabled roofs from Prague's history.
Czech Cubism seems a distinctive blend of new and old, internationalism and regionalism.


Court Outlaws Old Practice By Legislators
For 128 years, an integral but little-known part of lawmaking in New York has been the State Legislature's ability to change or kill a bill by recalling it from the Governor's desk before he signs or vetoes it.
Today the state's highest court struck down the practice as an unconstitutional abasement of open government and the separation of powers.
Lawyers and lobbyists in the Capitol said the decision would change state government by forcing the Legislature to pass bills with fewer defects, by requiring the Governor to make tougher decisions about vetoes and by blocking a favorite avenue for lobbyists to fight bills after they are passed.


Accounts
*
Spectrum Holobyte Inc., Alameda, Calif., to Mandelbaum Mooney Ashley, San Francisco, to handle the computer and video game software manufacturer's account, previously divided among various agencies and freelancers.
Billings were estimated at $5 million. *
Fisons Horticulture Inc., Bellevue, Wash., to Borders Perrin &amp; Norrander Inc., Seattle, to handle the account of the lawn and garden products company, previously at VRH Communications, Vancouver, British Columbia.
Billings were not disclosed.


Axel Gautier, 51, Elephant Trainer With Circus, Dies
Axel Gautier, a leading trainer of elephants who had been a performer with the Ringling Brothers and Barnum &amp; Bailey Circus for 35 years, died on Wednesday in Shands Hospital at the University of Florida in Gainesville.
He was 51.
One of the elephants he was working with at the Ringling Elephant Farm in Wiliston, Fla., knocked him down and stepped on him, said Rodney Huey, a Ringling spokesman.


The Wellspring of Lobby Reform
All it takes is one good man or woman.
In this case, the good man is Senator Paul Wellstone, a Senate outsider who's one of its most idealistic members.
He won as a dark horse and came to town two years ago full of innocence and idealism.
Those are just the qualities that drive cynical veterans of Capitol Hill crazy.
Energetic and earnest, Mr.
Wellstone, who is from Minnesota, has a manner more like an eager puppy than a lion of the Senate.
The folks who run the place have never considered him clubbable.
But his adherence to principle -- and his willingness to confront colleagues on a serious ethics issue that is central to influence-peddling in Congress -- has now shamed the Senate into doing the right thing.


Dinkins Announces Panel on City Workers' Productivity
After being criticized for months for not securing productivity gains from municipal workers, Mayor David N. Dinkins announced yesterday the formation of a panel to study how to get more out of the city work force.
The creation of the 13-member panel follows sharp criticism that began in January from fiscal monitors and the Mayor's political opponents, who said he did not press labor leaders hard enough in negotiations that led to contracts signed with 19 municipal unions representing 200,000 city workers.
That criticism grew this week when the Mayor presented a budget for the next fiscal year.


For Soul of Khomeini
ormer world heavyweight champion MUHAMMAD ALI laid a wreath yesterday at the tomb of Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini, Iran's late revolutionary leader, the Iranian news agency IRNA reported.
Ali, who converted to Islam after becoming world champion in 1964, prayed for the soul of the man who lead Iran's Islamic revolution and overthrew the Shah in 1979.


METRO DIGEST
METRO DIGEST  FEDERAL GOVERNMENT WARNS INSURER
The Federal Government has notified Empire Blue Cross and Blue Shield that its handling of $1.7 billion in Medicare claims for doctors' services has been so poor for the last three years that Empire's contract with the Government may be canceled, government officials said.
A1.
DEPORTEE FROM ISRAEL CHARGED IN BLAST
A 27-year-old Palestinian, Mohammad Ahmad Ajaj, who was deported from Israel as a suspected terrorist was charged yesterday with conspiring in the World Trade Center bombing by traveling into the United States with another suspect and carrying manuals that told how to construct the kind of bomb used in the February 26 explosion.
A1.


On My Mind; The Messy Presidency
For weeks, some of President Clinton's closest advisers have been telling him that he has taken on too many problems.
They warn him that he has to cut back, simplify.
If a handful of hard-line rogues among the Bosnian Serbs insist on suicide and bring on U.S. military action, the warnings obviously will take on urgency.
Save your mind, energies and political capital for just a couple of the big ones, he will be told -- the budget and the intervention.


OTB: A Sure Bet Now Falling Behind; Illegal Bookmakers Undermine a State Gambling Monopoly
At a time when the Offtrack Betting Corporation is in dire need of fresh profits, its wagering parlor in Chinatown is a daily festival of gambling risk, the city's most crowded and lucrative street parlor where, unfortunately, the clerks cannot handle all the betting action that lines up as each race approaches.
This is precisely when a half-dozen illegal bookmakers get busiest, right there in the lobby of the Chatham Square parlor, brazenly using OTB's own betting slips to secure a steady fortune in illicit, on-site wagerings.


Clinton Ties Deficit Cut to Talks Negotiations
President Clinton used a speech on international trade today to lobby for the passage of his deficit-reduction plan, saying that the United States will be in no position to press for open markets abroad if it does not address its own domestic problems first.
Mr.
Clinton, who lost an important Congressional battle last month over a $19.5 billion package that he said would stimulate the economy and create jobs, pointed to a reduction in long-term mortgage interest rates as proof that his overall budget plan had been well received in the financial markets.
As proposed, the deficit-reduction plan would cut the yearly deficit in half in four years through spending cuts and tax increases.


N.F.L.-Players Agreement Alters Free Agent Rules
Just when everyone was getting the hang of free agency, the National Football League owners and players came up with a surprising conclusion yesterday to more than five years of haggling over a new collective bargaining agreement.
As part of a sweeping seven-year agreement that will increase player benefits by more than $1 billion, the sides changed the rules on the so-called franchise players, the one supposedly untouchable player on each team.


Senate Passes Stringent New Rules for Lobbyists
The Senate moved en masse today to haul this city's tens of thousands of lobbyists to public account for the first time, voting to make them report on who hires them to sway public policy and what they spend doing it.
The 95-to-2 vote was the first serious attempt to overhaul controls of lobbying since 1946, when Congress passed a lobbying-disclosure act that was almost immediately circumvented and ignored.


Here Comes Franco, Hoping for the Best
The remote control wasn't too much for John Franco's left elbow to handle.
Alone in a hotel room, Franco worked the channels, his surgically repaired elbow untroubled.
Soon, the television screen was filled with a baseball game.
It was only May, but already the disabled closer for the Mets had seen too much.
He was about to hit the remote, when an image suddenly caught Franco's interest.
Joe Magrane, the left-hander for the Cardinals who was back from major elbow surgery, was on the mound.
For Franco, it was another snapshot of the future coming at a time that has been overloaded with doubts.


The Art Market
Picasso Estate
Auction houses and art dealers often compare securing estate property to winning the lottery, especially if the estate happens to have a big name, like Jacqueline Picasso, attached to it.
After Jacqueline, Pablo Picasso's second wife, shot herself at her house in Mougins, in southeastern France, in October 1986, Catherine Hutin-Blay, her daughter by a previous marriage, inherited the bulk of her mother's property.
Three years ago, in lieu of estate taxes, she gave the French Government 49 paintings, 38 drawings, 24 drawing books, 2 sculptures, 19 ceramics, 7 lithographs and 240 prints, which have gone into museums in France.


Resolution Establishes Safe Areas But Lacks Enforcement Provision
The Security Council voted today to declare six war-torn Bosnian cities as "safe areas" in a resolution that demanded an end to taking territory by force and called on the Secretary General to deploy 50 more military observers to protect civilians in the towns.
How the zones would be protected was not addressed in the resolution, which was adopted unanimously.
Although the resolution demanded total compliance from all parties, diplomats here say the possibility of cooperation is remote, even with 50 additional soldiers to carry out the plan.


The Sorcerer Of Suspense As Apprentice
IF you think you know every guilty secret of every Hitchcock character, get ready for a shock.
There are gloriously bizarre surprises hidden in the English phase of Alfred Hitchcock's career, those early days when he was scarcely a gleam in Hollywood's eye.
Among the oddities from the 1930's are: a killer who turns out to be a cross-dressing trapeze artist; a wry comedy about marriage in which no one comes close to being murdered, and more toy trains than you've seen since childhood.
And though Hitchcock went to Hollywood for good in 1939, he returned to England near the end of World War II to make the strangest movies of his career: two French-language propaganda films of such cynicism and double-agentry that they might end war altogether.
After watching these shorts, no one could possibly figure out who was fighting whom, much less whom to trust.
" 'Cocky' in Britain: The Early Alfred Hitchcock" is the too-too-clever title of the delicious series that begins today at the Walter Reade Theater at Lincoln Center.
"Cocky" refers to the director's boyhood nickname as well as his thumb-your-nose attitude, but while the title's peculiar British ring is jarring, it does make sense.
The series follows Hitchcock as he moves away from his Cockney background toward Hollywood, a process that transformed him from Cocky to Hitch.


Top Court Rules Drug Treatment Programs May Not Exclude Pregnant Women
The state's highest court ruled today that drug treatment programs cannot exclude pregnant women as a matter of policy, saying the practice is sexually discriminatory.
Lawyers in the case said the ruling was the first of its kind by a top court in any state.


CONFLICT IN THE BALKANS: Europe; Europe's Call: Lead On, U.S.
Despite all their reluctance to agree with the United States about military steps to stop the killing in the Balkans, what the European allies have really wanted from President Clinton is firm leadership now that he has consulted with them.
More than one European diplomat has said in recent conversations that Mr.
Clinton should stop asking them their opinion on what he plans to do and start telling them instead what he plans to go ahead with, preferably with their support.


Review/Film; A House Party of Beatrice, Benedick and Friends
Kenneth Branagh, the nervy young Belfast-born actor and director, has done it again.
In 1989 he challenged Laurence Olivier's lordly reputation by making his own very fine, dark and dour, pocket-sized "Henry V" to stand alongside the classic Olivier film.
Now he has accomplished something equally difficult.
He has taken a Shakespearean romantic comedy, the sort of thing that usually turns to mush on the screen, and made a movie that is triumphantly romantic, comic and, most surprising of all, emotionally alive.
The Branagh "Much Ado About Nothing" is a dreamlike house party set in and around a magnificent Tuscan villa in the erotic heat of an Italian summer.
The period is not specified, although it seems to be a distant, vaguely Renaissance past.
As can happen during a month of well-fed indolence in the country, connections to the outside world are forgotten.
Time stops.
Life becomes a pursuit of pleasure: eating, drinking, dancing, making love.


Dow Falls 7.20 as Investors Await Jobs Data
In what has become a familiar story this week, the stock market was stuck in a narrow trading range for much of the session yesterday, before turning downward in the last hour of trading.
Once again, many investors remained on the sidelines waiting for another economic portent; this time, it was today's Government report on unemployment.


Empire Blue Cross Is Told by U.S. It May Lose Medicare Claim Work
The Federal Government has notified Empire Blue Cross and Blue Shield that its handling of $1.7 billion in Medicare claims for doctors' services has been so poor for the last three years that Empire's contract for the processing may be canceled, Government officials said yesterday.
Losing the contract, which Empire and its predecessors have held for decades, could cost the financially troubled company $63 million at a time when its reserves have dwindled to a level that regulators consider dangerous.


Nostalgia and Sciatica Move to Center Court
So I told the cabdriver, "Take me to the 69th Regiment Armory, in the spring of 1968," and suddenly I was watching people who looked like Muscles and Emmo and the Rocket play a game that looked like tennis the way it oughta be.
Was this a dream?
"One hopes it will be an annual event," said the promoter, Owen Williams, last encountered at the United States Open in 1969.
He had a five-year contract as tournament director of that event, but disappeared soon afterward, back to a liquor business in South Africa.
He has returned and his "presentation" (not tournament, not matches) is called the Manhattan Masters, on display through Sunday at the Armory, on Lexington Avenue at 26th Street.
Anyone who remembers, live, Twiggy, the Boston Strangler and Dr.
Christiaan N. Barnard needs to be there.


YELTSIN IS VAGUE ON REFORM DETAILS
President Boris N. Yeltsin went on television today to claim his victory in the April 25 referendum and to condemn the "irreconcilable opposition" for the clash with the police in Moscow on May Day.
But beyond vague promises of "the most decisive measures," Mr.
Yeltsin announced no new actions.


A Bagel Brief: Rolling Back the Lineage
To the Editor:
You write in "Bagels Are Now Fast Food, and Purists Do a Slow Boil" (news article, April 25): "It's believed that bagels were invented by a Jewish baker in Vienna in 1683. To thank King John III Sobieski of Poland for saving the city from Turkish invaders, the anonymous baker crafted a hard roll in the shape of a riding stirrup, in honor of the king's favorite hobby. The bread's original name was 'bugel,' from the German for stirrup."


17 Companies in Electronic News Venture
Some of the nation's biggest newspapers are taking another look at the electronic paperboy.
A group of 17 companies, including the newspaper publishers Gannett, Knight-Ridder and Times Mirror, plan to announce Friday that they are forming a research consortium to explore new ways to use computers and telecommunications to deliver news.
The possibilities might include electronic newspapers transmitted to pocket-sized wireless computers or personalized papers printed at home.


No New Bomb-Making Material Found in Iraq; A Technology Drain
To the Editor:
In your April 26 Op-Ed update on Iraq's Bomb, neither Russia nor the former Soviet Union are even once mentioned among the suppliers of relevant technology to Iraq.
The suppliers are exclusively businesses from Western countries, including some from the United States.
Though the Soviet Union was not only an ally but a close friend of Iraq, it strictly observed all the international agreements and gentlemen's understandings with regard to nonproliferation.


CHRONICLE
RORY KENNEDY was born six months after her father, Robert F. Kennedy, was assassinated in 1968, so when the Robert F. Kennedy Memorial Journalism Awards were instituted 25 years ago, they were dedicated to her, she said yesterday.
Tonight, she will be the speaker at the annual presentation of the awards at the offices of the Freedom Forum in Arlington, Va.
The grand prize, one of 16 awards, will be given to Paul McEnroe and Allen Short, reporters for The Minneapolis Star Tribune, for a series on abuses in the Minneapolis foster-care system.


A Bagel Brief: Rolling Back the Lineage; The Dough Jones Index
To the Editor:
Your article on bagels reminded me that my father, who was born in the Williamsburg section of Brooklyn, used to tell me you could gauge the economy by looking at a bagel.


Raising Hackles, Italy's Premier Pledges Change
Italy took a further, halting step today toward breaking with a discredited political past when the new Prime Minister, Carlo Azeglio Ciampi, went before Parliament to pledge his fledgling administration to rapid political change as an "absolute priority."
Within hours of his promise, however, one of the parties backing him, the Socialists, threatened to rebel if the Italian leader did not meet conditions intended to delay new elections and thus keep Socialist legislators in their jobs at least until the end of the year.


At Sri Lanka Rite, Widow Speaks Up
The body of Sri Lanka's assassinated President, Ranasinghe Premadasa, was cremated today, and his widow indicated during the ceremony that she might try to build her own political career, a suggestion that seemed to take members of the ruling party by surprise.
Only hours after the elaborate Buddhist funeral, Government officials were suggesting that the President's widow, Hema Premadasa, might move quickly to try to become Prime Minister of this nation of 17 million, thereby unsettling the ambitions of other politicians.


Health-Care Plan to Be Delayed Further
Bowing to political reality and Congressional concerns, the White House said today that there would be a further delay in sending Congress legislation to revamp the nation's health-care system.
It now appears that the legislation, being developed by Hillary Rodham Clinton and her Task Force on National Health Care Reform, will not be sent to Congress before mid-June at the earliest, Administration officials said.


Knicks Win With the 3 R's: Rivers, Rivers, Rivers
Crushing Indiana with 3-point shots, Doc Rivers sent the Pacers packing for vacation and shot New York into the next round of the playoffs.
Making three 3-point jumpers in overtime, Rivers led the Knicks to a memorable series-clinching 109-100 victory in Game 4 of their first-round series tonight at Market Square Arena.
It was a remarkable display of long-range clutch shooting by a 10-year veteran not known for his offense.
But with the Knicks in jeopardy of facing a decisive Game 5 against the dangerous Pacers on Sunday, Rivers (21 points, 11 assists) took matters into his own hands and scored 11 points in overtime.


Voter Turnout For Schools Rises Slightly
Despite the most vigorously disputed campaign in two decades, only about 9.4 percent of New York City voters cast ballots in Tuesday's community school board elections, according to tentative figures released yesterday.
The turnout was below the expectations of many educators and officials, who had hoped this year's hard-fought campaign would lead to dramatically higher participation.
Even so, the turnout was the highest since 1983, when 11.9 percent voted, and well above the 7.2 percent who cast ballots in the last school elections, in 1989.


Job Outlook Bleak at Big Law Firms
For the first time in decades, the nation's largest law firms grew hardly at all last year, according to a survey to be published this month.
The annual survey, by the legal magazine Of Counsel, found that growth at the nation's 500 largest firms was flatter than it had been since the 1950's and early 1960's.


Robert De Niro, 71, A New York Painter And Actor's Father
Robert De Niro, a New York painter whose career spanned more than four decades, died on Monday, his 71st birthday, at his home in Manhattan.
The cause was cancer, said a family spokeswoman.


For Children
'The Thief of Bagdad'
Mazur Theater  555 East 90th Street  Manhattan  (212) 688-1740  Recommended ages: 4 and up  Fridays through Sundays
You would never know by looking at him that the Thief of Bagdad in this children's musical is all that bad.
In fact, he has a clean-cut look; it is his accuser and ruler, the Imperial Caliph of Bagdad, who appears sinister.


Glow of Firefly Is Used in New Test to Detect TB
The glow of the firefly has been transformed into a new laboratory test that can detect drug-resistant strains of tuberculosis much more quickly than standard tests, and experts are hailing the development as a potentially important advance in combating the resurgence of the disease.
The spread of drug-resistant tuberculosis in New York and elsewhere in the country has alarmed health officials because the death rate in some outbreaks has been as high as 50 percent.
The firefly test reduces by several weeks the time it can take to detect a drug-resistant strain of the bacterium that causes tuberculosis.


Street-Vendor Vets Are Being Neglected
To the Editor:
There is no question that the streets of New York City must be rid of the illegal vendors and their merchandise.
I, too, commend the Mayor for his initiatives ("Smart Steps on Peddling," editorial, April 20).
However, at the time the New York State Legislature struck down the longstanding Chapter 687, displacing approximately 176 vendors who are veterans, it was with the understanding that the Fifth Avenue Association and the City of New York would live up to their promises to provide assistance and economic opportunities to them.


Abroad at Home; The Moment Of Truth
If there was any doubt left, the Serbs have blown it away.
They will not agree to a peace that keeps them from conquering all they want in Bosnia.
They delivered that message to the world with contempt, twice in a single day.
The so-called Bosnian-Serb assembly rejected the Vance-Owen peace plan for Bosnia.
Then Serbian military forces aimed a devastating artillery barrage at Zepa, one of the last Bosnian Government enclaves in the eastern part of the country, filled with Muslim refugees.


Montevideo Journal; Uruguay Is on Notice: Blacks Want Recognition
Beatrice Santos says she doesn't face openly hostile racial comments every day, but there are enough to make her uneasy.
The journalist said that recently, as she was boarding a bus, she heard the ticket collector say to the driver, "If I let this little black lady pass, maybe my luck will change."


CONFLICT IN THE BALKANS: The Fighting; SERBS ARE POISED TO SEIZE ENCLAVE
Reports from Zepa, a besieged Muslim enclave in eastern Bosnia, said attacking Bosnian Serb forces had broken through longstanding defense lines and were poised today to overrun the entire pocket.
The ham radio reports of the Zepa assault remain unconfirmed because there are no independent observers in the area.


BASF Selects A New Agency
The BASF Corporation in Parsippany, N.J., said yesterday that it had selected the new agency of Houston, Effler, Hampel &amp; Stefanides in New York to handle its corporate advertising account, which had been at Geer, DuBois in New York until that agency closed in February.
Billings were estimated at $4 million to $5 million.
Tony Graetzer, who was the management supervisor on the account at Geer, DuBois, will supervise it as part of his duties as general manager of the new agency, which opened last week without clients.
Houston, Effler was awarded the account following a review that also included two other New York-based shops: Jordan, McGrath, Case &amp; Taylor and Pedone &amp; Partners.


At the Bar; A Democratic firm merely flirts with Dan Quayle, and suddenly they're an item.
A historically Democratic law firm in Washington courts former Vice President Dan Quayle, perhaps the nation's most famous unemployed lawyer and previously its most famed bar basher.
What is wrong with this picture?
That is what many people have asked since Legal Times, a weekly publication covering law and lobbying in Washington, recently reported that Mr.
Quayle had held talks with Arent, Fox, Kintner, Plotkin &amp; Kahn, another pea in the pod of major law firms in the capital.


Magic in Exhibition
BOB McADOO, MICHAEL COOPER and KURT RAMBIS can't wait to play basketball with MAGIC JOHNSON again.
But the former Los Angeles Lakers threesome will have to wait until Sunday when Johnson plays his first competitive game since the Dream Team won the Olympic gold medal at Barcelona, Spain, last year.


Corrections
A brief report on the obituary page yesterday about a memorial tribute to the artist and philanthropist Judith Rothschild, who died on March 6, misidentified a scheduled speaker.
She is Anne d'Harnoncourt, director of the Philadelphia Museum of Art.
The tribute will be at 4 P.M. on Monday at the New York Society for Ethical Culture, 2 West 64th Street, in Manhattan.


Computer Makers Question Coding Plan
A group of the nation's largest computer makers and telephone companies sent a letter to President Clinton yesterday raising questions about the Administration's plan to create a voice- and data-encoding standard that would protect information but also permit law-enforcement officials to eavesdrop on electronic communications after obtaining a warrant.
The plan, developed by officials at the National Institute of Standards and Technology and the National Security Agency, was announced by the Clinton Administration on April 16.


Review/Art; Anselm Kiefer, Emigre, In Two-Part Installation
Anselm Kiefer doesn't live in Germany anymore.
About two years ago, the Neo-Expressionist artist who made his name with paintings that delved ambiguously into his country's dark Nazi past pulled up stakes, departed his enormous studio in Buchen, near Frankfurt, and resettled in southwestern France.
What this change of country will do for Mr.
Kiefer's work remains to be seen.
For now, he has commemorated what must have been a rather traumatic act of expatriation with a momentarily startling, ultimately indulgent two-part installation piece titled "20 Years of Loneliness" at the Marian Goodman Gallery on West 57th Street.
The opening last Saturday was followed by a bizarrely theatrical white-on-white dinner for 150 at Industria in the West Village, an event that involved lip-synching drag queens, a challenging menu of animal organs, and pigs' feet for table decorations.


Books, Not Bunts
The Rutgers University-Newark baseball team forfeited its New Jersey Athletic Conference playoff game yesterday because the players had to take exams.
Athletic Director JOHN ADAMS said the 3:30 P.M. game conflicted with the school's final exam schedule.
The forfeiture means Rutgers-Newark is out of the playoff picture and out of the running for an automatic bid to the National Collegiate Athletic Association Division III tournament.


Serial Killer and Audience
"Man Bites Dog" was shown as part of the 1992 New York Film Festival.
Following are excerpts from Stephen Holden's review, which appeared in The New York Times on Oct. 9, 1992.
The film, in French with English subtitles, opens today at the Quad Cinema, 13th Street, west of Fifth Avenue, Greenwich Village.
Two things can safely be said about "Man Bites Dog," a pseudodocumentary of a serial killer, which was directed and written by its three young producers, who also appear in it (Remy Belvaux, Andre Bonzel and Benoit Poelvoorde).
The film is jam-packed with graphic violence.
And its gun-toting, speed-rapping subject, Ben (Mr. Poelvoorde), has the edgy charisma of James Woods in one of his more maniacal star turns.


Honors
*
Paula Lipstein Forman, the executive vice president and executive management director at Saatchi &amp; Saatchi Advertising, New York, and Jean L. Farinelli, the chairman and chief executive of Creamer Dickson Basford Inc., New York, were among the women named as recipients of the 23d annual Matrix Awards sponsored by New York Women in Communications.


Sports of The Times; The Knicks Fight Off Their Demon
THE Knicks have yet to exorcise their ugli est demon the image of a team that could self-destruct at any given time out of sheer nastiness, or let its opponent back into the game through occasional cloddishness.
These are not healthy or attractive traits in a team that would be a contender, but they survived them again last night as Doc Rivers made three 3-pointers in overtime for the 109-100 victory over Indiana that put them into the next round.


Icahn Raises Buyout Ante In Battle for E-II Holdings
Carl C. Icahn has lobbed yet another grenade in the war for control of E-II Holdings Inc., the bankrupt owner of the companies that make Samsonite luggage, Culligan water purification systems and Botany 500 men's suits.
In an April 30 letter to the lawyer representing the company's creditors, Mr.
Icahn offered to buy out the holders of E-II's senior notes and take control of the company in a deal worth about $320 million in cash and $500 million in secured debt.


Fourth Trooper Is Charged With Tampering With Evidence
In a growing scandal that has shaken the New York State Police, a fourth trooper was charged today with tampering with evidence.
David M. Beers, a 15-year veteran of the force, was suspended without pay after he pleaded not guilty this morning in Broome County Court to tampering with evidence in connection with the armed robbery of a Best Western Motel in Johnson City, a few miles from here, in 1991.
He was released and given until Friday to post $50,000 bond.


Schedule of Human Rights Film Festival
The Human Rights Watch Film Festival begins tonight and runs through May 20 at the Loews Village Theater VII, Third Avenue at 11th Street, East Village.
Admission: $6.50.
Information: (212) 978-8991.
Festival sponsors include Loews and MTV.
Here is the festival schedule for this weekend.
Today  "SERBIAN EPICS" (1992), directed by Pawel Pawlikowski, and "A DAY IN THE DEATH OF SARAJEVO" (1992), directed by Thierry Ravalet, Alain Ferrari and Bernard-Henri Levy, 6 P.M.
Two views of the violence in the former Yugoslavia.
"THE JOURNEY" (1991), directed by Fernando E. Solanas, 6:15 P.M.
A surreal Argentine road film.
"KIEV BLUE" (1992), directed by Heather MacDonald, "SEX AND THE SANDINISTAS" (1991), directed by Lucinda Broadbent, and "KHUSH" (1991), directed by Pratibha Parmar, 9:30 P.M.
Documentaries on homosexuality.
"MEMORY OF THE WATER" (1992), directed by Hector Favor, 9:45 P.M.
A portrait of a concentration-camp survivor.
Tomorrow  "MESSING UP GOD'S GLORY" (1993), directed by Avril Johnson and Afua Namiley-Viana; "THE VOICE OF THE SHAWLS" (1992), directed by Marcelo Cespedes and Carmen Guarini, and "WOMEN OF ALGIERS" (1992), directed by Kamal Dehane, noon.
Works on women's experiences.
"THE HOUR OF THE FURNACES" (1968), directed by Fernando E. Solanos and Octavio Getino, focusing on the exploitation of Latin America, 12:15 P.M.; "BLUE NOTES AND EXILED VOICES" (1992), directed by Imruh Bakari, and "MIZIKE MAMA" (1992), directed by Vollaine de Villers, 2 P.M.
Two works on singing groups in Africa.
"MAMA SAID" (1992), directed by Michael Costanza; "NO JUSTICE, NO PEACE" (1992), directed by Portia Cobb; "APRIL 29TH," (1993), directed by Dai Sil Kim-Gibson, and "HANDS ON THE VERDICT" (1992), directed by Liz Canner and Julia Meltzer, 4 P.M.
Four views of the Los Angeles riots.
"FROM HOLLYWOOD TO HANOI," (1992), directed by Tiana Thi Thanh Nga, 6 P.M.
A Vietnamese-American returns to Vietnam.
"ANOTHER AFRICA," (1992), directed by Francoise Ebrand, 7 P.M.
A coming-of-age drama set in New Guinea.
"TANGOS: THE EXILE OF GARDEL," (1985), directed by Fernando E. Solanos, about Argentine political exiles in Paris, 9 P.M.
"DISMISSED FROM LIFE," (1992), directed by Waldemar Krzystek, 9:15 P.M.
An amnesiac wanders during the emergence of democracy in Poland.
Sunday  "THE UNDECLARED WAR" (1991), directed by Bertrand Tavernier, focusing on former French soldiers discussing the Algerian war, noon.
"SERBIAN EPICS" (1992), directed by Pawel Pawlikowski, and "A DAY IN THE DEATH OF SARAJEVO" (1992), directed by Thierry Ravalet, Alain Ferrari and Bernard-Henri Levy, 12:15 P.M.
Two views of the violence in the former Yugoslavia.
"TXAI MACEDO" (1992), directed by Marcia Machado and Tal Danai, focusing on the Amazon rain forest, and "WINDS OF MEMORY" (1992), directed by Felix Zurita, about Mayan life in Guatemala, 3:15 P.M.
"EIGHTH DAY THEATER" (1992), directed by Joanna Helander and Bo Persson, 4:30 P.M.
Emigration of a Polish theater group.
"KIEV BLUE" (1992), directed by Heather MacDonald; "SEX AND THE SANDINISTAS" (1991), directed by Lucinda Broadbent, and "KHUSH" (1991), directed by Pratibha Parmar. 5:15 P.M.
Documentaries on homosexuality.
"FROM HOLLYWOOD TO HANOI" (1992), directed by Tiana Thi Thanh Nga, 6:30 P.M.
A Vietnamese-American returns to Vietnam.
"HEAR MY CRY" (1991), directed by Maciej Janusz Drygas, and "THE KATYN FOREST" (1991), directed by Marcel Lozinski and Andrzej Wajda, 7:30 P.M.
Documentaries about Poland.
"IN THE NAME OF GOD" (1992), directed by Anand Patwardhan, 9 P.M.
An examination of Hindu fundamentalism.
"TERRORISM AND KEBOB" (1992), directed by Sherif Araf, 9:30 P.M.
An Arab farce about bureaucracy.


On Stage, and Off
Case of the Vanished Audience
Amid the raft of recent closings, the one surprise is "The Song of Jacob Zulu," which shuts down Sunday on the eve of the Tony nominations (it seems certain to garner at least one, for best score) after a run of just over a month.
The show, an anti-apartheid drama by Tug Yourgrau and featuring the a cappella singing group Ladysmith Black Mambazo, received mixed reviews, but attendance figures were quite respectable, hovering around 75 percent throughout the run.
In addition, the producers said this week, the show seemed to have found the core black audience that it had particularly sought.


CONFLICT IN THE BALKANS: Diplomacy; CHRISTOPHER FAILS TO WIN CONSENSUS
Secretary of State Warren Christopher will return home on Friday without winning an endorsement of President Clinton's proposal for the use of military force to curb Serbian aggression in Bosnia, despite the Bosnian Serbs' rejection of an international peace agreement.
French, British and Russian leaders all agreed with Mr.
Christopher's view that they must jointly take tougher action against the Bosnian Serbs.
But none embraced what senior British and French officials described as the core of the American plan: the selective lifting of the United Nations arms embargo so that the United States and its allies can arm the Bosnian Muslim Government.


Gamble That Inflation Stays Low
The Clinton Treasury is betting that the Clinton Presidency will succeed in creating a low-inflation environment over the next several years and that the President's successor will follow suit.
That is the gamble that the Treasury took this week when it announced that it would shift 45 percent of its longer-term borrowing to shorter- term maturities of from three years to three months.
If the bet proves wrong and inflation does not stay low, taxpayers will be paying higher interest costs.


Even With a Sub-Par Lemieux, Penguins Get Healthy
This game, tense, tough and interesting throughout, involved so much more than merely the performance of the two goalies.
But because Pittsburgh beat the Islanders, 3-1, tonight at Nassau Coliseum, the play of Tom Barrasso and Glenn Healy demands primary review, so here goes.
Barrasso made 36 saves and he has given up only one goal in the last two games as the Penguins have won both to take a two-games-to-one lead in the four-of-seven-game Patrick Division final.
His statistics make him a star in the box score, although the truth is that the Islanders are in a terrible scoring slump without the injured Pierre Turgeon.
Right now, they can make a good goalie look great.


CHRONICLE
When CHER got on a plane headed for Yerevan, the capital of Armenia, last Wednesday, she told LYNN SHERR, a correspondent on the ABC news magazine "20/20," "I don't really feel Armenian -- I am an American, but something just guided me to go back," Ms.
Sherr recalled yesterday.
The two women were on a mission together.
Cher went to see the country of her ancestry (her father was Armenian); to take $2.75 million worth of medical supplies, computers and toys there, and to help a sick child whose mother had written to her for help.
Ms.
Sherr went to film a segment on Cher's trip that will be seen on "20/20" tonight.


Cisneros Sees Housing Progress in Brooklyn


Schultz's Future Tied To Virginia Probation
The future of Dick Schultz as executive director of the National Collegiate Athletic Association became more uncertain yesterday when the University of Virginia was placed on a two-year probation for 13 major rules violations that began before Schultz left the school as athletic director.
In an unprecedented situation in college athletics, Schultz, the leader of a movement to reform the N.C.A.A., increase academic standards for athletes, provide more equitable opportunities for women and make athletic departments more accountable for their actions, now faces the judgment of the organization's 14-member executive committee.


A Cleanup for New Jersey Bonds
Suspicious dealings in New Jersey bond sales have sparked two Federal investigations, embarrassed Gov.
Jim Florio and spotlighted once again the power of political connections.
The Governor's effort now to block the influence of political money in future sales is welcome, but tardy.
Scandal is no stranger in municipal bonds; state and local governmental issues are not subject to the rigorous regulation and disclosure requirements of corporate issues.
Close contact between public officials and Wall Street may be necessary in structuring a complicated financing, but the ever-present shadow of politics requires conscientious effort to avoid corruption.


Jury Rules Boston U. Can Keep King Papers
A Superior Court jury ruled against the widow of the Rev.
Dr.
Martin Luther King Jr. today, declaring that Boston University is the rightful owner of about one-third of Dr.
King's personal papers, based on a letter he wrote in 1964.
The jury ruled that the letter, in which Dr.
King wrote that in the event of his death all papers at Boston University would become the university's property, was legally binding.
The civil rights leader, who had earned his doctorate in theology at the university, had sent about 83,000 documents to the university's library.


2 Are Killed in Post Office Shootings in 2 States
Two people were killed and four others wounded in separate shootings today at post offices in California and Michigan.
Disgruntled postal employees were blamed in both cases.
In Dana Point, Calif., 50 miles southeast of downtown Los Angeles, a postal worker who had been dismissed seven months ago walked into a small post office and opened fire, killing a letter carrier, wounding a clerk and sending customers running into the street to escape, officials said.
The gunman was being sought by the police after fleeing in a blue pickup truck with a kayak on the roof.


New York's Transit Fare Collection Lags
To the Editor:
Your April 26 report ("A Fare Card for Transit Is Lagging") that all automated fare collection equipment for New York City buses will be delayed due to "the need to redesign, retest and retool a new fare box" is shocking.
Such a system already operates in Washington, D.C.
Moreover, I have recently spent two weeks in Copenhagen, where one can buy various types of transit tickets usable on buses and trains.
These tickets are electronically programmed.
The machines into which they are inserted automatically deduct the applicable fare.
Why must the New York commuting public wait for such innovations when they already exist?


Retail Funds' Assets Decline
The total assets of the nation's 632 retail money market mutual funds decreased by $1.71 billion, to $386.77 billion, for the week that ended on Wednesday, the Investment Company Institute said yesterday.
The assets of the 396 taxable retail money market funds fell $1.71 billion, to $306.56 billion, while the assets of the 236 retail tax-exempt funds increased $4.2 million, to $80.21 billion.


Review/Film; Treating a Delicate Story of a Soldier and a Boy Tenderly
Roeland Kerbosch's film "For a Lost Soldier" takes up the most delicate of subjects, a romantic relationship between a grown-up and a child, and invests it with an aching tenderness that stays just this side of nostalgic mush.
Set in the Netherlands near the end of the World War II, the film is an extended flashback in which Jeroen Boman (Jeroen Krabbe), a middle-aged choreographer at work on a piece about the Allied liberation, recalls his adolescent relationship with a Canadian soldier more than 40 years ago.


For Every Bill There Is the Perfect Lobbyist
Under President Clinton's tax bill, businesses would no longer be allowed to take tax deductions for the cost of their executives' club dues.
With this one exception: dues for membership in airline and hotel clubs would continue to be deductible.
One lobbyist, single-handedly, got the exception in the bill, and the story of how she pulled it off offers insights into how Washington works and how tax bills are written.


Grumman Says It Will Close Electronics Plant in Suffolk
In another sign of hard times for the military industry on Long Island, the Grumman Corporation announced today that it was closing a major electronics plant in Suffolk County.
The company also said it was shutting plants in Texas and Maryland as part of a long-term plan to cut costs and consolidate operations.
Grumman officials said most of the 839 employees of the Long Island plant, in the hamlet of Great River on the South Shore, would be transferred to factories at the company's headquarters in Bethpage, L.I., by the time the shutdown is completed in mid-1995.
The jobs of 424 workers in Webster, Tex., and Salisbury, Md., however, will be phased out when those factories close in 1994, Grumman officials said.


Corrections
An article yesterday about the decision to stop using the Central Park Reservoir mistranslated the capacity of the billion-gallon reservoir in some editions.
The capacity equals 20 million average bathtubs or 200 million flushes (not 200,000 tubs and two million flushes).


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
The productivity of American factories soared in the first quarter, helped by production of computers and cars, but productivity in the entire private economy fell at an annual rate of 0.1 percent.  [ Page D1. ]  Shoppers cut back on visits to stores in April, depressing sales growth for most retailers.  [ D3. ]
The Labor Department says that it overstated by 540,000 the number of jobs created in the late 1980's and how many jobs disappeared in the recession.  [ D1. ]


INSIDE
Comptroller Says She Erred
Elizabeth Holtzman, the New York City Comptroller, said it was wrong for her office to recommend a bank company as a bond underwriter when she owed it money.
Page B1. 2 Yonkers Officers Charged
A Federal grand jury charged two Yonkers policemen with civil rights violations in three beatings.
Page B5.
Knicks Eliminate Pacers
The Knicks beat Indiana in overtime, 109-100, and will face Charlotte in the second round of the National Basketball Association playoffs.
Page B7.


AMERICAN EXPRESS BUYING SWEDISH TRAVEL AGENT
In its largest investment outside the United States, the American Express Company said yesterday that it had agreed to buy Nyman &amp; Schultz A.B. of Sweden, the leading business travel agency in Scandinavia, for $115 million.
Under the agreement, American Express will acquire 90 percent of Nyman &amp; Schultz, which has 200 branches and about 1,700 employees.
An American Express executive said Nyman &amp; Schultz would retain its name in some form and its management.


Diner's Journal
The $19.93 Lunch
Last summer's $19.92 lunch promotion in New York City restaurants was considered such a resounding success that organizers plan to do it again this year: for $19.93.
From July 6 to 11, as many as 100 top city restaurants are expected to offer prix fixe $19.93 lunches.
In addition, on Tuesday, July 6, scores of leading restaurants plan to set up serving tables on their sidewalks and sell samples of their cuisine for $3 to $5.
Among the restaurants signing on so far are Aquavit, La Caravelle, Montrachet, Bouley, San Domenico and Shun Lee Palace.
NY93 Restaurant Day, as it is being billed, will run from 11 A.M. to 6 P.M.
The city has issued a blanket one-day outdoor service permit for the participating restaurants, which have been asked to donate $1 from every sale to either Share Our Strength or Citymeals-on-Wheels, two local hunger-relief organizations.


Just Say Nah to Today's Mix of Parimutuel Taxes
One of the horse-racing advisers to the Governor said yesterday that the state should lower its taxes on bets as part of an overhaul of the parimutuel system "to revive the state's racing, wagering and breeding indutries."
The proposal was made in a report by Steven Crist, the racing writer, who was one of nine people named last year to Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo's Advisory Commission on Racing in the 21st Century.
The commission is expected to send its recommendations to Cuomo early in June.
It has already indicated that it favors some sort of merger of the New York Racing Association and the Off-Track Betting Corporation.


U.S. Muslims, Despite World Spotlight, Focus on the Personal
There is an almost startling contrast between a resurgent Islam's tumultuous role on the world scene and the expectations of how a growing Islamic presence will change America.
The most likely effect, most experts believe, will be to bolster the forces of social conservatism on issues like sexual permissiveness, support for parochial schools and gay rights.


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt  *
Associates Corp. of North America, Dallas, a unit of the Ford Motor Co., is offering through Lehman Brothers $300 million of 4 1/2 percent notes due in 1996 at 99.699 to yield 4.62 percent.
The noncallable issue is rated A-1 by Moody's and AA- by S.&amp; P. and Duff &amp; Phelps.
*
Dole Food Co., Westlake Village, Calif., is offering through Bankers Trust Co. $300 million of 7 percent senior notes due in 2003 at 99.467 to yield 7.075 percent.
The noncallable issue is rated Baa-3 by Moody's and BBB- by S.&amp; P.


TRANSACTIONS
Auto racing  CHAMPIONSHIP AUTO RACING TEAMS, INC. -- Announced the creation of the Indy car consumer products group, responsible for overseeing the development and distribution of Indy car-related merchandise, and named Scott Johnson vice president.
Baseball  American League  BALTIMORE ORIOLES -- Placed Harold Baines, outfielder, on the 15-day disabled list, retroactive to May 5.
Recalled Mark Leonard, outfielder, from Rochester of the International League.
National League  COLORADO ROCKIES -- Placed Freddie Benavides, shortstop, on the 15-day disabled list.
Purchased the minor-league contract of Nelson Liriano, infielder.
International League  SCRANTON-WILKES-BARRE RED BARONS -- Placed Tyler Green, pitcher, on the 15-day disabled list.
Basketball  United States Basketball League  USBL -- Named Jim Healey director of officials.
LONG ISLAND SURF -- Named Jason Yellin director of publications and information.
DAYTONA BEACH HOOTERS -- Named George Galante and Mark Manning public relations assistants.
Football  National Football League  DETROIT LIONS -- Signed James Jones, running back.
KANSAS CITY CHIEFS -- Signed Matt Gay, Ron Dickerson and Jeff Jones, wide receivers, and Morris Lolar, cornerback.
NEW YORK GIANTS -- Signed Brian Fox, quarterback, and Jamie Crysdale, offensive lineman.
PHILADELPHIA EAGLES -- Signed Preston Jones, quarterback.
SAN DIEGO CHARGERS -- Signed Shannon Cornelius and Dan Hoke, defensive linemen; Vincent Parks and Chris Thomas, wide receivers; Reginald Davidson and Eugene Snisky, offensive linemen; Keith Embray and Israel Stanley, linebackers.
College
NCAA -- Placed the University of Virginia's athletic programs on probation for two years, limited the football team to one graduate assistant during one of those years, reduced by two the school's football scholarships for the 1993-94 and 1994-95 academic years and directed the school to develop and implement a program to educate its athletic department personnel about NCAA legislation.
BUENA VISTA -- Named Dave Gunther men's basketball coach, effective July 1.
CENTRAL FLORIDA -- Named Robert Winch men's soccer coach.
DUQUESNE -- Named Dan Durkin head women's basketball coach.
STETSON -- Named Dee Romine women's basketball coach.


Arthur Andersen Is Hired As New Leslie Fay Auditor
The Leslie Fay Companies said yesterday that it had replaced its old auditor, which had discovered accounting irregularities that helped plunge it into bankruptcy, with Arthur Andersen &amp; Company.
The action, prompted by a finding of the Securities and Exchange Commission, could delay until July the troubled apparel maker's restated financial results for 1991 and 1992.
The original numbers were found to have been inflated by some executives to show higher-than-actual profits.
The company sought Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection from creditors in April.


Driver Acquitted of Homicide In School Bus Crash in Texas
After nearly four years of being labeled a "killer" in Texas's worst school bus accident, the driver of a soft-drink delivery truck has been found not guilty on all 21 counts of criminally negligent homicide arising from the crash.
After hearing two and a half weeks of testimony, the jury in this impoverished border county on Wednesday acquitted Ruben Perez, 29, of the charges -- one for each of the children who died in an accident that sent a school bus plunging into a flooded roadside gravel pit on Sept. 21, 1989.


Books of The Times; Taking It From the Top: A Biography of Gershwin
The Memory of All That
The Life of George Gershwin
By Joan Peyser
Illustrated. 319 pages. Simon &amp; Schuster. $25.
Numerous books illuminating George Gershwin's music have appeared in the 56 years since his death, including, most notably, Edward Jablonski's detailed study of the composer, which was published in 1987.
Whereas Mr.
Jablonski willfully avoided examining Gershwin's psyche and nonwork life, Joan Peyser -- the author of a best-selling and much debated biography of Leonard Bernstein -- proposes to focus on just those aspects of the composer in her new book, "The Memory of All That." The result, sadly, is a highly prurient volume, filled with gossip and the crudest sort of armchair psychologizing.


Wife of Slain Sri Lankan President May Enter Politics


Holtzman Admits Her Support for Banking Concern Was Mistake
Elizabeth Holtzman, the New York City Comptroller, said yesterday that she made a mistake in allowing her office to recommend that a banking company become an underwriter of city bonds when she owed the bank a large campaign debt.
In a televised interview on New York 1 News, Ms.
Holtzman said she had written a letter to Mayor David N. Dinkins asking that the city reconsider the selection of the company's securities division, Fleet Securities, as an underwriter of the city's borrowing.


Review/Theater; Parents-to-Be Regress to Childhood
Lesbian motherhood is increasingly a subject of public interest, if not general acceptance.
Paula Vogel, the author of "The Baltimore Waltz," scrutinizes this provocative issue in "And Baby Makes Seven," which opened last night at the Lucille Lortel Theater.
In the play, a menage a trois awaits the imminent birth of a baby.
The expectant mother (Cherry Jones) is a lesbian who wants to have a child, but without the complications of questions of paternity.
The father (Peter Frechette) is gay, and the third character is the mother's lover (Mary Mara).
The pregnancy begins as an act of pragmatism, but the relationships become more intricate as the three continue to live together.
Their spacious New York City loft becomes a hothouse environment.
Deep within this discursive play is an untapped story of emotional alliances that transcend matters of sexual identity.
Such thoughts and others are submerged in a Gothic nursery tale gone awry.
Instead of exploring her characters, the playwright falls back on children's games.
Together, the women have a flourishing fantasy life, in which they pretend to be children.
In her fantasy, Ms.
Jones becomes a proper English schoolboy, Cecil, and Ms.
Mara doubles (or is it triples?) as the French youngster in the movie "The Red Balloon" and as a mischievous sprite named Orphan McDermott.


Leo Neuringer, 65; Aided Development Of Magnetic Imaging
Dr.
Leo J. Neuringer, a senior scientist at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology whose research enhanced the medical applications of magnetic imaging technology, died Tuesday at Brigham and Women's Hospital in Boston.
He was 65 and lived in Wellesley, Mass.
The cause was cancer, M.I.T. said.
He retired there last month after 30 years as a staff member of the Francis Bitter National Magnet Laboratory.


Anthony F. DiMauro; Sailor, 75
Anthony F. DiMauro, a catamaran sailor who won the Little America's Cup four times and helped promote the design innovation that the San Diego Yacht Club used to retain the America's Cup in 1988, died on Tuesday at Norwalk Hospital in Connecticut.
He was 75, and lived in Norwalk.
His family said the cause of death was prostate cancer.


No Headline
"It has long been recognized that the pen is mightier than the sword. The modern version of that is: the fax machine is mightier than the rifle. It is impossible for a society that has more open telecommunications to continue to be repressive." -- RANDALL L. TOBIAS, vice chairman, American Telephone and Telegraph.  [ A1:2. ]


The Art Market
Picasso Estate


Last Chance
Here is a sampling of shows and art exhibitions in the New York metropolitan region that close soon: Closing This Weekend  "ANOTHER TIME," American Jewish Theater, 307 West 26th Street, Chelsea.
A drama by Ronald Harwood about a Jewish family in South Africa, directed by Stanley Brechner, with Malcolm McDowell, Marian Seldes, Joan Copeland, Michael Lombard and James Waterston.
Through Sunday.
Performances: tonight and tomorrow night at 8; Sunday at 2 and 7 P.M.; Tickets: $30.
Information: (212) 633-9797.
"WIDOWERS' HOUSES," Pearl Theater, 125 West 22d Street, Chelsea.
George Bernard Shaw's comedy about class differences, directed by Grey Johnson.
Through Sunday.
Performances: tonight at 8; tomorrow at 5 and 9 P.M.; Sunday at 2 P.M.; Tickets: $14, weekdays; $16, weekends.
Information: (212) 645-7708.


CONFLICT IN THE BALKANS: The Serbs; Belgrade Vows to Cut Bosnia Aid, Prompting Skepticism and Hope
The Governments of Serbia and federal Yugoslavia said today that they would cut all but humanitarian aid to the Serbian nationalists in Bosnia and Herzegovina, saying they were angered by the Bosnian Serb parliament's rejection, hours earlier, of an international plan to end this country's war.
"The Government believes there is no reason to provide further help in the form of money, fuel, industrial materials and other goods that have been sent until now," Serbia's statement said.
Future aid shipments, it said, "will be only in the form of food and medicine."


In Hawaii, Step Toward Legalized Gay Marriage
Hawaii's highest court has taken a long step toward making the state the first in the country to recognize marriages between couples of the same sex, ruling that a ban on such marriages may well violate the State Constitution's prohibition against sex discrimination.
In a 3-to-1 ruling on Wednesday in a case brought by three homosexual couples, the State Supreme Court stopped short of striking down the ban, instead sending the case back to a trial court for review.


Citibank Expands A Bond Strategy
Citibank, the largest issuer of bonds backed by credit card receivables, said yesterday that it planned to issue up to $4 billion more.
The bank, which has $27 billion of outstanding bonds backed by credit card payments, filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission for additional offerings through its Standard Credit Card Master Trust 1.
Citibank, which has shifted a large amount of its credit card portfolio to payments with floating interest rates that change with the prime rate, is expected to sell its next credit card issue to pay a floating rate as well.


No New Bomb-Making Material Found in Iraq
To the Editor:
The Op-Ed piece by Diana Edensword and Gary Milhollin ("Iraq's Bomb -- an Update," April 26) is an example of the old adage that a little knowledge is a dangerous thing.
The authors have cobbled together a motley collection of half-truths and personal interpretations of limited information to which they have had access.
They have then constructed a grossly distorted and arbitrary picture, comfortably secure that a vast majority of your readers cannot form any independent judgment but will be prepared to think the worst of possible Iraqi intentions.


Yeltsin Irks Japan by Canceling Visit for the 2d Time in 8 Months
Japanese officials reacted with barely veiled anger and exasperation today when they learned that President Boris N. Yeltsin of Russia had once again abruptly canceled a visit to Tokyo, for the second time in eight months.
Like Mr.
Yeltsin's last cancellation, Japanese officials first heard about it over the television rather than through diplomatic channels.
And while both countries attempted to lay the blame on scheduling problems, officials here made it clear that the trip had been scuttled largely after it became clear that no progress would be made toward resolving the dispute over the fate of the four Kurile islands that were seized by the former Soviet Union in the last days of World War II.


Art in Review
'Nether Art' 'A Dutch Response to the 90's'  Grey Art Gallery and Study Center 33 Washington Place East Greenwich Village  Through May 15
There is certainly more to contemporary Dutch art than wry, culturally critical appropriation, but that's what stands out in this uneven, if sometimes illuminating, show of 10 young artists from the Netherlands.


Older Planes Grounded


Ailing Shares
Advacare Inc. provides bookkeeping services for doctors.
Its stock has languished since reaching a 52-week high of $10.125 in September.
Yesterday, it reached a new low of $2.375 and closed down 87.5 cents, to $2.75.
On Wednesday, Advacare said it anticipated a second-quarter loss, partly due to an accounting change.


Bargaining at the Art Galleries: A Personal Odyssey
I BEGAN at the Fawbush Gallery in SoHo, under thundery skies, pursuing John Wilcox, a young artist known for his canvases about the soul.
The gallery is on Grand Street in SoHo.
It is a narrow place with white-splashed walls, and very neat.
One other person was circling the room when I arrived, a fidgety man with a worn face.
As he inspected the art, he kept muttering to himself: "Hmmm, nice. Hmmm, nice. Hmmm, nice."
Joe Fawbush, the owner, greeted me with an earnest smile.
A single Wilcox was on display, and Mr.
Fawbush lugged out five others.
One was a square piece of white canvas.
Glued to it was a narrow strip of acid-free paper, on which were typed excerpts from the Book of Revelation.


Saudi Banker Asks Dismissal of B.C.C.I. Suit
A leading Saudi banker in the Bank of Credit and Commerce International case has asked a Federal court to dismiss a $10.5 million racketeering lawsuit against him, contending that the bank's liquidators lack authority to bring the case.
The request, on behalf of Sheik Khalid bin Mahfouz and the National Commercial Bank of Saudi Arabia, was made Wednesday in response to a scramble to recoup an estimated $10 billion for some 250,000 creditors of the failed Bank of Credit and Commerce International.


Advantage, Borg and Nastase
Bjorn Borg and his partner, Ilie Nastase, won again last night at the Manhattan Masters, the new round-robin doubles competition at the 69th Regiment Armory on Lexington Avenue.
Borg, 35, the youngest player in the field of 12, and Nastase, 48, were extended by Rod Laver, 55, and Bob Lutz, 46.
They split sets, 6-4, 3-6, and Borg and Nastase then prevailed in a tie-breaker set, 7-4.


In Interview, Trade Center Suspect Proclaims Innocence and Charges Torture
Mahmud Abouhalima, in the first public statements by any of the World Trade Center bombing suspects, said yesterday that he knew five other men arrested in the case, but he denied any involvement in the attack.
"No, no, no way." he said, "I'm absolutely innocent."


Nynex Link For Newsday
Newsday Inc. and the Nynex Corporation said yesterday that they would work together to test a system that would provide access to news and other information by telephone.
About 500 newspapers in the country, including Newsday, already offer various audio information services by telephone.
But the Newsday-Nynex project is considered significant because it involves a partnership between a newspaper and a local telephone company.


Passaic Man Charged in Rape and Killing of Girl, 7
A 40-year old Passaic man was arrested Wednesday night and charged with the kidnap, rape and murder of a 7-year-old girl near his home.
Passaic police identified the suspect as Canrad Jeffrey who, according to The Associated Press, had been released from prison two weeks ago.


Corrections
A picture caption in some copies yesterday about negotiations at the United Nations on a Bosnia peace plan misstated the location of the talks.
They were in the Security Council chamber.


COMPANY NEWS
BROWNING-FERRIS INDUSTRIES, Houston, said its affiliate American Ref-Fuel Co., which is a joint venture with Air Products and Chemicals Inc., has completed the purchase of a facility for turning waste into energy from Occidental Petroleum Corp.
Terms were not disclosed.


Review/City Ballet; Counting Down: 73 Works
The New York City Ballet began its survey of 73 ballets by George Balanchine in earnest on Wednesday night.
If Tuesday's gala was a prologue to the company's "Balanchine Celebration," this first regular program, which included "Apollo" (1928), "Prodigal Son" (1929) and "Serenade" (1935), set the chronological pattern for the festival.
All the ballets are familiar, with "Apollo" usually considered to be the seminal work that presaged Balanchine's neo-classical style of a decade later.
"Prodigal Son," influenced by the acrobatics and Constructivism of the 1920's Soviet avant-garde, still shows the choreographer open to a range of experiments.


A SIXTH SUSPECT CHARGED IN BLAST
A 27-year-old Palestinian who the authorities said entered the United States carrying manuals that told how to construct the kind of bomb used in the World Trade Center explosion was charged yesterday with conspiring in the Feb. 26 attack.
In a Federal complaint, officials said Mohammad Ahmad Ajaj arrived in New York City last September on a flight from Pakistan with Ramzi Ahmed Yousef, identified in the complaint as another suspect who is still at large.


Allen Grover, 92, Aide To Henry Luce at Time
Allen Grover, a retired vice president of Time Inc. and former personal aide to Henry R. Luce, the company's founder, died on Monday at home in Manhattan at 92.
He died in his sleep, his family said.
Mr.
Grover, whose close relationship with Mr.
Luce earned him the sobriquet "vice president in charge of Henry Luce," started with the company when he was 30.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article on the Media Business page yesterday, about an attempt by the National Basketball Association to eliminate television broadcasts of N.B.A. games by superstations like WTBS, misstated the timing of legal action on the issue.
A court hearing on the matter is to be held next week; a decision by the judge is not expected then.


Jurors in a Libel Case Get Homework: Read
A jury of seven women and one man was given a daunting homework assignment today by Judge Eugene F. Lynch: A 48,500-word, two-part series from The New Yorker magazine that is at the heart of a $10 million libel case in Federal court here pitting a flamboyant scholar against an erudite writer.
With three days of reading behind them, the jury will reconvene Monday for opening arguments in this celebrated, nine-year-old case, and will hear testimony from Jeffrey M. Masson, who is suing the writer of the series, Janet Malcolm, for libel.


Giants Sign Collegians
BRIAN FOX, a Florida quarterback who did not play last year, and center JAMIE CRYSDALE of the University of Cincinnati signed with the Giants as free agents yesterday.


Good Housekeeping Is Drawing Fire from Homosexuals Over Ads Dealing with Family Values.
GOOD HOUSEKEEPING's efforts to end a controversy surrounding the magazine's trade advertising seem to be generating more controversy.
In print advertisements introduced in March, the Hearst Magazines monthly began presenting results of a Roper Organization survey on "Family Values in the 90's." The ads are intended to broaden and soften the "new traditionalist" theme at the center of Good Housekeeping's campaign since 1988, which was interpreted by many liberals and feminists as an endorsement of attempts to encourage homemakers to remain home and working women to return home.


The Spoken Word
ARTS SYMPOSIUM, Columbia University, Lewisohn and Dodge Halls, Broadway and 116th Street, Morningside Heights.
"Dean's Day," a day of seminars by leaders of the New York arts world, is to include the playwright Arthur Kopit, the sculptor George Segal and Stacy Cochran, the director of "My New Gun." Tomorrow, 9:30 A.M. to 4 P.M.
Admission: $20; $10 for students and 1993 graduates.
Information: (212) 567-0260.
COMMUNITY CONFERENCE, Columbia University, Ferris Booth Hall, 115th Street and Broadway, Morningside Heights.
"New York: The Apple of Clinton's Eye," a conference focusing on the impact of the Clinton Administration on New York City and other urban areas, is to feature State Senator Franz S. Leichter and Representative Charles B. Rangel, both Democrats of Manhattan.
Tomorrow, noon to 4 P.M.
Free.
Information: (212) 397-5913.


Results Plus
CYCLING Dutchman Wins DuPont Time Trial  The 11-day, 1,085-mile Tour DuPont, America's leading bicycle race, began last night in Wilmington, Del., with Jelle Nijdam of Holland winning the 2.98-mile prologue time trial in 5 minutes 55.070 seconds.
Two overall favorites among the 118 competing cyclists were next: Raul Alcala of Mexico second in 6:05.952 and Lance Armstrong of Austin, Tex., in 6:07.037.
There will be two stages today, a 55.6-mile flat-road race in the morning and a 15.4-mile team time trial at night.
TENNIS  Edberg and Becker Are Upset Victims  Top-seeded Stefan Edberg and second-seeded Boris Becker were upset yesterday in the $1.7 million German Open in Hamburg, Germany.
Becker was was unable to keep up with the steady baseline play of fellow German Bernd Karbacher and lost, 6-3, 6-4.
Edberg, the defending champion, lost to Emilio Sanchez of Spain, 4-6, 7-6 (7-5), 6-4.
Marc Goellner, the rising German star who had upset fifth-seeded Michael Chang in the previous round, was also eliminated, 6-1, 4-6, 6-2, by Andrei Chesnokov of Russia. (AP) Navratilova Returns Victoriously: Martina Navratilova, playing her first tournament after a 10-week layoff caused by a tender right ankle, defeated Naoko Sawamatsu of Japan, 6-4, 6-4, to reach the quarterfinals of the Italian Open at Rome.
The two-hour match was interrupted for three hours by rain.
Jennifer Capriati also advanced, beating South Africa's Amanda Coetzer, 7-6 (8-6), 4-6, 6-2, in a baseline battle. (AP) COLLEGES  N.C.A.A.
Women's Field Expanded to 64  The field for the National Collegiate Athletic Association Division I women's basketball tournament will be expanded from 48 to 64 teams for next season, the N.C.A.A. announced yesterday in Overland Park, Kan. (AP)


Bosnia. Now What?
By emphatically rejecting a compromise peace plan that even their closest allies had urged them to endorse, the members of Bosnia's Serbian "parliament" fling a challenge at the international community -- how now to maintain credibility, avoid a wider war and, most urgently, protect endangered Bosnian lives.
The challenge is especially acute for President Clinton.
He has publicly called for some kind of international military response, but the American people and European governments remain divided over just how deeply to let themselves be drawn into the Balkan maelstrom.


2 Yonkers Officers Accused of Beating a Woman and 2 Men
A Federal grand jury today charged two Yonkers police officers with violating the civil rights of two men and a woman by beating them with nightsticks during arrests after a late-night christening party in 1991.
The grand jury said that the two officers, one of whom retired in August, drove the two men by squad car to a deserted train station parking lot and struck them repeatedly with their clubs while the two men's arms were handcuffed behind their backs.


People
*
David Brenner, executive vice president at MCA TV, New York, was named to head MCA TV's new in-house advertiser sales division.
Also, Karen Zollman was named senior vice president of advertiser sales there.
She was previously a vice president at NBC Cable, New York.


Friends and Neighbors Pay One More Visit to 6 Killed in East Harlem


Researchers Close In On Discovering Date Of Earliest Dinosaur
In the most precise dating of the earliest known dinosaurs to date, scientists have determined that these reptiles were already established on earth 228 million years ago and had begun to evolve along several distinct lines.
The research on the dates of the dinosaurs is being reported today in the journal Science.
The new research should help paleontologists focus on one of the least-known aspects of the otherwise much-studied dinosaurs: their origins and early evolution.
Previously, there had been only broad estimates for the ages of the earliest known dinosaurs.


Restaurants
Two of the questions most frequently asked by New Yorkers are: "Where can I find an affordable apartment?" and "Where can I get a good seafood dinner?" While the former requires a magician, the latter has become less problematic in recent years.
The 11-year-old Wilkinson's Seafood Cafe has been the prototype for a half-dozen small neighborhood fish houses.
Seven weeks ago a new chef took over: Melissa Lord, from the defunct John Clancy's in Greenwich Village.


NBC to Team Brokaw and Couric in Prime Time
NBC News announced yesterday that it would put two of its best-known news anchors, Tom Brokaw and Katie Couric, onto a new prime-time news-magazine program to start in late summer.
The program, still untitled, will be under the supervision of Jeff Zucker, the 28-year-old executive producer of the "Today" show who has been credited with revitalizing that morning show's format.
Mr.
Zucker will leave "Today" to become the new program's executive producer.
Mr.
Brokaw will remain the anchor of the "NBC Nightly News" and Ms.
Couric will remain co-anchor of "Today."


Hartford Legislature's Budget Includes Minimal Tax Increase
The Connecticut General Assembly passed the first half of an $8.6 billion state budget late Wednesday that includes no major tax increase for the year that begins on July 1.
Legislative leaders vowed that despite a last-minute snag in approving details on how the money would be spent, they were determined to deliver to Gov.
Lowell P. Weicker Jr. the earliest budget package in recent state history.





Political Memo; Hillary Clinton Is Back! Details Inside
Suddenly, Hillary Rodham Clinton is back, dominating the newsstands, from Family Circle to the cover of People and from Time to The Washington Post.
Her aides insist that the timing is all coincidental, but some political professionals see it as a useful exercise in image-burnishing before the release of the Administration's long-awaited proposal for health-care reform.
Sometime in June, after all, the health-care task force that Mrs.
Clinton heads will come forth with a program to overhaul one-seventh of the nation's economy.
As lawmakers are discovering in a series of private briefings, it will be complicated, it will be big and it will be expensive.


U.S. Blames Con Ed Error For Fatal Plant Explosion
The explosion at an East Side power plant last November that killed one man and badly burned two others occurred in part because Consolidated Edison failed to drain steam pipes, the same mistake that resulted in a 1989 explosion in Gramercy Park, a Federal safety agency said yesterday.
It proposed fining the utility $247,000.
A spokesman for the utility, Daniel Walden, said that the company had not yet seen the charges from the Occupational Health and Safety Administration and would have no comment.
OSHA also accused Con Edison of violating other safety rules intended to protect workers from asbestos.


Market Place; Herbalife Cleanses Its Balance Sheet and Attracts New Interest
HERBALIFE INTERNATIONAL INC., which nearly went bankrupt in the late 1980's after building a fervent following for its diet products and nutritional supplements, appears to have put the worst behind it.
The company has installed a new management team that has cleaned up its balance sheet, resolved its problems with regulators and charted a course for future growth that focuses mainly on international expansion.


Afrikaner Rightists Vow Never to Live Under Mandela's Rule
The meeting started about corn prices and farm labor laws, but soon enough it got around to blood.
The 5,000 white farmers, assembled in the rugby stadium of this right-wing farm-belt town, listened to the too-familiar stories of farm families raped and killed in their bedrooms by black intruders.


Art in Review
'Golub/Spero, Part II' '90's/50's'  Josh Baer Gallery 475 Broome Street SoHo Through May 15
Having been married for nearly 40 years and having shared adjacent studios for many of them, it is not surprising that Nancy Spero and Leon Golub have influenced each other's work.
This quietly inspiring joint exhibition includes some seldom-seen paintings from the 1950's that attest to the couple's shared interest in diverting the formal means of Abstract Expressionism toward more narrative ends: she toward shrouded images of goddesslike females, he toward even more primal shamanistic motifs.
But the show's real news resides in the impressive recent efforts by the two artists, which indicate that their mutual influence may be at a new high.


Critic's Notebook; Balancing Love and Death At the Circus
CHILDREN are bent into strange shapes, tossed in the air, kicked around.
Ripe adult bodies are flaunted, coupled, cantilevered, hurled through space.
And the possibility of death lurks everywhere: death by falling, death by dismemberment, death by collision, slapsticks of death and rebirth.
It is, of course, that most innocent form of entertainment, fun for the whole family: the circus.
Two circuses in town -- the Ringling Brothers and Barnum &amp; Bailey three-ring extravanganza, which has moved on to Providence, R.I., and Cirque du Soleil, the thrust-stage circus whose current production is titled "Saltimbanco," at Battery Park through May 30 -- offer an opportunity to contemplate not just individual feats but also the collective message of two distinct but kindred performances.
The two have different roots and class aspirations: Ringling Brothers connects to all-American vaudeville, Cirque du Soleil to European commedia dell'arte and modern performance art.
The Ringling Brothers' concessions sold hot dogs and snow cones; Cirque du Soleil offers Evian water and four kinds of tea.
Ringling Brothers included trained animals; Cirque du Soleil does not.


Transport Chief Quits Under Fire in Germany
Transport Minister Gunther Krause, the most prominent eastern German politician in Chancellor Helmut Kohl's coalition Government, resigned today over accusations that he had used public funds to pay his family's private moving expenses.
Mr.
Krause's resignation came after he met with Mr.
Kohl to discuss allegations in the German press that he had billed the Government $4,000 for the move in 1991 from Berlin to his hometown, Borgerende on the Baltic Sea not far from Rostock.


Art in Review
Michael Byron
Baron-Boisante Gallery  50 West 57th Street  Manhattan  Through tomorrow  Elga Wimmer Gallery  560 Broadway (at Prince Street)  SoHo  Through May 31
The earliest pieces in Michael Byron's show at Baron-Boisante are five small mixed-media works from 1990.
They appear to be scenes from a paranoic dream-narrative, its meaning suggested by captions written directly onto the painted surface in ballpoint pen.
In one, for example, a sinister-looking woman holding a dustpan and brush is accompanied by the words "The cleaning woman knew something was up." The influence of both Surrealism and Sigmar Polke are evident in these urbane little images, not surprisingly, considering that Mr.
Byron, an American, has been living in Europe for the last several years.


The Art Market
Picasso Estate


Howe Gets Lit Up But E.R.A. Goes Down
The earned run average that started at infinity and rested briefly at 81.00 reached a season-low 19.06 yesterday.
Steve Howe pitched two innings against the California Angels at Yankee Stadium and he dropped his e.r.a. by more than 5.00.
That sounds positive or, at least, reassuring.
It was not.
After Mike Witt pitched seven stout innings, Howe relieved and gave up a two-run homer to Chili Davis in the eighth inning to provide the Angels and Scott Sanderson with a 3-1 victory over the Yankees and a two-game series sweep.
It is simply a measure of his miserable early season that Howe bettered his numbers with a two-inning outing that produced two earned runs and a loss.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-12  CLINTON SEEKS EUROPEAN SUPPORT  President Clinton pressured European allies to join in "tougher measures" against the Bosnian Serbs, which Senior officials said included arms shipments to the Muslims and air strikes to keep the Serbs at bay until the arms arrive.
A1  BELGRADE TO CUT AID TO SERBS  The Governments of Serbia and federal Yugoslavia said they would cut all but humanitarian aid to the Serbs in Bosnia and Herzegovina, saying they were angered by the Bosnian Serb parliament's rejection of a plan to end Bosnia's war.
A1  WHAT EUROPEAN ALLIES WANTED  News analysis: Firm leadership in the Balkans is what the European allies have wanted from President Clinton now that he has consulted them, despite their reluctance on U.S. military steps there.
A1


Audit Cited in Suicide Offers Bad News for France
A report whose impending publication has been cited as a factor in the suicide of former Prime Minister Pierre Beregovoy last week was published today and revealed a French economy in far worse straits than his Socialist Government had suggested.
Commissioned by the new center-right Government of Edouard Balladur and compiled by the chief state auditor, the report had become highly controversial before its disclosure today because leaks of its contents carried the clear suggestion that Mr.
Beregovoy had misled the country over the state of the economy.


Bruce Fiigen, 39, Dies; Warner Bros. Lawyer
Bruce G. Fiigen, the chief entertainment lawyer for Warner Brothers Inc., died on April 29 at his home in the Bel Air section of Los Angeles at the age of 39.
The cause was Kaposi's sarcoma and other complications of AIDS, said David Hebert, his companion.


Review/Film; 'Dave,' a Prince-and-Pauper Switch
When Dave Kovic (Kevin Kline) finds Secret Service agents in his living room, he thinks their presence must have something to do with his tax returns.
He is much too naive to realize that because he looks exactly like Bill Mitchell, the President of the United States (also Mr. Kline), he can be used to impersonate the President while greeting foreign dignitaries, throwing out ceremonial baseballs, reading from a hidden Teleprompter as he talks to the press, and of course kissing babies.
Dave is also too innocent to think that duties like these constitute the most influential part of the President's job.
But audiences may feel otherwise, which is the joke at the heart of "Dave," Ivan Reitman's glossy, energetic new Washington comedy.
If President Mitchell is cynical enough to have his pets on call for photo opportunities -- and to turn them over to handlers immediately after the cameras stop flashing -- then a Dave might just be invaluable.
That is, once he stops looking around the White House in astonishment and trying to take home souvenirs.


Senate Backs Rules On Most Lobbying
The Senate voted overwhelmingly yesterday to require lobbyists to account for the money they spend to influence Government officials.


Review/Film; The Threats to Creatures of Amazonia
"Amazonia: Voices From the Rain Forest," a documentary about life in the Amazon River basin, is a handsome, well-meaning film that is overwhelmed by the scope and complexity of its subject.
The 70-minute film, which opens today at the Cinema Village on a double-bill with "Anima Mundi," a nature documentary, explores the devastating impact of Western civilization on one of the world's richest natural habitats.
Although "Amazonia" offers passionate arguments about the necessity of preserving the region from development, its evocation of the political and social forces affecting the area is far too sketchy and confusing for the pieces to form a coherent historical portrait.


Today's TV Listings
Television and radio news, listings and advertising appear today on pages B14-15.


Jeffries Suit Summations
It was only coincidence that Dr.
Leonard Jeffries was removed as chairman of the black studies department of City College after a speech he delivered in Albany was attacked as racist, lawyers for the City University of New York said yesterday in closing arguments at Federal District Court in Manhattan.
But Joseph Fleming, the professor's lawyer disagreed, saying Dr.
Jeffries's had been reappointed seven times.


Nets Need 6th Man, And 7th, And 8th
And now, Dr. Chuck Daly, with today's medical report.
"Sam's foot is in a cast and he's supposed to get an M.R.I. today."
That would be Nets center Sam Bowie, and even if the magnetic resonance imaging scan shows no damage in his left ankle, it is extremely unlikely that he will play against Cleveland in Game 4 on Friday at Byrne Meadowlands Arena.


McHale Looks Back and It's Funny
Eventually, after the green uniform had been removed forever, Kevin McHale could laugh at the fact that the last official act of his Hall-of-Fame-caliber career was arguing with an official.
It was not so humorous at the time.
McHale had been brought back into the din of the Charlotte Coliseum Wednesday night with 0.4 seconds restored to the clock, one last encore of a 13-year career with the Boston Celtics, his team trailing the Charlotte Hornets by a point, his last playoff series all but over.


One Voice Tries to Quell Chorus of Leaf Blowers
OUTSIDE Dick Roberts's house, the birds are singing ("Cardinals. Finch. We have lots of wrens this year.") and the foghorns in Long Island Sound are hooting like off-key mechanical owls.
Inside, Sam, the retriever, is padding across the carpet ("He barks a little.").
Then Mr.
Roberts, a jazz pianist who has been known to ask the guitarist in his quartet to play a little softer ("I want to hear the fingers on the strings. Count Basie could play quiet.") turns on a full-blast tape recording of the thing he hates.
"O.K., LET'S HAVE A CONVERSATION," he says.
Make that, he shouts.
On the tape is the 105-decibel drone of a leaf blower.


CONFLICT IN THE BALKANS: Clinton's Plight; For Bosnia's Serbs, the War Is Total, But the U.S. and Its Allies See Limits
The refusal of Bosnian Serbs to accept the peace settlement in Bosnia has put President Clinton in an exquisite diplomatic bind: his threat of military action has failed to produce a political solution, and the allies and Congress are still expressing reservations about carrying out the military threats.
The reason is simple.
While many allies mourn for the Bosnian Muslims, others do not see a direct threat to their own national interests that would justify their deep involvement in a rescue mission.


Biospherics Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Berlin Trip Called Off
Berlin's embattled bid for the Olympic Games for the year 2000 took another hit yesterday with the announcement that I.O.C. president JUAN ANTONIO SAMARANCH had called off a visit to avoid possible riots by anti-Olympic activists.


Jockeying for a Title
OSCAR DE LA HOYA wanted the Olympic gold and got it.
Now, he wants a title fight before his first anniversary as a pro.
But FRANKIE AVELAR, another former Olympian, owns a North American Boxing Federation title and wants to get a world championship as well.
It's likely that whoever wins their scheduled 10-round fight tonight at Lake Tahoe will get his wish.


Kemper Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Germany to Return Asylum Applicants In Pact With Poland
Germany, on the verge of changing its Constitution to cut down a flood of foreign asylum-seekers, signed a treaty with Poland today that will allow it to turn many back at the border and deport as many as 10,000 rejected applicants who arrive from Poland this year.
Interior Minister Rudolf Seiters described the treaty as a model for a similar one his country is trying to negotiate with the Czech Republic.
Germany will also pay Poland the equivalent of $76.4 million this year and next to provide shelter for immigrants and improve surveillance of its borders, with technical equipment purchased from Germany with the money provided under the treaty.


Rowland H. George, Insurance Innovator And Financier, 98
Rowland H. George, who helped to pioneer health insurance in New York, died on Thursday at New York Hospital.
He was 98 and lived in Manhattan.
The cause was pulmonary and cardiac illness, his family said.


Review/Pop; Oscar Peterson In Mellow Mood
"I've started writing ballads in my old age," Oscar Peterson said early in Tuesday's opening performance of a six-night engagement at the Blue Note.
"I can't do anything about them," he joked, "but I write them."
The 67-year-old pianist went on to introduce a spare, wistful song, "Why I Think About Tomorrow," which he accurately described as being "in the Tony Bennett mold." Like everything Mr.
Peterson played in a show dominated by original compositions, the piece and its performance were models of order, clarity and emotional restraint.


Atlanta Gas Light Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


IDEC Pharmaceuticals Corp.  (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Editorial Writer in Hartford Joins Times Editorial Board
Susanna Rodell, an editorial writer at The Hartford Courant, will join The New York Times on June 1 as an assistant editor of the editorial page.
The appointment was announced yesterday by Howell Raines, editorial page editor.
Ms.
Rodell, 44, earned a B.A. degree in East Asian studies at Harvard in 1979 and is fluent in Mandarin Chinese, Spanish and French.
She has been writing on international, national and local subjects at The Courant since 1991, specializing in East Asian and Latin American affairs.


Leviathan Gas Pipeline Partners L.P.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


No Need for Mets' Bullpen, and No Success for Yanks'
Before he arrived in New York, Jeff Torborg had been told that Doc Gooden is "the man" at Shea Stadium -- the team leader, the go-to guy, the soul of the Mets' club.
The manager didn't see that last spring or early last summer, and he caught only glimpses of Gooden's greatness as the hideous 1992 season faded in the fall.
He understands what they were telling him now.


Arms Makers Vie to Build Rail Cars
In what public officials here are billing as the first serious effort to steer the declining weapons industry toward commercial work, five of the nation's largest military and aerospace contractors are competing for a contract to build rail cars for this city's new mass transit system.
The military contractors have each joined forces with established rail-car manufacturers to bid for the contract, which is seen as a test case of whether the companies can successfully transfer decades of high-tech weapons production into marketable products for the rapidly expanding transportation equipment and services market.
The contract, with an estimated value of $200 million, is to be awarded by the end of June.
It covers the building of 87 cars for the city's Green Line, scheduled to open in late 1994, and to develop technologically advanced transportation products that can be used in Los Angeles cars and other transit systems worldwide.
"Unlike some businesses that the defense contractors are considering entering, transportation is still an underdeveloped market, and a lot of the skills used in defense are applicable to mass transit," said James Raffel, a research analyst for the National Commission for Economic Conversion and Disarmament, a Washington group.
Rail-car industry executives appear pleased to form partnerships with military contractors, which they said had developed a variety of technologies that would benefit future mass transit systems.
They may include lightweight frames for rail cars and buses, made from the same composite materials that the military contractors use in their rocket and missile designs.
The contractors may also use their knowledge of aerospace electronics to develop safer braking and more fuel-efficient propulsion systems for the rail cars.
"Most of this technology has been too expensive for us to develop for the current market, and a lot of it has been kept confidential or classified as sensitive because of its use by the military," said Thomas J. Smith, president of the Morrison Knudsen Corporation's rail system group, which has teamed with the Hughes Aircraft Company and the Lockheed Corporation.
"It's a unique opportunity for us to get our hands on some of it."
Many weapons industry experts and executives have long maintained that the skills the contractors gained in building complex weaponry like missiles, jet fighters and radar have direct applications to transportation.
Even critics say that if military contractors are at all successful in commercial ventures, they will most likely be transportation related, mainly because that market remains largely undeveloped.
Yet Mr.
Raffel said that military contractors were unlikely to enter the market for transportation equipment and services, despite its predicted fast growth, unless the Federal Government made a considerable investment in the development of new technologies and in the rebuilding of roads, bridges and mass transit.
As an example of why such conversion efforts are prone to fail when there is no Government support, Mr.
Raffel cites the Boeing Corporation's early success in building rail cars and trolleys after the Vietnam War.
But the Seattle-based jet builder ultimately abandoned its rail-car efforts when financing from the Urban Mass Transit Administration was cut during the Carter and Reagan Administrations and the market became unstable.
President Clinton has said he intends to increase Federal investment in transportation and rebuilding roads and the like, but no specific plans have yet been formulated.
The American Public Transit Association, an industry group, estimates that transit systems across the United States will have to spend about $8.1 billion by the end of the decade to replace rail vehicles and keep them in proper working order.
That amount compares with $4.5 billion spent in 1990.
Los Angeles plans to spend $150 billion over the next 30 years on a 400-mile metro system that includes light- , heavy- and commuter-rail systems.
About $70 billion will be spent on the light-rail system, which will require hundreds of rail cars.
Motive Was Loss of Jobs
Officials of the Los Angeles Metropolitan Transportation Authority said that the region's loss of some 150,000 aerospace and weapons jobs in the last five years prompted them to structure the rail-car procurement as an enticement for military contractors to consider transportation work to offset the decline in military business.
"We've worked very hard to encourage local aerospace and defense firms to form these partnerships with the rail-car industry to help them make the transition into the emerging surface transportation industry," said Mike Antonovich, chairman of the Los Angeles Metropolitan Transportation Authority.
The four bidding teams are: the Northrop Corporation with the Bombardier Corporation; Lockheed, Hughes and Morrison Knudsen; TRW Aerospace, the AAI Corporation and the Siemens Duewag Corporation, and the Rockwell International Corporation with the Sumitomo Corporation.
Under the contract, the winning team will receive up to $10 million to develop product ideas, which will be tested on two prototype cars and possibly be included in some of the 87 cars ordered.
The winning team is expected to be well positioned to compete for other transit rail contracts and to sell its products across the country and overseas.
But some critics and supporters of conversion alike say that the military contractors have yet to show a real commitment to transportation and that the companies' participation in the Los Angeles rail system is only window dressing because it requires little capital investment.
Union Is Skeptical
"If they are serious about transportation, why aren't they creating design and development centers within the companies to study the new technologies and make prototypes?" asked Don Nakamoto, research director for the International Association of Machinists and Aerospace Workers District 727 in Los Angeles.
"They are very reluctant to take the first step."
Mr.
Nakamoto, whose union strongly supports conversion for jobs growth, said he believed the city's effort to get military contractors to participate in the rail-car procurement was partly political.
After the metropolitan transportation commission canceled a $121.8 million contract it had awarded to Sumitomo for the Green Line cars, amid a storm of criticism about the selection of a foreign-owned company, it was forced to find American companies to bid with foreign rail-car makers, Mr.
Nakamoto said.
Gwendolyn Williams, manager of contracting for the vehicle acquisition project for the Los Angeles Metropolitan Transportation Authority, said that initially the rail-car makers responded coldly to the idea of teaming with the military contractors because the two were in totally different businesses.
After months of collaboration, however, the rail-car makers have expressed optimism that the partnerships will prosper.
Greg Fountain, Lockheed's manager of advanced product development for commercial systems, said that the Los Angeles procurement represented an opportunity to test ideas.
"The critical issue here is that we in the defense business must learn to assess the needs of the market and match those needs with the appropriate technology," he said.
"In the past we were just given requirements and we met them."
Mr.
Fountain said that if Lockheed was successful in developing new transportation technologies, he believed the new area of business could amount to as much as $100 million in annual revenue and possibly more in the long term.
Rockwell Sees Advantage
Officials of Rockwell International said they believed they had an advantage over other military contractors competing for the Los Angeles rail contract because of the company's history of translating military technology into transportation products.
Using its military navigation and electronics skills, Rockwell recently developed satellite navigation and communications systems that are being used by trucking companies, transit systems and railroads to track vehicles and provide the latest type of communications.
The contractor is also developing so-called intelligent vehicle highway systems, a traffic management tool, and it is a major supplier of car and truck components and systems.
"It's not hard to imagine transportation being half of Rockwell International," Mr.
Black said.
"The same technology that we put in infrared sensors can be used for traffic-lane monitoring or even for collision avoidance in cars. The trick is correctly identifying the market and applying the technology."


Armand D'Amato Found Guilty Of Fraud in a Lobbying Scheme
Armand P. D'Amato, whose Long Island law firm prospered as his older brother, Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato, gained power in Washington, was convicted of mail fraud today in connection with $120,500 he received from a military contractor to lobby the Senator.
Senator D'Amato was not a defendant in the trial, but the case drew attention to allegations of influence peddling against him that prompted a two-year Senate Ethics Committee investigation and that have repeatedly been raised by his political opponents.


Timorese Can't Get Fair Trial in Indonesia
To the Editor:
"Fear and Repression Still Rule Area Occupied by Indonesia," your otherwise excellent news article on human rights violations in East Timor (front page, April 21), understates the Indonesian Government's domination of the country's justice system.
You cite the defense lawyer of Jose Alexandre (Xanana) Gusmao, the detained opposition leader, as saying that Mr.
Gusmao's trial proceedings have been fair.


Trimac Ltd. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
President Clinton's health-care plan will cover the cost of treating people injured on the job or in automobile accidents, merging workers' compensation and the medical portion of auto insurance with standard health insurance in one big system, Hillary Rodham Clinton said.  [ Page 1. ]
The unemployment rate remained stuck at 7 percent in April for the third consecutive month.
Businesses added 119,000 jobs to their payrolls, but the total number of jobs remained a million shy of the pre-recession peak.  [ 37. ]  New Jersey's unemployment jumped to 9.1 percent, the highest among industrial states.
The rate also rose in New York City, but fell in New York State.  [ 1. ]


Elscint Ltd.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Mutter Cancellation
Itzhak Perlman will replace Anne-Sophie Mutter as the violin soloist with the Metropolitan Opera Orchestra tomorrow at 3 P.M.
Ms.
Mutter has a back injury.
The all-Berg program remains the same: the Violin Concerto, suites from "Wozzeck" and "Lulu" featuring the soprano Renee Fleming, and Three Pieces for Orchestra (Op. 6).
James Levine is to conduct.
Information: (212) 247-7800.


American Technical Ceramics Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Underwriter Is Removed By Dinkins
Mayor David N. Dinkins yesterday removed as a city bond underwriter a banking company recommended by City Comptroller Elizabeth Holtzman's staff.
And the City Department of Investigation began an inquiry into whether a debt that Ms.
Holtzman's campaign owed the bank had influenced its selection.
Ms.
Holtzman, without mentioning the investigation that was already under way, announced on television Thursday evening that she had made a mistake when she allowed her office to recommend Fleet Securities at the same time that her Senate campaign owed $255,000 to Fleet Bank, which is part of the same Rhode Island company, the Fleet Financial Group.


Penn Engineering &amp; Mfg.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Serv-Tech Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Group Rights Advocates Fan Flames of Bias
To the Editor:
Nowhere is the decline of political debate more apparent than in the controversy over "gay rights." The essential political issue is not whether homosexuality is a matter of choice or a biological determinant.
This is a scientific question, which only a commitment to the honest and rational pursuit of knowledge can resolve.


Tejas Power Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


New Jersey Unemployment Surges To Worst Among Industrial States
Dimming hopes for a brighter, more prosperous economy in the New York region, unemployment jumped sharply in New Jersey and rose in New York City last month, according to the Federal Government.
Joblessness in New Jersey rose to the worst among the nation's largest industrial states, according to the report, which was released yesterday.
The state's unemployment rate climbed to 9.1 percent in April from 8.3 percent in March.
That deterioration followed two months of mounting unemployment since January, when 7.4 percent of the state's job seekers were out of work, the Government said.


Classical Music in Review
'Otello' Amato Opera Theater 319 Bowery at Second Street East Village


Clinton Unveils Financing Plan For Campaigns
Vowing to "change the way Washington works," President Clinton today proposed a bill that offers public subsidies for television commercials for Congressional candidates who limit their spending and seeks to reduce the influence of lobbyists and political action committees.
Under pressure from Congressional Democrats, who feared a campaign reform bill that would endanger their prospects for re-election, Mr.
Clinton abandoned the pledge made in his Presidential campaign: to reduce to $1,000 from $5,000 the amount a political action committee can give to a candidate.


A Real Arab Revolution
Something wonderful has happened in Yemen, a remote Muslim state on the southern flank of the Arabian Peninsula.
About 80 percent of its 2.7 million registered voters have elected 301 members of Parliament from among 3,545 candidates.
Of 50 women who ran, 2 won.
More than 40 parties took part in the election, on April 27, which was observed by international monitors and freely reported in the press.
This was not only Yemen's first multi-party election but also the first ever held in the Arabian Peninsula -- and the first in which women could fully participate.
Saudi Arabia, under an absolutist royal family, permits no nonsense about elections, women's rights or press freedom; its monarch balks at even a toothless consultative council.
Only men vote in Kuwait, where parties are forbidden and Parliament is kept on a short leash.
Even tentative steps toward unfettered democracy in Jordan, Egypt and Algeria cause panic among ruling elites terrified by fundamentalism.


Teen-Ager With H.I.V. Tells of Anger and Isolation
Flanked by her parents and her lawyer, a slight, blonde Florida teen-ager identified herself today as the sixth patient believed to have been infected with the virus that causes AIDS by Dr.
David Acer, a dentist in Stuart, Fla.
The 18-year-old woman joined a group of patients of Dr.
Acer that includes Kimberly Bergalis, the 23-year-old college student who unsuccessfully campaigned for mandatory H.I.V. testing for health workers before she died from AIDS-related illness in 1991.


METRO DIGEST
UNEMPLOYMENT RISES IN REGION
Dimming hopes for a brighter, more prosperous economy in the New York region, unemployment in New York City rose last month and jumped sharply in New Jersey.
Page 1.
The nation's unemployment rate remained at 7 percent in April. Page 37. NEW YORK CITY
CENTRAL PARK GETS  $17 MILLION GRANT
The Great Lawn in Central Park and softball diamonds that have deteriorated are among the heavily used areas that will be restored with $51 million, including a $17 million donation.
City officials say it is the largest gift ever from an individual for a municipal park.
Page 1.
FIVE ARRESTED IN DRUG RAIDS
Authorities said that they had arrested the head of one of the largest Colombian drug dealing organizations in New York City and four of his confederates.
Page 25.
THE MAYOR'S QUIET COUNSELOR
Few outside the inner sanctum of the city's government know who George B. Daniels is, but the former judge is emerging as one of the most prominent of Mayor Dinkins's behind-the-scenes advisers.
Page 25.
PASTOR SPEAKS OUT AGAINST RAP
The pastor of the Abyssinian Baptist Church in Harlem is planning a campaign against segments of the rap industry that he says glamorize sex and violence.
Page 24.
REGION
ARMAND D'AMATO IS CONVICTED
Armand P. D'Amato, whose Long Island law firm prospered as his older brother, Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato, gained power in Washington, was convicted of mail fraud.
Page 1.
Armand D'Amato's conviction is just one more storm for his brother to weather. Page 27.
AFTER 7 YEARS, 3 CHILDREN ARE FOUND
Three children kidnapped from a schoolyard in Belgium in 1986, apparently by their father in a custody fight, were found unharmed at a Westchester County home.
Page 26.
IRISH FAMILY DESCRIBES ANGER
The late-night christening party in December 1991 was a symbol of collective success for Patrick McNulty and his Irish immigrant friends.
But the festive occasion turned into what the partygoers describe as a nightmare that spawned a Federal investigation into police brutality in Yonkers.
Page 26.
Numbed, Joselin Genao could manage only a half-hearted burst of anger against the man the police say killed her daughter.
Page 26.
A meningitis outbreak at the University of Connecticut has led health officials to offer vaccinations to students and staff members.
Page 26.
Mayor William J. Pascrell of Paterson, N.J., turned over an inventory of the art collection at the city's public library to the Passaic County Prosecutor's Office.
Page 26.
Striking workers formed picket lines at some northern New Jersey supermarkets. Page 27.
About New York by Michael T. Kaufman 25


Accel International Corp.  (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


No One Knows Him, Except Her Majesty
Introverts finally have a boxer to embrace: Lennox Lewis.
His voice is silky and British, he is civil out of the ring, his life is a closed book and he is anti-Don King for the moment.
The 27-year-old Lewis may not be the people's champion, but he is the Queen's.
He spends much of his free time in England and spars in seclusion.
King, the envious promoter who is said to want to lure Lewis into his stable of fighters, said Lewis "could walk through Times Square and remain invisible."


Borg and Nastase Undefeated
Bjorn Borg and Ilie Nastase remained unbeaten last night at the Manhattan Masters, the six-team round-robin doubles tournament being played at the 69th Regiment Armory on Lexington Avenue.
The pair defeated Roy Emerson and Roscoe Tanner, 7-6, 6-4, for their third victory in the $100,000 event that continues today and will conclude tomorrow.
Because Bob Hewitt and Frew McMillan lost for the first time, Borg and Nastase are the only unbeaten team.


Declaring Bankruptcy: Not Easy and Not Cheap
FOR the hundreds of thousands of people who have gone to bankruptcy court recently and the millions who have contemplated it, there is bad news: Popular as they are, bankruptcy proceedings are not easy to navigate, and being declared insolvent is not cheap.
Last year was a record for the United States Bankruptcy Courts.
They recorded more than 900,000 personal filings, almost triple the 1982 figure.
The successful filers forestalled harassment and collection actions by creditors -- but not by the Internal Revenue Service -- and discharged debts or arranged payment plans.


Fresenius USA Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Northgate Computer Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


UNITY WITH EUROPE IS SEEN BY CLINTON ON PLAN FOR BOSNIA
Despite the apparent lack of progress in a week of diplomatic consultations, President Clinton said today that he expected to produce "a common approach" with Europe soon on a strategy to bring the Bosnian Serbs to the peace table.
"There's still some disagreement around the edges about what the overall specific tactical steps should be," Mr.
Clinton told reporters after a meeting at the White House with representatives of the European Community.
"But I think there's a lot more agreement than you think, and I think in the next few days we'll see a common approach emerging."


O'Charley's Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for 16wks to April 18


Dow Ends 4.71 Lower But Is Higher for Week
The stock market, still stymied by a torpid economy, yesterday briefly broke out of the narrow trading range it has hugged for the previous four sessions.
The market fell in the early afternoon before recovering somewhat to close with modest losses.


Gensia Pharmaceuticals Inc.  (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


CMS Enhancements Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Authorities Arrest Five In Drug Raids
In five predawn raids yesterday, authorities said they arrested the head of one of the largest Colombian drug dealing organizations in New York City and four of his confederates.
Agents from the Drug Enforcement Task Force and the New York City Special Narcotics Prosecutor's office called the arrests the high point of a five-month investigation in which they have seized nearly $3 million in cash and 600 pounds of cocaine.


War Powers: An Old Debate Clinton May Resolve
When President Clinton said this week that he would certainly seek some form of Congressional backing for any use of American forces in Bosnia, he may help resolve a debate as old as the Constitution that has grown more agonizing since the Vietnam War -- whether and how the President should consult with Congress over the use of force on foreign soil.
Although the Constitution explicitly grants Congress the power to declare war, recent Presidents have resisted the notion that they are obliged to deal with lawmakers over dispatching troops.


Household International reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Canadian Utilities reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Riser Foods Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to April 3


Donald Kvares, 57, Prolific Playwright For Off Broadway
Donald Kvares, the author of more than 100 plays, many of which were performed Off and Off Off Broadway, died on Tuesday at the Veterans' Administration Hospital in the Bronx.
He was 57.
The cause was complications of diabetes, said Viktor Allen, a friend.


Columbia Hospital Corp.  (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Ramsay Health Care (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Group Rights Advocates Fan Flames of Bias; Marching in Common
To the Editor:
Dennis G. Kuby is not convincing in his attempt to distinguish the 1963 march on Washington for jobs and freedom from the 1993 march for gay and lesbian rights (letter, April 25).
While differences exist, both events share a fundamental objective: to make America's constitutional guarantees work for all citizens.


Tejas Gas Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Another Parade Furor; Salute to Israel Uninvites Gay Group
Like the St.
Patrick's Day parade before it, another of New York City's exercises in ethnic pride that has long attracted politicians, the annual Salute to Israel parade, has been caught up in division rather than unity.
A day before marchers are to step out, a gay congregation finds itself excluded, and now several New York politicians who thought marching was an easy decision are scrambling to find a way to offend the fewest voters.


Omega Health Systems Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


SI Handling Systems Inc.  (NMS) reports earnings for Year to Feb 28


Wynn's International Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Kirschner Medical Corp.  (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


No Need for Mets' Bullpen, and No Success for Yanks'
Another wonderful start by Jimmy Key wasted.
Another potential victory erased in the late innings by the failings of relievers.
Another mammoth homer by the opposition in a crucial spot.
Devastating walks in tight situations.
Does this sound like a theme for the Yankee season yet?
In another frustrating display tonight that has to increase concern about the bullpen, the Yankees squandered a 6-0 lead, chiefly because their relievers faltered, and suffered an agonizing 7-6 loss to the Tigers in 12 innings.
It was supposed to be the beginning of a showdown for first place.
Instead it became reason to wonder whether the Yankees, with such a weak bullpen, can seriously contend as the season progresses.


Women See a Future And the Collars Are Blue
WHILE one group of women learned about double-headed nails in carpentry, another group built up upper-body strength on weight machines in a renovated firehouse on West 20th Street, where Nontraditional Employment for Women prepares future plumbers, electricians and construction workers.
It was a week after Take Our Daughters to Work Day and the women, many of them single mothers, talked about the day.
"I wish we had that when I was young," said one participant in the 13-week program.
But it turned out that none had brought daughters to the classes.
"It's good for the girls coming up," said a woman from the Bronx, "but we're more interested in the here and now."


Dynamics Corp. of America reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Lomak Petroleum Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


The Mayor's Quiet Counselor; At Dinkins's Side, George Daniels Has Power, Not Flash
George B. Daniels works in a quiet office in a distant corridor in the basement of City Hall, far from the chaos that often fills the Mayor's complex of offices directly overhead.
Few outside the inner sanctum of the city's government know who Mr.
Daniels is and fewer still have the slightest clue to what he does.
But the 39-year-old former judge, who is now counsel to Mayor David N. Dinkins, nonetheless is emerging as one of the most prominent of the Mayor's behind-the-scenes advisers, having played a central role in crafting most of the major initiatives of the Dinkins administration.


Washington National Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Pioneer-Standard Electronics Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Tidewater Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Profits Flow as Savings Banks Convert
It may not truly be a free lunch, but depositors who exercise their right to buy stock in savings institutions as they convert from mutual to stock ownership may think they have found the next best thing.
Mutual savings banks and savings and loans are owned by their depositors, but there has been little opportunity for the owners to share in the increased value of those banks as low interest rates have raised profits to record levels.
But in the process of converting to stock companies, in which shares are offered at attractive prices to depositors and management, the former "owners" can earn a big profit while the savings institutions benefit by adding to capital.


Schultz's Status? Stay Tuned
The status of National Collegiate Athletic Association executive director Dick Schultz is expected to be announced at a news conference on Tuesday.
A two-year probation imposed upon the University of Virginia, announced Thursday, indirectly implicated Schultz, the university's athletic director until Aug. 31, 1987.
While a statute of limitations, under N.C.A.A. bylaws, eliminated most of Schultz's tenure at the school from the investigation, the report cited a lack of institutional control while he was athletic director.
Schultz has denied any knowledge of the major violations, improper loans made by the Virginia Student Aid Foundation.


U.S.C. Makes Art Buchwald Honorary Doctor of Letters
Art Buchwald, the Pulitzer Prize-winning columnist, delivered the main address yesterday to 7,900 seniors and graduate students at the 110th commencement ceremonies of the University of Southern California, at the university's Alumni Memorial Park.
Mr.
Buchwald, who attended U.S.C. in the 1940's, urged graduates to make the most of their lives.
"I don't know if this is the best of times or the worst of times," he said, "but I can assure you this: It's the only time you've got. So you can either stare at your navel or go out and pick a daisy."


Reno Questions Drug Policy's Stress on Smuggling
Attorney General Janet Reno today questioned the wisdom of spending billions of dollars a year to stop the production and transportation of narcotics from abroad and vowed to take steps that would make treatment for drug abusers more widely available.
In her most extensive comments on national drug policy since she took office nearly two months ago, she said more serious consideration had to be given to alternatives to prison sentences for drug offenders.


Amre Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 28


Review/Pop; A Concert Like a Reunion
Few pop divas have as devout a cult following as Nina Simone, who made a rare New York appearance last Saturday evening at the Beacon Theater.
To the faithful, Ms.
Simone's visits are not just concerts but ceremonial reunions at which "the high priestess of soul" returns from a self-imposed exile to bless her flock and to refresh her own sense of self-worth.
During one especially boisterous round of acclaim at the Beacon, she stoked the applause by gesturing for more and demanding: "Feed me!  Feed me! I need it!"
The ceremony would be ludicrous were Ms.
Simone not an astonishingly dramatic performer.
When she feels comfortable and appreciated, as she did at the Beacon, she can take a familiar song and virtually reinvent it, sometimes by interpolating her own lyrics, to turn it into an intense, often troubling personal journey.
The drama comes from the volatile mix of Ms.
Simone's deep, rumbling voice, her elegant classical pianism and her mercurial temperament.
A brooding ballad can suddenly explode with anger.
An exultant cry of delight can just as suddenly crack with pain.


Gowanus Expressway Should Be Demolished, Not Rebuilt; Riding on the Trashway
To the Editor:
I was shocked on a visit to New York City last week to see the sorry state of the highways.
The bus ride from La Guardia Airport to Manhattan was one long ride along a highway of trash.
At one point along the Brooklyn-Queens Expressway there was an actual dump with mattresses, tires and boxes.


A Festival Of Theater Reaches 30 In Berlin
Imagine a theater festival in New York in which an impartial jury picks the best productions of the last year in the English-speaking world and brings them together over a three-week period.
Along with them come all manner of readings of new plays and public discussions, and every other theater in the city -- assuming that New York boasted several major repertory companies -- stages special performances just to remain competitive.
The Germans have no need to imagine such a thing, because they already have it.
The Theatertreffen, or Theater Meeting, which is celebrating its 30th anniversary, brings 12 productions to Berlin in the month of May from Germany, Austria and Switzerland.
Spilling into several Berlin theaters, the event attracts eager audiences, roughly half of them theater professionals of one sort or another and a third from outside Berlin.


Baldwin Technology Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Electronic Filings to S.E.C. Go Forward
To the Editor:
"Electronic S.E.C. Filings Mandatory for 500 Companies" (Business Day, April 26) caused a wave of unnecessary anxiety among corporate officers gearing up for the transition.
The article suggests erroneously that the new electronic data gathering, analysis and retrieval (Edgar) system's computers "crashed four times . . . once for an entire day" in the two-week shakedown period leading to the program's start.


Consolidated Natural Gas Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Ranger Oil Ltd.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Resource Recycling Technologies Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


ICO Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Race Fight at Boston High School Evokes 1974 Uproar Over Busing
The streets of South Boston were calm today, and school officials prepared to reopen classes next week in phases.
But uneasiness lingered in the largely white neighborhood after Thursday's racially motivated fight outside the public high school.
For many people here, Thursday's disturbance recalled the disturbances over busing 19 years ago.
But unlike 1974, when whites vented their fury at black students being bused in, today there were more shades of opinion.


Sports of The Times; Thompson's Keepers Of the Flame
DURING a conversation from his office in Washington, John Thompson said one of the joys of being an educator, becoming involved with young people, is meeting up with former students 15 and 20 years after the fact and seeing that their lives turned out well.
Thompson talked about a call he received on Thursday from an instructor he had not spoken with in years.
Her name was Carolyn Welch and she had been Thompson's science teacher at Brown Junior High School in Washington.
"She said she just wanted to tell me how pleased and proud she was of me," Thompson said.
"That moved me."


Buffets Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to April 21


Grey Advertising Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Columbia Gas System Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Children Kidnapped in Belgium Found Unharmed in Westchester
Three children kidnapped from a schoolyard in Belgium in 1986, apparently by their father in a custody fight, were found unharmed at a Westchester County home early yesterday by Federal agents who told of a trail that spanned seven years and led from Antwerp to Amsterdam to London and New York.
The children had apparently been living happily with an American Hasidic couple who were unaware of the kidnapping and who, told that they were Hasidic children, had agreed to take them in for a few days that became more than four years.


Double the Fun, Double the Challenge


New Electric Electric Sys.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


And the Meek Inherit A Trip Back to Ohio
In the wake of what may yet prove to be a devastating defeat, the Cleveland Cavaliers were as meek in the post-game locker room as they had been moments before, during the game.
There were no angry outbursts, no team captain angrily denouncing the lackluster performance that has pushed Cleveland to the possibility of elimination.
Mark Price, Cleveland's shooting star who has largely been absent during the series as a scoring threat, was absent from the locker room.
Waves of notebook-wielding reporters and microphone-carrying sportscasters surrounded selected players to ask one question: What happened?


NEWS SUMMARY
International 2-6 NO CONSENSUS ON BOSNIA
Little progress has been seen in President Clinton's attempt to build a unified allied policy toward Bosnia, but he remains optimistic that some compromise will be reached on a plan for military action against the Bosnian Serbs to force them to accept a peace plan.  1 BELGRADE DENOUNCES ATTACK
Two historic mosques were bombed in Banja Luka, and Yugoslavia further distanced itself from ethnic Serbs in Bosnia by condemning the act.
Yugoslavia and Serbia already have announced a cutoff of support for their longtime allies in Bosnia, although there is no evidence that it has taken effect.  1 A PIVOT POINT FOR WAR POWERS
The debate on who has the power to declare war is rising again in Congress, where both opponents and supporters of military intervention in Bosnia are demanding a say in whether troops are sent to the country.
And in this case, the President would rather not act alone.  4 A HOMELAND AND ITS HEAD
Transkei was pushed into independence in 1976, and since then this South African homeland has become independent beyond Johannesburg's wildest imaginings.
Its dictator -- popular with everyone but the Government -- might be found reviewing once-secret documents, playing rugby or fielding questions on a local radio talk show.  1 KHMER ROUGE DENY ATTACKS
While the Khmer Rouge denied any connection to a series of attacks against United Nations peacekeepers this week, another member of the force, a Filipino police officer, died of a heart attack during an attack on a United Nations encampment.
The agency suggested the Khmer Rouge were responsible for his death.5 GERMANY SIGNS ASYLUM LIMITS
Germany signed an agreement with Poland that will allow Germany to turn away thousands of immigrants who enter through Poland.
A similar treaty is being worked out with the Czech Republic.  6 ANOTHER KIND OF LAND REFORM
Guanxi, or connections, are what count in China's slightly unusual real estate market.
And in Hainan, which has special economic privileges, business is booming.  3 Italy's prime minister wins confidence vote.  6 Paris Journal: Between the covers, sex, jealousy and disagreement.  2 National 7-10 PLANNING ONE BIG SYSTEM
President Clinton's health-care plan will cover the cost of treating people injured on the job or in auto accidents, merging workers' compensation and the medical portion of auto insurance with standard health insurance in one big system.  1 CLINTON OFFERS CAMPAIGN REFORM
Clinton proposed a bill that offers public subsidies for TV commercials for Congressional candidates who limit their spending and seeks to reduce the influence of lobbyists and political action committees.  1 GUY HUNT ORDERED TO PAY FINE
Former Gov.
Guy Hunt of Alabama was sentenced to pay $210,000 and do 1,000 hours of community service after his conviction for illegal use of inaugural funds.  7 WORK THAT BREEDS ANGER
As postal officials gathered information on the latest shootings, psychologists described postal work as a treadmill of angry monotony, with labor-management hostility making many post offices minefields of carefully nurtured grievances.  7 DENTAL PATIENT WITH H.I.V.
SPEAKS
A teen-ager identified herself as the sixth patient believed to have been infected with the virus that causes AIDS by a Florida dentist.  7 CLINTON ALLY CRITICIZED
Reporter's notebook: A conservative group is fighting the nomination of Webster L. Hubbell to Associate Attorney General, saying his Little Rock country club is all white.  9 STREETS CALM IN SOUTH BOSTON
After Thursday's racially motivated fight, the streets of South Boston were calm yesterday, and school officials prepared to reopen classes next week in phases.  10 Senators loudly debate the ban on homosexuals in the military.  9 Janet Reno questions drug policy's stress on smuggling.  9 Religion Notes: In defense of religious pluralism after Waco.  10 Metro Digest 23 MORE JOBLESS IN REGION
Dimming hopes for a brighter, more prosperous economy in the New York region, unemployment jumped sharply in New Jersey and rose in New York City last month, according to the Federal Government.  1 ARMAND D'AMATO CONVICTED
Armand P. D'Amato, whose Long Island law firm prospered as his older brother, Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato, gained power in Washington, was convicted of mail fraud yesterday in connection with $120,500 he received from a military contractor to lobby the Senator.  1 CENTRAL PARK'S BIG GIFT
Rowland H. George, insurance innovator and financier.
George W. Ahr, bishop who headed the Trenton diocese.
Ann Todd, British actress.
Donald Kvares, Off Broadway playwright.
Dorothy B. Hughes, mystery writer.
Editorials/Op-Ed 20-21 Editorials Hold it while I focus.
A real Arab revolution.
The killer who wants to die.
Our sleeping doctor watchers.
Letters Russell Baker: What's in a naming?
Doug Bandow: Soldiers, not Kiwanians.
John Gagnon: Food, wine and surgery.
Anna Shapiro: Water, water, everywhere.


Dick Metz, 84, Dies; Golfer and Rancher
Dick Metz, a peripatetic cattle rancher who was a leading touring golf pro in the 1930's and 40's, died Wednesday from a self-inflicted gunshot wound in Arkansas City, Kan., according to his wife, Jean.
The police in Arkansas City said yesterday that Mr.
Metz, who was 84 and in ill health, drove his pickup truck to the parking lot of a local funeral home, parked it and climbed into the rear before shooting himself in the head.
Mrs.
Metz said her husband had been despondent after declining health forced him to abandon active ranching and lease out the ranch he had operated near Arkansas City, his boyhood home.


Harlem Pastor to Campaign Against Rap Lyrics
Arguing that some rap-music lyrics contribute to antisocial behavior by young blacks, the Rev.
Calvin O. Butts 3d, the pastor of the Abyssinian Baptist Church in Harlem, is planning a campaign against segments of the rap industry that he says glamorize sex, misogyny and violence.
Mr.
Butts, who has previously campaigned against the way liquor and cigarettes are marketed in black neighborhoods, said yesterday that beginning with his annual Mother's Day sermon on Sunday he would speak out against the negative influences fostered by rap artists like 2 Live Crew, Apache, Scarface and N.W.A.


U.S. Convinced Iraqi Saboteurs Plotted to Kill Bush
Clinton Administration officials said tonight that they now believe that Iraqi saboteurs sought to assassinate George Bush during the former President's visit to Kuwait three weeks ago.
The Administration is trying to determine whether the Iraqi Government was behind the plot, the officials said.
The officials said the Administration had initially been skeptical about whether the saboteurs, who have been arrested by the Kuwaiti Government, intended to kill Mr.
Bush.
But they said they had become convinced that the group had assembled a car bomb designed to be used in an assassination attempt.


Even Friends of Gold Are Muting Their Pitch
THE most trustworthy, forthright, absolutely bankable Wall Street advice comes in those rare cases when that advice runs contrary to the interests of those giving it.
In particular, when someone says not to buy what they are selling.
So it's worth paying attention when the specialists in charge of whipping up excitement for gold tell individual investors to calm down.
"Gold has its wonderful, magical connotations," said Ted Arnold, the metals analyst at Merrill Lynch.
"But in fact it's a commodity like any other. It's yesterday's story. It's a couple-of-decades-ago story. Historically, it's been an incredibly poor investment."


Future Now Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


National Rehabilitation Centers Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


USA Classic Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


The Killer Who Wants to Die
Which state is being tougher on the murderer Thomas Grasso: Oklahoma, which wants to execute him for a murder he committed there?
Or New York, which wants him back to serve a long prison term for another murder before returning him to Oklahoma for execution?
This odd custody battle finds Oklahoma eager to accommodate the murderer's desire to be executed promptly and New York, which does not have the death penalty, frustrating the prisoner's desire for death.
Mr.
Grasso's own lawyer accuses New York of lacking the "common decency" to hasten his client's death.


Khmer Rouge Deny Attacks
The Khmer Rouge denied today that they were responsible for a series of attacks against the United Nations peacekeeping force in Cambodia, even as the United Nations suggested that the rebels were responsible for the death of another peacekeeper, the second this week.
The new victim, a Filipino policeman, died of a heart attack when a United Nations encampment in southwestern Cambodia came under rocket fire today from a group of attackers initially identified as Khmer Rouge.


'Homeland' Is a Base for Needling Pretoria
In the 11th-floor office from which he presides over the black homeland of Transkei, Maj.
Gen.
Bantu Holomisa, arguably Africa's most free-spirited military dictator, was cheerfully biting the hand that feeds him.
Over cups of instant coffee he was guiding a visitor through a packet of once-secret South African military documents that implicated some of President F. W. de Klerk's senior functionaries in a twisted plot to overthrow another homeland leader in 1986.


Classical Music in Review
New York Philharmonic  Young People's Concert Avery Fisher Hall


Schwitzer Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to April 4


Playboy Enterprises Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


China Sells Off Public Land to the Well Connected
Four decades after Communist leaders declared a "land reform" that ultimately left almost all rice paddies and city apartments in the hands of the state, an equally revolutionary "land reform" is under way.
In effect, real estate is being privatized on a huge scale, and it has become one of China's hottest, craziest new businesses.


Hornets Are Young, Confident, Dangerous
The Knicks spent yesterday recovering from one intense battle and preparing for another.
Having survived a difficult four-game series with the Indiana Pacers, the Knicks will open their four-of-seven-game Eastern Conference semifinal series against the Charlotte Hornets tomorrow at Madison Square Garden.
And while the Knicks won three of four games against Charlotte this season, there are many reasons to expect the Hornets to be a tougher opponent than Indiana.
Among them, are the following:


Cinemark USA reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Ex-Gov. Hunt Is Sentenced To 1,000 Hours of Service
Guy Hunt, the part-time preacher who became Alabama's first Republican Governor since Reconstruction, was ordered to pay $210,000 and serve 1,000 hours of community service today after his conviction and removal from office last month for illegally converting money from his inauguration for his own use.
Mr.
Hunt, a farmer and former Amway salesman whose unlikely rise and catastrophic fall became one of the most unlikely political stories of recent years, avoided going to prison when Judge Randall Thomas of State Circuit Court suspended a five-year prison sentence.
Mr.
Hunt left the courthouse unrepentant, telling supporters at a rally on the Capitol steps that an appeal would put him back in the Governor's office.


Sequa Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Reporter's Notebook; Clinton Pal, Club Member and Target
After some nasty nomination fights in recent years over Republicans who belonged to clubs that excluded blacks, a conservative group is after Webster L. Hubbell, a Democratic nominee at the Justice Department, over his membership at a country club in Little Rock, Ark., that they say is all white.
Mr.
Hubbell, the designee to be Associate Attorney General, has been a chief justice of the Arkansas Supreme Court, a mayor of Little Rock and a law partner of Hillary Rodham Clinton.
Since he started at the Justice Department early this year, working without a title, he has played an important behind-the-scenes role in virtually every big decision, including the tear-gas assault on the Branch Davidian compound near Waco, Tex., last month.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball American League  SEATTLE MARINERS -- Claimed Len Picota, pitcher, off waivers from the Montreal Expos and optioned him to Calgary of the Pacific Coast League.
TEXAS RANGERS -- Activated Nolan Ryan, pitcher, from the 15-day disabled list.
Optioned Jeff Bronkey, pitcher, to Oklahoma City of the American Association.
TORONTO BLUE JAYS -- Recalled Doug Linton, pitcher, from Syracuse of the International League.
Optioned Scott Brown, pitcher, to Syracuse.
Football National Football League  BUFFALO BILLS -- Signed Monty Brown, Jason Carthen, Anthony Fieldings, Kevin O'Brien and David White, linebackers; Kurt Bleodorn and Steve Kratz, placekickers; Malcolm Everette, defensive back; Tom Svobodny, offensive tackle; Dean Jones, defensive end; Yonel Jourdain, running back; and Bob Gordon, wide receiver.
LOS ANGELES RAMS -- Acquired Chris Martin, linebacker, from the Kansas City Chiefs for an undisclosed draft choice.
Signed Jay Barry, running back, and Louis Perez, placekicker.
MINNESOTA VIKINGS -- Agreed to terms with Adam Schreiber, center; Fred Strickland, Dave Garnett and William Sims, linebackers; Ron Carpenter, safety; Matt Eller, offensive lineman; Eric Guliford, wide receiver; Bryan Hooks, defensive end; Robert Staten, running back; and Shawn Jones, quarterback.
NEW ORLEANS SAINTS -- Agreed to terms with James "Tootie" Robbins, tackle, on a three-year contract.
Signed Eric Blount, Tom McManus, Pete Shufelt and Ken Turner, linebackers; Israel Byrd and J.J.
Eldridge, cornerbacks; George Coghill and Shane Pahukoa, safeties; Rick Dolly and Lamar Sally, defensive ends; Fernando Evans, Tre Everett and J.J.
McCleskey, wide receivers; and Royce Nelson, guard.
Hockey National Hockey League  NEW YORK RANGERS -- Traded Robert Burakovski, right wing, to the Ottawa Senators for future considerations.


Chiron Corp. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Postal Officials Examine System After 2 Killings
As shaken Post Office officials gathered information on the latest shootings in Michigan and California, some psychologists described much of postal work today as a treadmill of angry monotony, with labor-management hostility making many post offices mine fields of carefully nurtured grievances.
In California on Thursday a postal worker killed a letter carrier and wounded a clerk, and in Michigan just hours earlier another postal employee shot and killed one person and wounded two others -- bringing to 29 the number of supervisors and colleagues who have been slain by disgruntled employees over the last decade.


Epidemic of Meningitis at U. of Connecticut
An outbreak of meningitis at the sprawling campus of the University of Connecticut was classified an epidemic today and led health officials here to offer vaccinations to 20,000 students and staff members.
The outbreak was labeled an epidemic when the third student in a week was diagnosed today with the same strain of bacterial meningitis, an infectious disease that can rapidly lead to severe brain damage or death if untreated, officials said.


Review/Ballet; Balanchine's Works, Changing With Time But Always Balanchine
When the curtain rose on the New York City Ballet on Thursday night at the New York State Theater, it was 1936.
When it fell on this installment of the Balanchine Celebration, it was 1941.
Yet because George Balanchine kept tinkering with productions, none of the three works presented was precisely what audiences saw back then.
"Slaughter on 10th Avenue" is a snippet from "On Your Toes," the musical hit that Balanchine choreographed in 1936.
Possibly because of the enduring popularity of its score by Richard Rodgers, Balanchine restaged "Slaughter" for the City Ballet in 1968.
Seen apart from its musical-comedy context, this comic melodrama seems an awkwardly constructed fragment from a longer entity.
But it does offer opportunities for effective characterizations.


1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10: Garden KO's Boxing Group
Madison Square Garden, once considered the mecca of boxing, is shutting down its boxing business, but it is not abandoning the sport.
It will close the doors this summer of its long-running boxing department, once renowned for helping make the Garden synonymous with the sport, starting in the Joe Louis era 60 years ago.
The Garden could still stage fights by licensed outside promoters, but these bouts will be booked by the same department that schedules events that range from rock concerts to the Westminster Dog Show.


Passing Storm for Buoyant Politician
When the mail-fraud indictment of Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato's younger brother, Armand, was handed up last year, New York City Comptroller Elizabeth Holtzman, then vying for the Democratic nomination to challenge the Senator, offered a crisply partisan observation:
"The indictment of Armand D'Amato is the indictment of Alfonse D'Amato as well. It's just another sleazy chapter."


Northwestern Public Service Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


FHP International Corp.  (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Jobless Rate Flat For April
The nation's unemployment rate remained stuck at 7 percent in April for the third consecutive month, the Government said yesterday.
The report provided new evidence that the economic expansion is still sluggish and that the job market is recovering at a painfully slow pace.
Indeed, the job market deteriorated in some states.
In New Jersey, the jobless rate jumped from 8.3 percent in March to 9.1 percent -- higher than that of California or any other large state.


Hold It While I Focus
Twice recently Bill Clinton has said that the White House needs more "focus." Focus is today's Beltway buzzword to explain the Administration's shapeless start.
It's not wholly clear what Mr.
Clinton intends to do, but two obvious adjustments are in order.
His first task is to reaffirm the priorities he arrived with.
The man who likened himself to a laser beam has grown diffuse.
Unless he fixes his attention on the key items -- the economy, health care, ethics legislation -- Congress and public will begin to wander.
So far, his vaulting legislative ambitions have produced an agenda so loaded with worthy ideas that it's in danger of stopping dead.


INSIDE
Holtzman's Lender Is Barred
Mayor David N. Dinkins removed a banking company recommended by Comptroller Elizabeth Holtzman's staff as a bond underwriter, and the city began an investigation.
Page 23.
Divisions for Another Parade
A day before marchers are to step out on Fifth Avenue, a gay congregation finds itself excluded from the annual Salute to Israel parade.
Page 23.
Ex-Governor Sentenced
Former Gov.
Guy Hunt of Alabama was ordered to pay $210,000 and serve 1,000 hours of community service after his fraud conviction.
Page 7.


Nova Scotia Power reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


2 MAJOR MOSQUES BLOWN UP BY SERBS
In an assault that seemed a calculated gesture of defiance, Bosnian Serbs blew up two historic mosques in the northern Bosnian town of Banja Luka today.
The ornately decorated Ferhad-Pasha Mosque, one of those blown up, dated from 1583 and was considered one of the most beautiful in the Balkans.
Also destroyed was the town's other principal mosque, Arnaudija, which was built in 1587.


Our Sleeping Doctor Watchers
When the Governor of Alabama was found guilty by a jury last month of ethics law violations, he was removed from office the same day.
When a jury returned a guilty verdict for fraud against the Speaker of the New York State Assembly two years ago, the defendant was instantaneously out of a job.
But when a doctor is found guilty of raping a patient, New York does nothing about his license -- doesn't even suspend it -- for months and sometimes years.
The doctors ply their trade by virtue of a state-conferred license, yet state officials somehow find their hands tied.


Q &amp; A
Naked Went the Option
What is a naked option?
JEREMY MOYLER, Redding, Conn.


Geico Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Gowanus Expressway Should Be Demolished, Not Rebuilt
To the Editor:
I have been following with interest and dismay the public discussion on Brooklyn's Gowanus Expressway reconstruction.
Once again we have negotiations focusing on the terms without first analyzing the premise: that the Gowanus should be rebuilt.
The rationale is that the expressway is deteriorated and is in danger of collapse.
This is cause to demolish it!


Spartan Motors Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Nets Are Both Undermanned and Overwhelming
At the end of the third quarter, with the Nets safely ahead of the Cleveland Cavaliers by a startling 27 points, Derrick Coleman decided to dance.
Chuck Daly was diagramming plays and Coleman didn't care.
Forget the plays, forget the coachspeak.
It was party time.
So when a song by the rap group Naughty by Nature came on, Coleman, near the Nets' bench, turned to the crowd and began to dance, urging them to do the same.


Changes for Consumers in Treasury's Shift
The Government's decision this week to try to save money by borrowing for shorter periods is likely to affect consumers in important, though only slowly unfolding, ways.
The dominant Wall Street view is that by halting sales of new seven-year notes and shrinking sales of 30-year bonds -- replacing this financing with nearer maturities -- the Treasury will inevitably put upward pressure on short-term interest rates.


Mercury Air Group Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Arts Chief Withheld Controversial Grants
To the Editor:
Your April 22 news article about the new book by John E. Frohnmayer, former chairman of the National Endowment for the Arts, is misleading in an important respect.


STV Group Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Dixie Yarns (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Material Sciences Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28


American Biltrite reports earnings for Qtr to April 3


HEALTH-CARE PLAN MAY COVER INJURIES ON JOB AND ROADS
President Clinton's health-care plan will cover the cost of treating people injured on the job or in automobile accidents, merging workers' compensation and the medical portion of auto insurance with standard health insurance in one big system, Hillary Rodham Clinton said today.
The plan would move toward eliminating the sprawling workers' compensation system, which has become a particular headache for employers.
Medical costs paid by workers' compensation and auto insurance have risen faster than health-care expenses in general, as have the mandatory workers' compensation premiums paid by employers.


A Death and a Suicide Threat Tie Up Brooklyn Bridge Traffic
A naked man who was running across the Brooklyn Bridge and shouting that it was a beautiful day was struck and killed by a car minutes before dawn yesterday, the authorities said.
Ninety minutes later, they said, a woman climbed the cables to the top of the bridge, threatening to jump.
The two incidents backed up traffic into Queens for much of the morning rush, said Joseph DePlasco, a spokesman for the city's Transportation Department.


Dorothy B. Hughes, A Mystery Writer And Historian, 88
Dorothy B. Hughes, a mystery writer as well as a critic and historian of mystery fiction, died on Thursday at her home in Ashland, Ore.
She was 88.
She died of complications from a stroke, said her daughter Suzy Sarna.


Barrasso's Best Save Was on His Attitude
Tom Barrasso is convinced that nothing can hurt him while he's tending the playoff goal for the two-time defending Stanley Cup champion Pittsburgh Penguins.
Not the onslaught of desperately hurled pucks from the Islanders, who have watched him smother or deflect 62 of their 63 shots in the last two games and seen his club take a 2-1 lead in games in the Patrick Division finale that resumes Saturday night at Nassau Coliseum.


American Water Works reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Paris Journal; A Best Seller Muses About, of All Things, Love
Weary, it seems, of the Balkans and stirred perhaps by a beautiful spring, the French have turned in droves to an old subject at which they are old hands: love.
The focus of their attention is a new book about men and women, suitably titled "Les Hommes et les Femmes." Written by a journalist and former Government minister named Francoise Giroud and the philosopher-turned-playwright Bernard Henri-Levy, this meandering discourse on sex, jealousy, feminism, fidelity and marriage has become what the French call a "phenomenon" -- that is, something whose success defies even their unusual powers of Cartesian analysis.


CHRONICLE
SALMAN RUSHDIE won a Swiss literary award but couldn't go to Geneva to receive the $24,500 prize because security would have cost too much, The Associated Press reported.
The Colette Prize jury said it was "rising against intolerance" in honoring Mr.
Rushdie, who has been living in hiding since receiving repeated Iranian death threats for his 1988 book, "The Satanic Verses."


Bridge
Although the Cavendish Club is no more, the Cavendish Invitational Charity Pairs continues.
The 18th annual event begins at noon today at Loew's Hotel, Lexington Avenue and 51st Street, and it concludes tomorrow.
The field includes many world-famous players, but few are playing with their regular partners.
Foreign participation is unusually small, perhaps because of the high costs involved, and some of the usual participants are in Las Vegas, playing in the first cash-prize tournament held under the auspices of the American Contract Bridge League.


Review/Dance; 'Sleeping Beauty' Has Debuts in 2 Shows
American Ballet Theater was remarkably assured in two performances of "The Sleeping Beauty" on Wednesday at the Metropolitan Opera House.
The dancers looked at home in a world of kings and queens and magical struggles between good and evil.
The company's success in this most sumptuous of 19th-century classics suggested that Ballet Theater is gaining vitality and confidence under its new director, Kevin McKenzie.
The matinee and evening casts featured dancers who have already been reviewed and dancers who were performing their roles for the first time this season.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
6.50
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
3.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
2.80
2.88
3.56
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
2.86
2.88
3.62
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
2.95
2.95
3.74
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
5.54
5.51
7.06
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
6.84
6.80
7.89
TELEPHONE BONDS
7.80
7.73
8.85
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
5.85
5.84
6.67
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


ISM Information reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


A Death and a Suicide Threat at the Brooklyn Bridge


Robbins Joins Saints
Offensive tackle JAMES (TOOTIE) ROBBINS, an unrestricted free agent, agreed to a three-year, $4.7 million contract with the New Orleans Saints.
Robbins, played for the Green Bay Packers last year, and before that, played 10 seasons for the Cardinals, in St.
Louis and Phoenix.


CHRONICLE
How does news travel in the age of global communication?
Sometimes circuitously.
Consider the way that SEYMOUR D. REICH, chairman of the American Zionist Movement, learned that the New York City Council had approved a measure he favored: from a passenger on a bus in Israel.
On Tuesday, Mr.
Reich, the former head of a group of Jewish leaders, testified before a council committee and urged adoption of a resolution asking President Clinton to review the sentence of Jonathan Jay Pollard.
Mr.
Pollard, a former civilian intelligence analyst for the Navy who pleaded guilty in 1986 to passing intelligence information to Israel, is serving a life sentence.


Central Park to Receive $17 Million Matching Gift
The Great Lawn in Central Park and softball diamonds there that have deteriorated into dust bowls are among the heavily used areas that will be restored with $51 million, including a $17 million donation announced yesterday.
City officials say it is the largest gift ever from an individual for a municipal park.
The restoration will put the finishing touch on a 12-year program that has revitalized the Sheep Meadow, the Bethesda Terrace, the Mall, the Dairy and Strawberry Fields.
Richard Gilder, a stockbroker who grew up playing in the park and now runs there every day, promised the $17 million on the condition that the city and the Central Park Conservancy match his commitment.


Observer; What's in a Naming?
The latest J. Edgar Hoover news is that Walt Disney too was in the late Director's pocket.
Ronald Reagan we already knew about.
Both were name namers for Hoover.
Name namers were people who named names, and yes, I know it doesn't make any sense, but that's what they did -- named names.


Clipping Coupons for Extra Cash
Eight years ago, Sue Diffily, 54, of Smithtown, L.I., became a champion of the art of coupon clipping.
She joined a coupon club which lets members swap coupons and rebate certificates.
Over three years, she saved $1,700 in rebates alone, which she used to buy a washing machine, dryer and storage freezer.


Review/Music; Kurt Vonnegut's Reinterpretation of 'L'Histoire du Soldat'
The drawing card on the New York Philomusica Chamber Ensemble program on Thursday evening at Alice Tully Hall was Stravinsky's "Histoire du Soldat," with a new text composed for the occasion by Kurt Vonnegut Jr.
Because the text and music in a music-drama work are so closely intertwined, replacing a work's text is no small thing.
In this case the gestures, language and spirit of Stravinsky's music mirror the Soldier's progress and describe the odd, supernatural circumstances in the original text by Charles Ferdinand Ramuz.
For anyone who knows and loves the work, both elements make crucial points.


New Editor Sought For The Daily News
The publishers of The Daily News have told the newspaper's editor that they will bring in another editor above him, the current editor, Lou Colasuonno, said last night.
Mr.
Colasuonno and Sherrie Rollins, a spokeswoman for The News, said the new editor has not been chosen.
Ms.
Rollins said Mortimer B. Zuckerman, The News's owner, has been speaking with several people.


Universal Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Classical Music in Review
'Gianni Schicchi' Sylvia and Danny Kaye Playhouse Hunter College


Child's Death Leaves Mother and a Neighbohood Stunned


RESULTS PLUS
TENNIS Martinez Topples Navratilova in Rome  Playing steady tennis, Conchita Martinez of Spain defeated Martina Navratilova, the No. 2-seeded player, 6-1, 6-4, yesterday in the quarterfinals of the Italian Open in Rome.
The match lasted only about an hour.
The sixth-seeded Martinez kept up the pressure on the 36-year-old Navratilova, playing her first tournament in 10 weeks because of an ankle injury.
Navratilova's usually strong serve let her down, and Martinez broke her six times.
Martinez next will play Mary Joe Fernandez, who defeated Anke Huber, 6-4, 5-7, 7-6 (7-5). (AP) Stich Solves Lendl: For the first time in seven meetings, Michael Stich beat Ivan Lendl, scoring a 6-3, 6-3 victory in 1 hour 7 minutes in the quarterfinals of the German Open in Hamburg.
Stich used a solid serve and a versatile game to keep Lendl off-balance.
Stich was seeded sixth and Lendl third. (AP) GOLF Weiskopf and Gilbert Share Lead  Tom Weiskopf and Gibby Gilbert, taking advantage of Barton Creek's rain-softened greens, shot seven-under 65's yesterday to share the first-round lead in the 54-hole Legends of Golf in Austin, Tex.
Weiskopf, a 50-year-old senior tour rookie, had nines of 33 and 32.
Gilbert, 51, who won last week at Las Vegas, Nev., put together nines of 31 and 34 on a day when the wind didn't seem to bother the players.
Close behind at 66 were George Archer, Al Geiberger and J. C. Snead. (AP)
Andrade Leads at Halfway Mark: Billy Andrade posted a six-under-par 66 and grabbed a one-shot lead halfway through the BellSouth Atlanta Golf Classic in Marietta, Ga.
Andrade, who has four top-10 finishes this season, had a 36-hole total of 11-under-par 133 for two trips around the 7,018-yard Atlanta Country Club course.
He had the halfway lead over Tom Sieckmann, Mark Calcavecchia and Dillard Pruitt. (AP) Eight Birdies for Coe-Jones: Dawn Coe-Jones shot an eight-under-par 64, beating by two strokes the previous low score of her 10 pro seasons, to take a one-shot lead after the opening round of the Sara Lee Classic in Nashville, Tenn.
She had eight birdies during a bogey-free round on 6,311-yard Hermitage Golf Course.
The 64 was a shot off the course record set by Amy Benz in the final round a year ago. (AP) BASKETBALL U.S.
Stars Start Fast Against Finnish Team  The National Basketball Association all-stars really didn't need Magic Johnson in the opener of a two-game exhibition series against the Finnish national team in Turku, Finland.
Moses Malone of the Milwaukee Bucks and a former three-time N.B.A. scoring champion, Bob McAdoo, each scored 29 points as the United States veterans beat Finland, 120-108, last night.
Malone, one of the two active N.B.A. players on the team, also topped the all-stars with 21 rebounds.
Kurt Rambis, who finished his N.B.A. season recently with the Sacramento Kings, had 18 points.
Tomorrow's game will be Johnson's first since retiring from the Lakers for the second time before this season.
The all-stars travel to the Netherlands and Belgium for four more games next week. (AP) ROWING Fordham Men and Women Win Heats  Two Fordham crews advanced yesterday at the annual Dad Vail regatta on the Schuylkill River in Philadelphia.
The men's lightweight eight and the women's lightweight four both placed first in their heats as 400 crews from 83 colleges competed in 20 events.
The Rams men's eight, one of 18 crews in its event, won its heat in 5 minutes 51.4 seconds, as did Georgetown, 5:54.2, and Western Ontario, last year's champion, 5:46 in its heats.
All will row in semifinals and the final today.
The Fordham women's four won easily, by 13 seconds over Tampa, and advanced to its final.


Correction
Because of an editing error, an article on the Real Estate page yesterday about a condominium project in Brewster, N.Y., misstated the origin of its name.
Hunter's Glen was the original name; it was not supplied when a new developer took over.


Suspect in Bombing Is Linked to Kahane Killing
Mahmud Abouhalima told Egyptian interrogators that a fellow suspect in the World Trade Center bombing, Mohammed A. Salameh, was part of a plot to assassinate Rabbi Meir Kahane in 1990, senior investigators said yesterday.
The plan was said to have called for Mr.
Salameh to shoot the militant Jewish leader during a speech in a Manhattan hotel, while another gunman, El Sayyid A. Nosair, was to create diversionary fire.
It was Mr.
Nosair who was later charged and acquitted in the assassination.


Irish Family Describes Anger Over Beating
The late-night christening party on an unseasonably warm December night in 1991 held an air of promise.
It was a symbol of collective success for Patrick McNulty and his Irish immigrant friends who had made their own rite of passage from County Fermanagh, where jobs are few and the outlook is bleak, in Northern Ireland.
Mr.
McNulty had taken a wife, bought a home in Larchmont, and had a stable job as a carpenter.
Now, he had brought more than two dozen people together to celebrate what made him most proud: his first-born child, Fiona.
He had even bought airline tickets so that his mother, his sister and an aunt could come from Ireland for the party.


AFP Imaging Corp. (NSC) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Middleby Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to April 3


Garan Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Selective Insurance Group (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


NEW ITALIAN CHIEF WINS CRUCIAL VOTE
Italy's new Prime Minister, Carlo Azeglio Ciampi, won a first and important parliamentary confidence vote tonight that endorsed his new Government's proposals for political and economic reform.
The vote in the lower house was 309 in favor of Mr.
Ciampi's Government to 60 against, with 185 abstentions.
The result reflected a decision to abstain by leading opposition groups, notably the Democratic Party of the Left, as Italy's former Communist Party is now named, and the Northern League.


Horace Mann Educators Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Chesapeake Utilities Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Home Beneficial Corp. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Cisco Systems (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to April 25


Investigation Of Missing Art Is Narrowed
The mystery of Paterson's missing art got a little less murky today.
Mayor William J. Pascrell turned over an inventory of the art collection at the city's public library to the Passaic County Prosecutor's Office, which is looking into complaints that many objects have been stolen or sold illegally.


Precision Standard Inc.  (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Religion Notes
Theology and Cults
As Federal investigations into the events that led to the Branch Davidians' conflagation continue, a broad alliance of religious and civil liberties groups has urged the Government not to use it as an occasion to try to define what makes a religion proper or valid.


St. Joe Paper Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


CHRONICLE
TONY DANZA has filed a lawsuit over the privacy of his ski house.
And he is being so private about it that he balked at disclosing its address for the suit.
Mr.
Danza, the star of "Taxi" and "Who's the Boss?" who is appearing off-Broadway in "Wrong Turn at Lungfish," seeks damages from the previous owners and two real estate agents who negotiated his purchase of a house two years ago in Deer Valley, Utah.
He accuses them of fraud in neglecting to tell him that the Deer Valley Ski Resort planned to build a ski trail next door.
An avid skier himself, Mr.
Danza says the presence of the trail and the skiers it will bring in threaten his privacy.


Canada Wins Victory on Its Lumber Trade
A binational trade panel has handed Canada a major victory in a long-running dispute with the United States over trade in softwood lumber.
The five-member Free Trade Agreement panel late Thursday essentially found that the Commerce Department had not made its case that Canada subsidized exports.
On the basis of those subsidies, the United States imposes $200 million a year in duties on Canadian softwood, used mainly in home building.


Falcons Offer Sanders A Full-Time Contract
The Atlanta Falcons have approached DEION SANDERS's agent about a new contract that could make Sanders a full-time football player for 1993 and a part-time player the following two seasons.
The agent, EUGENE PARKER, said yesterday that Falcons president TAYLOR SMITH had called him to ask what the team could do to get the two-sport star in uniform as soon as possible.


Atkinson (Guy F.) Co. of Calif.  (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Sid Fernandez Goes on D.L.
Left-handed pitcher Sid Fernandez has been placed on the 15-day disabled list retroactive to May 1 with a small cartilage tear in his right knee, the Mets said yesterday.
Fernandez, who was scheduled to start today against the Florida Marlins, could return to the rotation by next Sunday.
"We're hoping that he recovers quickly," said Manager Jeff Torborg.


Airlines Reluctantly Match Northwest's Fare Cuts
Most major airlines agreed yesterday to match the summer fare cuts announced by Northwest Airlines late Thursday evening, but what started as a routine announcement of matching fares turned into a mini-seminar on such industry problems as competition, accusations of price-fixing, incipient price wars and the financial health of individual carriers.
The day began as routinely as a takeoff or landing, with most airlines saying they would match the Northwest cuts, which on average slice 20 to 30 percent off regular fares but are loaded with restrictions.


Samuel Rabin, Long-Time Judge And Ex-Assemblyman, Dies at 87
Samuel Rabin, a judge who served at all three levels of the New York State court system, died yesterday at his home in Floral Park, L.I.
He was 87.
His family said his death followed a brief illness.
Mr.
Rabin was elected to the State Assembly as a Republican from Queens in 1944 on his second try and was re-elected four times.
He worked on housing issues and rent control, as well as on education and reapportionment.
He was active in the fight against a "black market" in babies for adoption.
Elected to Supreme Court
In 1954 Mr.
Rabin was elected to the first of two 14-year terms on the State Supreme Court in Queens.
In 1962, Gov.
Nelson A. Rockefeller elevated him to the Appellate Division, Second Judicial Department, and advanced him to Presiding Justice in 1971.


COMPANY BRIEFS
KELSEY-HAYES GROUP, Romulus, Mich., will build its European antilock brake systems manufacturing plant in Heerlen, the Netherlands, and expects to start production by May 1994.
NORTECH SYSTEMS INC., Minneapolis, signed a letter of intent to acquire certain assets of Custom Computer Cable Inc.
STANDARD FEDERAL BANK, Troy, Mich., signed a letter of intent to acquire Interfirst Bankcorp Inc. and agreed to pay $13.78 a share in cash for Interfirst's projected worth on Sept. 30, the estimated final valuation date.


The Europe Group Turns Around, Finally
The sorry course of the 28 mutual funds that invest in European issues has reversed this year, rising 8.3 percent through April 22 compared with a gain of only three-quarters of a percent for domestic stock funds.
The Europe funds' stellar performance owes much to the German central bank for easing interest rates.
For Europe fund investors, it's about time.
Except for gold, the Europe group has been the worst performer over the last five years.
In the last three years, Europe produced a negative average annual return.


Speeches and Film At Milstein Service Recall the Violinist
Nathan Milstein, who brought dignity and rectitude to the violin and sly humor and good will to those around him, was remembered with brief speeches and a film at the Walter Reade Theater yesterday morning.
Mr.
Milstein died in December at age 88.
The speakers included Harold Shaw, Mr.
Milstein's longtime manager; the violinist's stepdaughter, Jill Spalding; his daughter, Maria Theodoli Braschi; and Christopher Nupen, producer of the film "Nathan Milstein: Master of Invention," about half of which was shown yesterday.


No Headline
Let's just say thank God that he's dead. -- SHERRY ANNETTE JOHNSON, asked if she thought her dentist intentionally infected her with H.I.V.  [ 7:1. ]


Fairchild Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 28


Review/Dance; Merriment And Pranks By Parsons
It's certainly accurate to say that the Parsons Dance Company opened a week's engagement at the Joyce Theater with a fine performance on Tuesday night.
But those facts in no way convey the spirit of the event.
The members of the company weren't simply dancing; they appeared to be throwing a party on stage.
They were obviously having fun, and they were fun to watch.
David Parsons has often choreographed lighthearted works.
But in the past he has occasionally strained to make his effect.
For the most part, the three New York premieres he presented on Tuesday were free of exaggerated comic touches.


Executive Changes
SKOLNIKS INC., Oklahoma City, named Roy Lemaire vice president of franchise development.
SYMBOL TECHNOLOGIES INC., Bohemia, L.I., a manufacturer of bar code transaction systems, named Tomo Razmilovic senior vice president of worldwide sales and services.


Merchants Group Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Diversicare Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


6 Weeks After Prison, an Arrest
Numbed by grief and tranquilizers, Joselin Genao could manage only a half-hearted burst of anger against the man the police say led her daughter away from home and to her death.
Sitting in the darkened bedroom of her apartment here, ignoring the television cameras that encircled her and cradling a picture of her daughter someone had propped into her hand, Ms.
Genao said she had learned only this morning that the man accused of murdering her daughter Wednesday night was a career criminal who once pressed a knife in the back of a 14-year-old girl and tried to force her to accompany him.


Weston (George) Ltd. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Mercury General (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


VAT's Invisibility Is a Dubious Virtue
To the Editor:
"A Value-Added Tax," your April 26 Business Day news analysis, contains the astounding assertion that economists are attracted to the tax because "it is largely invisible; consumers pay it, but often do not see it, because it is usually incorporated quietly into the final retail price."


Sturm, Ruger &amp; Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Piedmont Management Co.  (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


SSE Telecom Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 27


Dutchman Sprints to Finish
Three years ago, when the Tour de Trump rode through New York, a young man asked his father if he planned to go to Central Park to watch the bicycle race.
"Why should I go to see someone ride a bike?" the father said.
"I can ride a bike, too."


Fearing Suits, Companies Avoid Giving Job References
Add this to the annals of our litigious society: Fearing lawsuits, some companies have stopped giving job references, leaving employers in the dark about their prospective employees.
The downsizing of corporations in the late 1980's, which left many middle managers disgruntled and ready to sue, combined with some big court awards and civil rights laws have led to the tightening of reference policies.


Jewelry: Gold, Yes, but Also Paper or Clay
ALL that glitters is certainly not gold in the world of craft jewelry.
The demand for personal adornment is so strong that metalsmiths who create brooches and earrings of 14-karat gold and sterling silver have to compete with ceramists, fiber artists and even a few painters and sculptors who have entered their field.
"The range of media has expanded enormously," said Vitti Van Cleef.
When she opened her gallery, Vitti, in Upper Montclair nearly two decades ago, she sold one-of-a-kind necklaces, earrings and pins of precious metals and cut stones.
Now the cases are filled with art jewelry made from paper, clay, plastic, leather, bones, imported beads and shells along with more traditional gold and silver.


Q and A
Combining Apartments Question: I have a 15-year mortgage on a studio in a Manhattan high-rise and I want to buy the studio next to mine and make a small access doorway through, living in both apartments.
The extra bathroom will be welcome; the extra kitchen is no problem since I want to use the cabinets for storage.


Reaching for Top Rung From the Seat of a Bike
At one end of professional cycling's earnings spectrum are such kings of the road as Greg LeMond, Miguel Indurain, Pedro Delgado and Gianni Bugno, who make $1 million a year or more in salary apiece and maybe as much for endorsements.
At the other end are the journeymen who struggle through 100 to 150 races a year, 500 to 600 miles of training a week and happily exist on $20,000 a year.
Steve Hegg has the credentials to be among the big earners: Olympic gold and silver medals in 1984, Pan American Games gold medals in 1983 and 1987, nine United States titles, 11 victories last year.
He is a Californian with blond hair and a wonderful nickname, Golden Boy.


Phone Fraud
To the Editor: The Practical Traveler column about thieves who steal credit card numbers (March 28) was a timely one for our family.
Two days earlier our telephone bill had arrived and included $1,100 in international calls not made by us.
In discussing the bill that evening with New York Telephone and A.T.&amp;T., we came up with the following scenario:
A family member about to leave Pennsylvania Station for Washington placed a call to a friend.
Three minutes later, according to the bill, a call was made from another pay phone at Penn Station, by an unknown party, to a number in another borough.
Eight minutes later, the overseas calls began, from five numbers in yet another borough, all at one address, according to the phone company.
The calls continued for 20 hours -- 85 calls to seven countries.


COLONIALISM'S BACK
For once, you have chosen to be correct, instead of "politically correct."
I was born and lived until I was 30 (I am 66 now) in one of those countries "full of sound and fury signifying nothing," so I can only say "amen" to your author's statement that "Some countries are just not fit to govern themselves."


Where El Dorado Has Become a Golden Reality
The dazzling gold objects assembled in the newly designed Jan Mitchell Treasury at the Metropolitan Museum of Art make up what Philippe de Montebello, the museum's director, calls "our little El Dorado."
Dramatically expanded to exhibit 250 funerary masks, beakers, pectorals and ear ornaments, the gallery surveys all the pre-Columbian gold-working areas.
While each of the nations -- Mexico, Panama, Costa Rica, Ecuador, Colombia and Peru -- owns larger and more impressive holdings of its own early metalwork, the Metropolitan's collection of gold of the ancient Americas is the most representative in the world.


IN SHORT: FICTION
VOICES OF SUMMER By Diane Pearson. Crown, $20.


Boomer and Browning Discuss Basics
Boomer Esiason and Browning Nagle have a pact.
"We've played golf together," Esiason, the 32-year-old veteran, said today as the two players attended their first minicamp as competing Jets quarterbacks.
"We talked about realistic things. I said, 'Look, Browning, the reality is they brought me here for whatever reason. Our lockers are going to be right next to each other. I won't back-stab you.' "


E. E. Winters, C. I. White
Ellen Elizabeth Winters, a daughter of Mrs.
John C. Everett of Atlantis, Fla., and the late Dr.
Daniel M. Winters, was married yesterday to Christopher Igoe White, a son of Mrs.
Martin White 3d of Tequesta, Fla., and the late Mr.
White.
The Rev.
Roland Coyne performed the ceremony at the Roman Catholic Church of St.
Catherine of Sienna in Boston.
Mrs.
White, 33, is known as E. E. A graduate of the University of Massachusetts, she is a teacher at the Warren-Prescott elementary school in Boston.
Her father was an orthopedic surgeon in Red Bank, N.J.


Crime in Russia Grows; Some Targets Tourists
Crime is on the rise in Russia, as it is in all of the post-Communist states, and foreign tourists, once cosseted and controlled by the Soviet state tourist agency, Intourist, are on their own now.
Police statistics from 1992 show overall crime up more than 30 percent over 1991.
In the first six months of 1992, the Moscow police reported 492 thefts in which foreigners were victims.
Many Russians, not yet inured to the idea of pickpockets and break-ins, tend to exaggerate the threat, but tourists are advised to take the same kinds of precautions they would take in any large American city, starting from the moment they land at Sheremetyevo, Moscow's international airport.


In the Region: Connecticut; Recent Sales
Hamden, Conn.  $325,000
95 Rogers Road  4-bedroom, 3 1/2-bath, 31-year-old contemporary; oversized windows, family room, dining room, 0.33 acre; taxes $5,735.
Wallingford, Conn.  $138,000
220 Clintonville Road  3-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 29-year-old raised ranch; hardwood floors, oil heat, needs work; taxes $2,038.
Wilton, Conn.  $353,000
22 Powder Horn Hill  3-bedroom, 3-bath, 41-year-old Cape Cod; security system, open floor plan, 2 acres; taxes $3,983.
Greenburgh, N.Y.  $148,000
25 Biltom Road  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 37-year-old ranch; patio, eat-in kitchen, family room, carport, handyman's special; taxes $5,168.
Mount Pleasant, N.Y.  $177,500
97 Locust Street  3-bedroom, 1-bath, 63-year-old ranch; eat-in kitchen, breakfast room, unfinished basement, 1-car garage; taxes $2,980.
Ossining, N.Y.  $183,500
75 Stone Avenue  4-bedroom, 1-bath, 71-year-old colonial; modern kitchen, den, dining room, full unfinished basement, 2-car garage; taxes $5,492.
OTHER AREAS Blue Point, L.I.  $87,500
18 Oakwood Street  2-bedroom, 1-bath, 35-year-old ranch; eat-in kitchen, basement; taxes $1,900.
East Norwich, L.I.  $343,000
114 Split Oak Drive  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 33-year-old contemporary; new eat-in kitchen, fireplace, den, family room, 2-car garage; taxes $5,900.
Clinton, N.J.  $160,000
12 Marudy Drive  3-bedroom, 1-bath, 29-year-old ranch, den, h/w floors, ceiling fans; taxes $2,560.


Three Decades of Dwindling Hope for Prosperity
CONSUMER confidence.
It has such a reassuring, solid sound.
If only it would come back, the economy surely would get better.
It was even up a bit in April, the poll takers reported recently, although not nearly as much as last December when hopes were so high for the newly elected President.
But such avid attention to the monthly fluctuations has concealed a most troubling trend.
Ever since the 1960's, the optimism of Americans about the economy and their own circumstances has gradually deteriorated.
And today millions of people view their future with no sense of certainty that things can get better.


Streetscapes: Williamsburg Houses; A $35 Million Fix For a 1938 Complex
IT was one of the triumphal moments of modernism in New York: 12 city blocks of decrepit slums rebuilt into three superblocks of International Style housing.
But although Brooklyn's 1938 Williamsburg Houses did deliver on its promise of a new order of clean cities and factory-style garden apartments, it skipped established lessons of basic construction, and now the New York City Housing Authority is spending $35 million to repair the damage.


A 'Cast Member' Remembers
To the Editor:
I first saw "Hair" in the winter of 1969 at the Biltmore Theater.
The show opened with the loin-clothed Gerome Ragni swinging via rope from the heights of the opposite box seat.
He bounded onstage, jumped into the audience and perched on the back of the third-row seat in front of me -- his bare feet on the arms of my chair.
Oh, wow!
Too much!
Oh, wow!
He looked down, asked me questions, then asked for a handout.
I dug in my purse and came up with a quarter, which he slung backward over his shoulder deep into the stage.


Betsy A. Pollack, Kenneth Shimberg
Betsy Anne Pollack, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Stanley Pollack of Pepper Pike, Ohio, was married last evening to Kenneth Mark Shimberg, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Stephen Shimberg of Columbus, Ohio.
Rabbi Benjamin Kamin performed the ceremony at the Temple at Silver's Park in Cleveland.
Mrs.
Shimberg, 24, is an account executive at the Wynbrandt Company, an advertising and marketing agency in New York.
She graduated magna cum laude from Wellesley College.
Her father is the chief of obstetrics and gynecology at Hillcrest Hospital in Cleveland.


Fresh Air Fund Offers Respite From Urban Summers
As Diane Traiger drove Marcus Mitchell to the Traigers' summer home in upstate New York last summer, Marcus pointed out the window and asked, "What's that?"
"I thought he meant the power lines," Ms.
Traiger said.
"But he was talking about the trees. He had never seen so many trees together before."


Rationing Is Not a Health-Care Choice
To the Editor:
"Rationing Care? Let the Patient Do It" (Viewpoints, April 25), by Dr.
Robert A. Levine, proposes that we ration health care by offering insurance policies that deny life-saving measures based on the patient's age or statistical odds of long-term survival as a functioning person.
Such proposals are both obscene and unnecessary.


Stephanie Kanter, William Weisberg
Fanchon and Donald Kanter of Candlewood Lake, Conn., have announced the engagement of their daughter Stephanie Gail Kanter to William Martin Weisberg, a son of the late Rhona and Morris Weisberg.
An October wedding is planned.
Ms.
Kanter, 32, is a senior sales associate and broker at the Corcoran Group Inc., a residential real-estate company in New York.
She graduated from the University of Maryland.
Her father, an attending physician at Stamford (Conn.) Hospital, teaches internal medicine and diabetology at New York Medical College.


Jersey City Journal; After Fires, Neighbors Seek to 'Pull Together'
THE effect of the four-alarm blaze that swept through the Bergen Hill historic district here early last month wasn't limited to the damage to eight Victorian row houses.
Residents say the fire left a legacy beyond charred wooden beams, broken windows boarded over with cheap plywood and roofs mangled as if from the bite of a giant predator.
The fierce blaze, they say, also damaged a sense of confidence and security they had gained over the years.
On Astor Place, the brick houses had been a monument to bygone days when drugs were sold only from pharmacies and the sound of sirens accompanied horse-drawn fire wagons, not the police.


Joy C. Phelan, Dennis A. Pinto
Mr. and Mrs.
William J. Phelan Jr. of Wolcott, Conn., have announced July wedding plans for their daughter, Joy Carol Phelan, and Dennis Andrew Pinto, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Felix M. Pinto of Nairobi, Kenya.
Ms.
Phelan owns Joy Phelan Travel Services, which plans shore excursions and tours for the cruise and travel industries, in New York.
She graduated from Brown University.
Her father is the founder and president of Peerless Screw Products, an aeronautics manufacturer in Cheshire, Conn.


Looking for Love (Shh!) in Ads
CONSTANTINE, Algeria -- Samia Mohammed, like many of the high school students she teaches, dreams of someone special.
"He doesn't have to be handsome," she said, "but it would be nice. I do want him to be educated, and to be kind."


NORTHEAST NOTEBOOK: Bristol, R.I.; Reincarnating An Old Plant
GROUND was broken here 10 days ago for the first phase of the renovation of about half of the 800,000-square-foot, 18-acre former Kaiser Aluminum and Chemical Corporation complex, which now houses an industrial park leasing space to 26 companies.
The Bristol Foundation, the nonprofit developer, plans housing for the elderly, an assisted-care facility, a clinic, shops, and possibly a Y.M.C.A. in the one- , two- and three-story buildings, as well as a "Historic Interpretive Center."


Judging the Value of Winning an Award
WINNING isn't everything.
For members of the Advertising Club of Westchester, it's only the beginning.
This year, 225 entries from 48 companies are vying for the gold in the club's annual "Big W Awards" competition for creative excellence (the W stands for Westchester).


IN SHORT: FICTION
THE FOURSOME By John D. Spooner. Houghton Mifflin, $21.


Carol Smallwood, James F. Mullin
Dr. and Mrs.
Richard Smallwood of Palo Alto, Calif., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Carol Martin Smallwood, to James Francis Mullin, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Frank J. Mullin of Freehold, N.J.
A July wedding is planned.


A Nature Center Blooms in Central Park Woodlands
NOW surrounded by the tender green that trees are wearing these days, a picturesque structure is nearing completion at the northeast corner of Central Park at the edge of Harlem.
Scheduled to be opened to the public in September, the new building will be a place where visitors can learn about this most rustic section of the park before exploring its woodlands, bluffs, streams and archeological sites.
It will be the first completely new structure to rise in Central Park since the children's zoo opened in 1960.


British Health Officials Alter AIDS Strategy to Focus on High-Risk Groups
With rates of AIDS and H.I.V. infection in Britain staying well below those in many other Western nations, health officials are rethinking their strategy toward the disease.
The Government is trimming some AIDS programs and focusing resources on the people at highest risk.
Health Secretary Virginia Bottomley said this week that the Government wanted "to bring our thinking about H.I.V. and AIDS more into the mainstream," adding that it was time to regard the disease as a health threat on the same order as cancer and heart disease.


Animals That Ignore the 'Keep Out' Signs
IT was Jim Henson's popular puppet, Kermit the Frog, who sang "It's Not Easy Being Green."
Well, it's not easy being a black squirrel either, especially when the rest of the squirrel family is gray.
The squirrels in the neighborhood are the usual furry gray, except for one.
And for want of a more dynamic name, the neighbors have dubbed him Blackie.


Driver Is Charged in Crash
An emergency medical technician whose driver's license has been suspended seven times was arrested yesterday after he was involved in an accident while he was driving an ambulance on the way to an emergency call in Jamaica, Queens, the police said.
The technician, Ketlair Lefontant, 27, of 475 Rye Street in Elmont, L.I., was charged with driving without a license, said a police spokesman, Officer Scott Bloch.


Adopted Child's Heredity Is Not a Blank Slate; Homes, Not Awards
To the Editor:
As an adoptee, I agree with proposed reforms ("Adoption Is Getting Some Harder Looks") such as requiring a longer waiting period before surrender, balanced counseling for birth parents and prospective adoptive parents, a birth fathers' registry, open records and lifelong visitation opportunities.


SRI LANKANS CALM IN SPITE OF SLAYING
A week after President Ranasinghe Premadasa was assassinated by a suicide bomber, there was little to suggest here that Sri Lanka had suffered a human or political trauma of national dimensions.
Within 24 hours of the President's cremation, at a solemn and elaborate Buddhist ceremony, this city's streets were filled with swarms of bicycle riders, people watching colorful puppet shows, and couples strolling hand in hand along the sea front, in what seemed to be a determined effort to ignore the violence of recent weeks and recapture the lost celebrations of the annual Buddhist holiday, Vesak.


Clinton Reverses Policies at U.N. On Rights Issues
Taking a more aggressive stance on international human rights issues than its Republican predecessors, the Clinton Administration is pressing for appointment of a High Commissioner for Human Rights at the United Nations, as well as a special envoy to investigate abuses against women.
The initiatives were part of a nine-page proposal presented this week to a human rights meeting in Geneva by J. Kenneth Blackwell, the head of the United States delegation.


New &amp; Noteworthy
WAITING TO EXHALE, by Terry McMillan. (Pocket Star, $5.99.) This novel follows the fortunes of four black women in Phoenix as they struggle with careers, motherhood and men.
Reading it is "like being in the company of a great friend," Susan Isaacs said here last year.
"It is thought-provoking, thoroughly entertaining and very, very comforting."
TRUMAN, by David McCullough. (Touchstone/Simon &amp; Schuster, $15.) This biography illuminates the singular character of the small Midwestern man and former haberdasher who became President almost in spite of himself.
What distinguished Truman, David McCullough argues, was his forthrightness and rare obliviousness to concerns about his or his party's image.
Last year our reviewer, Alan Brinkley, found the book "warm, affectionate and thoroughly captivating" as well as "the most thorough account of Truman's life yet to appear." Also out in a new paperback edition is HARRY S. TRUMAN (Avon, $12.50), the biography of the President written by his daughter, Margaret Truman.
"Every anecdote adds human dimension to the Trumans as a family and to Harry as a man," Wilson C. McWilliams said in the Book Review in 1972.


Nicklaus to Play Bell
JACK NICKLAUS, who plays only a handful of non-major tournaments each year, will play the Bell Atlantic Classic seniors tournament May 20-23 at Chester Valley Golf Club in Malvern, Pa.
Nicklaus has played only two seniors events this year, The Tradition and the PGA Seniors Championship.
Organizers said they enlisted the help of former 76ers stars JULIUS ERVING and BILLY CUNNINGHAM to persuade Nicklaus to play the event, which benefits St.
Christopher's Hospital for Children.
Among the others in the field of the $650,000 tournament are the defending champion, LEE TREVINO, ARNOLD PALMER and CHI CHI RODRIGUEZ. (AP)


The New Challenges for the C.I.A. Are Open Secrets
BEHIND closed doors these days, Congress and the Clinton Administration are agonizing over openness.
Their task is to figure what best to do with American spies in a less secret world.
The agony is in some part pleasure: the post-cold war reassessment represents a reward.
But if an open world leaves less reason to worry about the Russians, it appears more prone to unpredictability.
For intelligence agencies, it probably raises more questions than it solves.


Woman Dies and 2 Others Hurt On Brooklyn and Queens Streets
Cars struck three pedestrians crossing streets in Queens and Brooklyn in a two-and-a-half-hour-period Friday evening, the police said yesterday.
One woman died and two other people were listed in critical condition at local hospitals as a result of the accidents.
Earlier in the day, the police and prosecutors said they were considering seeking warrants against 700 drivers whose licenses have been suspended at least 50 times.
The warrants would allow the authorities to arrest the drivers and force them to appear in court.
In the past, motorists driving with suspended licenses were simply given summonses, which were often ignored.


Mets Are Their Own Worst Opponent
The Mets do not lose gracefully, or peacefully, or without incident.
Vince Coleman lost another fly ball in the left-field sun yesterday afternoon at Shea Stadium.
Pete Schourek never got his pitches under control, and the offense managed a pitiful four hits across nine innings.
Bobby Bonilla could not even smack the ball out of the infield.
It wasn't enough, though, that New York lost an embarrassing 4-2 game to the Florida Marlins, an expansion club that has already surpassed them in the National League East standings.
The Mets had to fight among themselves as well.


Many More Miles to Go
To the Editor:
When my family visits the Renwick Gallery of the Smithsonian for the "Just American Wicker" exhibition  [ "American Wicker Puts On a Show of Shapeliness," April 25 ] , we'll be hoping to see examples of "traveling wicker," chairs that rode the rails in many parlor cars during the early part of the century.


Pittenger to Leave Post
BAARON PITTENGER has resigned as executive director of USA Hockey to take a sports management job in New England.
Pittenger will remain with USA Hockey until the organization's annual meeting in June.
USA Hockey, the governing body for amateur hockey in the United States, hopes to name a successor within 30 days.
Pittenger, former executive director of the United States Olympic Committee, has been the head of USA Hockey since June 13, 1990. (AP)


The Executive Life; Kids Are Changing Hollywood's Ways
When Joe Roth left as chairman of Twentieth Century-Fox in November to sign an independent production pact at Disney, he explained: "This was a life-style change. I wanted to coach my son's soccer team without guilt."
Mr.
Roth isn't the first Hollywood executive to jump out of the fast lane in good part for the sake of his family, but he is one of an increasing number for whom having a child has reshaped work habits and even business decisions (like making more family-oriented movies).
The demands of the high-powered Hollywood scene, these executive parents discover, have made the family/career balancing act especially challenging, but the discovery has also prompted some creative workplace arrangements.


A Badge Is Less a Shield When Police Go Too Far
THE image of police forces has been badly tarnished in recent months.
There was, of course, the conviction of two officers for the beating in Los Angeles of Rodney King.
And in other cases around the country, including a flurry in New York State, the fundamental role of police officers as keepers of the peace has been distorted.
Officers have been accused of misconduct ranging from manufacturing evidence to killing civilians carelessly.


Matthew Russman and Julie Strauss
Mr. and Mrs.
David C. Strauss of Englewood Cliffs, N.J., have announced the engagement of their daughter Julie Lynn Strauss to Matthew David Russman, a son of Elaine Tanzman Russman and Paul Russman, both of Southfield, Mich.
An October wedding is planned.
Ms.
Strauss, 24, is a third-year law student at Brooklyn Law School.
She graduated from the University of Michigan at Ann Arbor.
In August she plans to become an assistant district attorney for the County of New York in Manhattan.
Her father is a senior vice president at Oppenheimer &amp; Company in New York.
Her mother, Carol R. Strauss, is an owner of Travel Four Inc., a travel management company in Clifton, N.J.


2d Founder Died in Duel
To the Editor:
In the "Memorial to Alexander Hamilton" (April 24) there is an error.
He was not "the only Founding Father to die in a duel." Button Gwinnett (1735-1777), a signer of the Declaration of Independence from Georgia, died in a pistol duel the year following the signing.
This is the principal contributing factor to the scarcity of his autograph -- rarest of all the signers.
JEFFREY R. TISHMAN Glen Rock, N.J., April 25, 1993


Holocaust Diary:


MAY 2-8: Millions at Risk; Scientists Identify A Gene That Causes Colon Cancer and Others
In a medical double whammy, scientists have identified a gene, carried by 1 in 200 people, that causes colon cancer and other cancers, and they have discovered an astonishing way it leads to tumors.
Millions of Americans are at risk of carrying the gene, and anyone who does runs a 90 to 100 percent chance of developing cancer.
About 65 percent will develop colon cancer.
The rest will contract cancer of the uterus or ovary, if they are women, or cancer of the stomach, small intestine, gall bladder, kidney, urethra or pancreas.


Tutorials On Videotape
THE knowledge of some of the world's best photographers is being offered on videotape -- and at a discount.
Educational tapes that feature, among others, Mary Ellen Mark, Ernst Haas, Brian Lanker, Sam Abell, Rich Clarkson and William Albert Allard, which were previously available only to the educational community, are now being sold to the public.
The 11 tapes, all in the VHS format, have been marked down, from $50 each, to $29.95.
Dr.
R.
Smith Schuneman, who is the chairman of Media Loft, the company that distributes the videos, and who is a former chairman of the photographic communications program at the University of Minnesota, has videotaped more than 350 photographers as part of a project to give budding photographers the benefit of professionals' experiences. (He plans to release more videos in the future.)


Q and A
Kayaking in the Berkshires Q.
Can you give me the names of kayak rental outfitters in the Berkshires area of Massachusetts? -- Iyna Bort, Rockville Centre, L.I.


Armed and Ready


A Rarity Tries to Repeat as Mayor in Jersey City
Something seems amiss in this bastion of Democratic Party politics.
A Republican is sitting in the mayor's office and he does not want to leave.
True, Mayor Bret Schundler was once a Democrat who worked for Gary Hart's presidential campaign, but for the last few years he has been a registered Republican.


Viewpoints; Brand New! The Glazed Donut Fund
THERE are now 3,578 mutual funds in the United States.
This means that mutual funds outnumber the stocks on the New York Stock Exchange.
These funds come in all shapes and sizes.
There are, or have been, a Hawaiian Fund, an Astrologer's Fund, a Catholic bond fund, assorted socially conscious funds, and hedge funds.
There are insider funds and there are index funds that simply buy all the stocks in a particular market category.
There are single country funds, single state funds, single industry funds.
There are even funds sold by companies that primarily sell light bulbs and airline seats. (General Electric announced in January its plan to market a family of six funds, while American Airlines is already peddling funds to its passengers.)


Old Spymaster Sneers at His Trial by 'Polite Society'
AS the longtime spymaster of Communist East Germany, Markus Wolf for years flouted national laws in the murky pursuit of espionage.
Last week the 70-year-old Mr.
Wolf found himself at the mercy of the rule of law, and assailing the unfairness of its application in his case, as he went on trial in Dusseldorf, Germany, on charges of treason and espionage against the country that absorbed his own in 1990.
Here are excerpts from his statement in court.
I am submitting to this trial because I would like to live in this country, which is my homeland.
I respect the laws of the Federal Republic of Germany, whether I like them or not.
But I became a citizen of the Federal Republic of Germany only on Oct. 3, 1990.
Until that day, I was a citizen of the German Democratic Republic. ...
The G.D.R. was internationally recognized and a member of the United Nations, pledged to respect its charter.
Its intelligence services had the same legitimate right to exist as the corresponding services of the F.R.G.


Battery Packs Solve Electric Car Problem
To the Editor:
Re "Imagining the Electric-Car Future" (Business Day, April 28): The battery recharging problems of length of charging time, magnitude of charging currents and where to recharge overnight could be dealt with by using battery packs that are swapped at a service station.


Aikens Out on Bond
Former Kansas City Royals first-baseman WILLIE AIKENS, one of the players involved in the team's drug scandal of a decade ago, has been charged with possessing a small amount of cocaine.
Aikens was released on bond Friday after turning himself in at the Johnson County courthouse in Olathe, Kan., a Kansas City suburb.
His first court appearance is scheduled for next week.
Aikens's attorney, DENNIS MOORE, said he would contest the charges.


In Pursuit of 800 Readers
DELMORE SCHWARTZ AND JAMES LAUGHLIN
Selected Letters.
Edited by Robert Phillips. 382 pp.
New York: W. W. Norton &amp; Company. $29.95.


No Headline
The idea that these insulated and bubble-headed people should help make policy is ridiculous.
Hollywood actors are even more out of touch than elected politicians.
In Hollywood, politics is another way of dressing and talking.
LEON WIESELTIER, the cultural editor of The New Republic.  [ 1:2. ]


Buenos Aires
It is a typical afternoon in the Recoleta neighborhood of Buenos Aires.
In the plaza facing Pilar Church, a somewhat ragtag, 50-ish couple is dancing a sultry tango, accompanied by a lone accordion player.
Dozens of people look on, some joining in the dance.
A few feet away, groups of portenos, as residents of the capital are called, are sitting around tables, sipping espresso.
Most are dressed in designer jeans and sweatshirts.
Their children play in the shadow of a huge gomero, or rubber tree.


IN THESE GIRLS, HOPE IS A MUSCLE
Toward the end of the article, when Blais bestowed upon the team the well-earned title of "women," I wept with hope and joy.
At a time when Susan Faludi's book "Backlash" has a great deal of resonance, it is heartening to find young women receiving deserved support from parents, schools, coaches and the news media.
BETTINA SLUSAR New York, N.Y.


Asian/Pacific Heritage Celebrated in Manhattan


BEST SELLERS: May 9, 1993
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Fiction
1
1
39
THE BRIDGES OF MADISON COUNTY, by Robert James Waller. (Warner, $14.95.) A photographer and a lonely farmer's wife in Iowa.
2
2
8
THE CLIENT, by John Grisham. (Doubleday, $23.50.) A deadly secret presents serious problems for an 11-year-old boy.
3
3
3
THE LAST COMMAND, by Timothy Zahn. (Spectra/Bantam, $21.95.) The final volume of a "Star Wars" trilogy.
4
4
4
"J" IS FOR JUDGMENT, by Sue Grafton. (Holt, $21.95.) Kinsey Millhone investigates the case of a man who apparently committed suicide -- but may have returned to life to reap benefits.
5
1
I'LL BE SEEING YOU, by Mary Higgins Clark. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $23.) A television news reporter has mystifying experiences when she covers a story in a hospital.
6
1
GAI-JIN, by James Clavell. (Delacorte, $27.50.) Cordial relationships and terrorism between the Japanese and foreigners in Yokohama in 1862, shortly after that city was opened to the West.
7
5
2
A SEASON IN PURGATORY, by Dominick Dunne. (Crown, $22.) The political and social machinations of a wealthy Irish Catholic family.
8
7
4
LIKE WATER FOR CHOCOLATE, by Laura Esquivel. (Doubleday, $17.50.) Frustration, love, hope -- and recipes -- sampled by a woman coming of age on a Mexican ranch.
9
1
ANGEL, by Barbara Taylor Bradford. (Random House, $23.) The reunion of four people, all successful in glamorous jobs, is transformed by the appearance of two celebrated men.
10
6
2
PERFECT, by Judith McNaught. (Pocket, $22.) A model young woman is abducted by a onetime award-winning film maker.
11
8
6
AMERICAN STAR, by Jackie Collins. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $23.) The romance of two teen-agers, one who grows up to be a movie star, the other a model.
12
10
12
EINSTEIN'S DREAMS, by Alan Lightman. (Pantheon, $17.) Fantasies said to be dreamed by Albert Einstein in 1905, when he was a patent clerk.
13
11
2
CHARMS FOR THE EASY LIFE, by Kaye Gibbons. (Putnam, $19.95.) The fortunes of three indomitable North Carolina women.
14
1
WHISPERS, by Belva Plain. (Delacorte, $22.95.) The realities that lie below the surface of an outwardly happy family.
15
9
2
FOR LOVE, by Sue Miller. (HarperCollins, $23.) An affair is renewed and the past reconsidered by people returning to their Massachusetts hometown.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Nonfiction
1
1
39
WOMEN WHO RUN WITH THE WOLVES, by Clarissa Pinkola Estes. (Ballantine, $20.) A Jungian analyst reinterprets myths and folk tales to enable women to understand their psyches.
2
2
12
HEALING AND THE MIND, by Bill Moyers. (Doubleday, $25.) Conversations with physicians, scientists, therapists and patients about the relationship of sickness to thoughts and emotions.
3
3
34
THE WAY THINGS OUGHT TO BE, by Rush H. Limbaugh 3d. (Pocket, $22.) Anecdotes and opinions offered by the talk show host.
4
5
21
CARE OF THE SOUL, by Thomas Moore. (HarperCollins, $22.50.) A psychotherapist's discussion of spirituality and everyday life.
5
4
4
A WORLD WAITING TO BE BORN, by M. Scott Peck. (Bantam, $22.95.) A call for individuals and institutions to make civility part of their lives and functions.
6
10
25
BANKRUPTCY 1995, by Harry E. Figgie Jr. with Gerald J. Swanson. (Little, Brown, $19.95.) The collapse of America under Government debt.
7
6
2
REMEMBERING DENNY, by Calvin Trillin. (Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux, $19.) A memoir of a bright young man of the 1950's who committed suicide two years ago.
8
11
9
ASSEMBLING CALIFORNIA, by John McPhee. (Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux, $21.) Investigations into the geological history of California.
9 *
9
3
AMY FISHER: My Story, by Amy Fisher with Sheila Weller. (Pocket, $22.) The memoirs of the Long Island teen-ager who is now serving time for shooting the wife of a man she says was her lover.
10
8
3
THINKING OUT LOUD, by Anna Quindlen. (Random House, $22.) Essays on current topics by the New York Times columnist.
11 *
1
CONDUCT UNBECOMING, by Randy Shilts. (St. Martin's, $27.95.) The roles that gay men and lesbians have played in the United States armed forces, especially during the past 30 years.
12 *
7
8
PREPARING FOR THE TWENTY-FIRST CENTURY, by Paul Kennedy. (Random House, $25.) A historian assays social and political forces.
13
14
33
THE TE OF PIGLET, by Benjamin Hoff. (Dutton, $16.) Aspects of Taoist philosophy explained through the actions of an A. A. Milne character.
14
13
43
TRUMAN, by David McCullough. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $30.) A biography of the 33d President.
15
15
NOBODY NOWHERE, by Donna Williams. (Times Books/Random House, $21.) The autobiography of an autistic woman.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous
1
1
8
BEATING THE STREET, by Peter Lynch with John Rothchild. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $23.) Advice about investing in stocks and mutual funds.
2
2
43
HARVEY PENICK'S LITTLE RED BOOK, by Harvey Penick with Bud Shrake. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $19.) Anecdotes and tips about playing golf from a legendary teacher.
3
6
2
A WOMAN'S WORTH, by Marianne Williamson. (Random House, $17.) Advice about beauty, age, relationships, sex, children and careers.
4
3
4
MEN ARE FROM MARS, WOMEN ARE FROM VENUS, by John Gray. (HarperCollins, $20.) Ways to improve communication between the sexes.
5
4
60
MORE WEALTH WITHOUT RISK, by Charles J. Givens. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $23.) An updated and expanded volume of financial advice.
These listings are based on computer-processed sales figures from 3,050 bookstores and from representative wholesalers with more than 28,000 other retail outlets, including variety stores and supermarkets.
The figures are statistically adjusted to represent sales in all such outlets across the United States.
Rankings reflect sales for the week ending April 24. *An asterisk before a book's title indicates that its sales, weighted to reflect the book-selling industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
LP indicates that a book is available in large print.
And Bear in Mind
(Editors' choices of other recent books of particular interest)
IL DUCE'S OTHER WOMAN, by Philip V. Cannistraro and Brian R. Sullivan. (Morrow, $25.) Margherita Sarfatti, rich, beautiful, Jewish and a member of many elites, took up with Mussolini for 19 years, even writing books about how wonderful he was.
The authors' research on this self-made victim is deep and original.
TRAGIC MUSE: Rachel of the Comedie-Francaise, by Rachel M. Brownstein. (Knopf, $30.) A discerning, insightful analysis of the life of the Alsatian waif Rachel Felix, who dominated French theater and much of French society in the mid-19th century.
DR.
HAGGARD'S DISEASE, by Patrick McGrath. (Poseidon, $20.) In the (appropriate) guise of a Gothic horror tale, Mr.
McGrath produces a myth of the creator sacrificed to his creation in the person of a surgeon who sees his onetime lover in her son.
ARE YOU MINE? by Abby Frucht. (Grove, $19.95.) Ms.
Frucht's witty and sensual third novel explores sexuality and its consequences, humanizing even a political issue like abortion.
AT THE HAND OF MAN: Peril and Hope for Africa's Wildlife, by Raymond Bonner. (Knopf, $24.) Mr.
Bonner inspects nearly every relevant argument about conservation in Africa and finds that there will be none, without support by intelligent exploitation.
CHAUTAUQUA SUMMER: Adventures of a Late-Twentieth-Century Vaudevillian, by Rebecca Chace. (Harcourt Brace, $21.95.) An amusing, intimate account of a season with the Flying Karamazov Brothers on their annual vaudeville circuit.
SWIMMING IN THE VOLCANO, by Bob Shacochis. (Scribners, $22.) This novel by a short-story veteran, full of huge, informative digressions, is more about the fictional Caribbean island of St.
Catherine than about the plot or characters who happen there.


Susan Gulliver, Peter Carlson Jr.
Susan Gulliver, a daughter of the late Allan D. Gulliver and the late Jeanne Hogan Gulliver was married yesterday to Peter E. Carlson Jr., the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Carlson of Vero Beach, Fla.
The Rev.
Sally Colegrove performed the ceremony at the First Congregational Church in Old Greenwich, Conn.
The bride is also the stepdaughter of Mrs.
Bryce Blynn Jr. of Vero Beach, Fla.
Mrs.
Carlson graduated from Brown University.
She is a management associate at Tiffany &amp; Company in New York.
Her father was a senior partner and an executive vice president of Merrill Lynch in New York.


Ease On Down The Road
For those who can't get enough of Dr.
M.
Scott Peck's insights in book form, Simon &amp; Schuster offers "Further Along the Road Less Traveled," a series of the spiritual psychiatrist's talks recorded before live audiences and not available in print.


Finding Death, Pain And Community Spirit
Delbert, Roscoe and Lyman Ward still live in the ramshackle farmhouse where their brother William was found dead in his bed three years ago next month.
But the world has expanded considerably since then for the surviving brothers, three dairy farmers who had kept to themselves for decades, never socializing or traveling any farther than their tractor could take them.
And while much of what they have lately seen of life has been painful, their loss has also led to a late and unexpected blossoming for "the boys," as they've always been called here though they're now on the cusp of old age.


The Executive Computer; Do Apple's Compromises Make Business Sense?
Apple Computer Inc. has introduced a family of powerful Macs under the name Centris, trying to close the gap between its Macintosh computers and the more popular and cheaper Windows-based personal computers.
Compared with previous Macintoshes, the Centris models 610 and 650 offer impressive power at surprisingly low prices.
But the lower prices were achieved in part by jettisoning features that are important for many business uses, especially in the case of the 610.


Growing Beyond Deft Signature Desserts
LONGTIME restaurantgoers have encountered Diane's desserts at some of the Island's top dining establishments.
Now Diane has opened her own restaurant, next door to her famous bakery in Roslyn.
Diane's restaurant is a simple, sunny, straightforward, two-story beauty of understated elegance.
Masses of pussy willows and wildflowers stand guard in antique tin buckets in the brick-floored entry.
Branches of flowering dogwood bedeck the mirror-backed bar.


Residential Resales
Closings in the week ended April 24  MANHATTAN  East Midtown  $399,000
418 East 59th Street  2-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 1,400-sq.-ft. postwar co-op; 24-hr. doorman, dining area, East River view; maintenance $1,500, 58% tax-deductible (Broker: Corcoran Group)  Flatiron District  $190,000
21 East 22d Street  1-bedroom, 1-bath, 850-sq.-ft. loft co-op; 24-hr. doorman, 12-ft.-ceilings, four 6-ft. windows; maintenance $760, 45% tax-deductible (Broker: FlatIron Real Estate)  Greenwich Village  $1.5 million
40 West 11th Street  5-bedroom, 4 1/2-bath, 4-story one-family 1840 Greek-Revival town house; dining room, eat-in kitchen, family room, 3 fireplaces, study, rear garden, 21.8- by 96.8-ft. lot; taxes $11,689 (Brokers: Ambrose Mar-Elia-Kanelba &amp; Robilotti)  NoHo  $475,000
439 Lafayette Street (Astor Place)  3,000-sq.-ft. open loft co-op; 2 baths, fireplace, exposed-brick walls, 4 exposures; maintenance $1,032, 50% tax-deductible (Brokers: Corcoran Group-Bascom &amp; Sears)  West Village  $349,000
166 Bank Street  2-bedroom, 2-bath, 1,900-sq.-ft. loft co-op; elevator, dining area, fireplace, 10-ft.-ceilings, 3 exposures; maintenance $776, 40% tax-deductible (Broker: Herbert H. Kliegerman Associates)  BRONX  Baychester  $105,000
4223 Boyd Avenue  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, one-family semi-attached brick house; dining room, eat-in kitchen, 1-car garage, 19- by 92-ft. lot; taxes $1,256 (Broker: J.A.V. Realty)  Williamsbridge  $180,000
950 East 216th Street  2-family semi-attached brick house; 1 1/2 baths in primary duplex; 1 bath in simplex; 3 bedrooms, eat-in kitchen in each, 1-car garage, 27- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $1,861 (Broker: ERA/Besmatch Real Estate)  BROOKLYN  Boerum Hill  $250,000
182 Dean Street  2-family attached brick house; 3 bedrooms, double parlor, terrace, 3 decorative fireplaces in owner's duplex; 1 bedroom, decorative fireplace in rental simplex; 1 bath in each; 20- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $1,800 (Broker: Harborview Realty)  Park Slope  $320,000
535 Ninth Street  2-family, 3-story limestone; 3 bedrooms, 1 1/2 baths, maid's room and family room in owner's duplex; 1 bedroom, 1 bath, study in rental simplex; eat-in kitchen in each; 20- by 80-ft. lot; taxes $1,875 (Broker: F.J. Kazeroid Realty Group)  Windsor Terrace  $235,000
610 20th Street  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, one-family attached wood-frame house; dining room, eat-in kitchen, 2-car garage, 18- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $1,500 (Broker: Homes R' Beautiful)  QUEENS  Briarwood  $173,000
81-05 135th Street  2-family semi-attached frame house; 2 bedrooms, eat-in kitchen in primary unit; 1 bedroom in other; 1 bath in each; finished basement, 1-car garage, 30- by 79-ft. lot; taxes $1,200 (Broker: Dix Realty)  Forest Hills  $245,000
68-17 Dartmouth Street  3-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, one-family semi-attached brick house; dining room, eat-in kitchen, 2 fireplaces, 22- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $1,100 (Broker: Terrace Realty)  STATEN ISLAND  Dongan Hills  $240,000
383 Liberty Avenue  2-family detached wood-frame house; 3 bedrooms, 2 baths in primary unit; 2 bedrooms, 1 1/2 baths in other; dining room, eat-in kitchen in each; finished basement, 2-car garage, 75- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $2,200 (Broker: Kingsley Real Estate)  St.
George  $215,000
3 Fort Hill Park  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, one-family detached colonial; dining room, library, fireplace, enclosed porch, 1-car garage, 66- by 97-ft. irregular lot; taxes $1,610 (Broker: Coldwell Banker/DeSimone Realty)


Most Paints Have Latex Bases, but Alkyds Have Improved
CHOOSING outdoor house paint has always been challenging, especially since air-pollution laws have become stricter.
As a result, manufacturers are reformulating products, causing some, specifically oil- or alkyd-based varieties, to have different qualities.
Most paint today is latex based.
The term refers to the chemicals in the binders, which make up the film that forms when the paint dries.
The best latex-based paint contains 100 percent acrylic binders, which adhere more strongly than other types and also bond to a wider range of surfaces.


Love Ballet, Love to Dance
The gala inaugurating an eight-week tribute to Balanchine that will feature 73 of his ballets, at the New York State Theater.


Athletic Center
To the Editor:
Your "Athletic Center for Lehman" on March 28 notes that a new $57 million Physical Education Center is to open this fall at Lehman College in the Bronx.
What is Chancellor W. Ann Reynolds thinking about when she plans to phase out physical education at all the City Univerisity campuses?
Even if this new complex is only for physical education majors, who will they teach if physical education is eliminated from the curriculum as the Chancellor is attempting to do?
DR.
NORMA VAN FELIX  The writer is chairwoman of the Department of Physical Education, Health, Recreation &amp; Dance at Manhattan Coummunity College.


Closing the Album On 'The Wonder Years'
Easy to overlook, amid all the "Cheers" fanfare, is the twilight of another distinctive comedy: ABC's "Wonder Years," which will present its final new episode Wednesday night at 8.
In signing off, the series stays true to its original purpose -- of taking an affectionate, sardonic look at growing up suburban in the late 1960's and early 70's.
The last episode finds the show's protagonist, Kevin Arnold (played by Fred Savage), now 17 years old, angrily quitting a summer job at his father's furniture factory and leaving town on what he imagines will be an odyssey of self-discovery.
What happens is summed up by the show's narrator -- Kevin himself, some years hence -- thusly: "Things never turn out exactly the way you planned."


Private School's Computer Network Is Changing Student Life
THIS week the Peddie School will dedicate an advanced computer network that has already changed academic life at the independent boarding school.
Without leaving their dormitories, students are conducting research in the library, handing in essays and other assignments electronically and getting help from teachers after class.
Nonacademic life is different as well.
Students are using electronic mail to communicate with other students and parents as far away as Hong Kong.
They are also lining up prom dates through the system, finding it not only convenient but also a much less unpleasant proposition than face-to-face rejection.


N.H.L. Violence Obscures Game
To the Sports Editor:
This year, the hockey team at Brown University, where I am a first-year student, had a remarkable season, advancing to the ECAC finals and making the National Collegiate Atheltic Association tournament for the first time in 15 years.
The Bears brought out fans in incredible numbers to witness well-played games full of suspense and excitement.


Good Boy in a Bad Crowd
THE KING OF CARDS
By Robert Ward. 324 pp. New York:  Pocket Books. $20.


Temple Continues Streak At the Dad Vail Regatta
Temple continued its domination of the Dad Vail regatta's marquee event, winning the men's varsity eights championship today for the fifth year in a row and the 10th time in the past 11 here on the Schuylkill River.
The Owls were too far ahead to even worry much about a late surge by the Georgetown boat that finished second, 3.1 seconds back.


Most Paints Have Latex Bases, but Alkyds Have Improved
CHOOSING outdoor house paint has always been challenging, especially since air-pollution laws have become stricter.
As a result, manufacturers are reformulating products, causing some, specifically oil- or alkyd-based varieties, to have different qualities.
Most paint today is latex based.
The term refers to the chemicals in the binders, which make up the film that forms when the paint dries.
The best latex-based paint contains 100 percent acrylic binders, which adhere more strongly than other types and also bond to a wider range of surfaces.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, a review on April 18 about "London in the 1890s: A Cultural History," by Karl Beckson, referred incorrectly to a writer of the succeeding generation.
He was D. H. Lawrence, not T. E. Lawrence.


Corrections
An article on March 14 about the Eexcel Apartments in Los Angeles misidentified the lender who provided a mortgage on the property.
The lender was ITT Federal Bank.
A bank official brought the error to the writer's attention; this correction was delayed through a misunderstanding about who would notify the editors.


Attendance Record In, Yes, Gatlinburg
ATTENDANCE at national championships, measured by the number of tables in play in each session, has roughly quadrupled in the last 30 years.
Records have been set at cities that attract tourists, like Anaheim, Calif., Orlando, Fla., and Las Vegas, Nev.
The Summer Nationals is always the most popular event, because players can conveniently devote their vacations to it, and at Las Vegas in 1991 it generated 24,221 tables, or an average of 1,211 per session of play.


Seeking the Enemy
To the Editor:
Although I appreciate the favorable tone present in Russell F. Weigley's review of my book "Red Thunder, Tropic Lightning" (April 11), he badly distorts my views on two important issues.


Conflict in the Balkans; Truck Traffic Evaporating at Serbian Border
The strategic bridge over the Drina River here, which only last week was a busy supply link between Serbia and Bosnia, was eerily quiet today.
Trucks laden with supplies for Bosnian Serbs and their army used to cross here at the rate of 50 to 100 per day.
Now, Yugoslav customs officers sit for hours without seeing a single one.


Ross McElwee's Long March to the Screen
At least once every decade, the film maker Ross McElwee bares his soul on screen.
The last time he did so, seven years ago in the documentary "Sherman's March," he wove the story of his own hapless search for a girlfriend into that of William T.  Sherman's bitter trail of Civil War victories.
Vincent Canby, writing in The Times, called it "a deadpan, dryly comic movie."
Since then, Mr.
McElwee (pronounced MAC-el-wee) has recovered from fame and overhauled his well-examined life, somewhat.
He's now married to Marilyn Levine, a documentary film maker, and is the father of a 4-year-old son, Adrian.


Indoor Championships To Leave the Garden
USA Track &amp; Field will announce tomorrow that it is moving the USA/ Mobil national indoor track and field championships next March from Madison Square Garden to the Georgia Dome in Atlanta.
Although USA Track &amp; Field has four more years on its contract with the Garden, Paul Munick, vice president of athletics for Madison Square Garden, said an "amicable divorce" had been finalized.
"It is done," he said.
"I don't like to lose any event at Madison Square Garden, but it got to the point where this was the mutually best move. Attendance has been declining."


Low-Tech Medicine
To the Editor:
The article is partly outdated.
In the last five years, the entire Medicare payment system has been restructured to reduce payments to specialists and increase payments to primary care/general internists.
Payments for procedures performed by gastroenterologists, for example, have dropped by an average of 51.3 percent since 1987.
Medical education funding has been modified to increase incentives to encourage more physicians to choose primary care.


U.N. Weighs Plea to North Korea
The Security Council plans to take up a resolution in the coming week urging North Korea to open two suspected nuclear weapons sites to international inspectors.
The resolution was drafted by the United States and is supported by Britain, France and Russia.
China, which has close though not always easy relations with North Korea, is expected to abstain but not to veto the measure.


Other Takes on Recycling
To the Editor:
It is true that "five years after recycling took hold in this country, it has become clear that the market value of the materials left at the curbside is not likely to cover the collection and processing costs for a long time." But it is also irrelevant.
The key question is not whether recycling pays for itself, but whether it is cheaper than traditional collection and disposal.
Recycling is cost-effective.
A city of one million whose landfill costs equal the national average of $26 a ton can save $7 million a year with recycling.


Vanessa Green, Alexander Spiro
Vanessa Daryl Green, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Gary Green of Potomac, Md., was married last evening to Alexander Charles Stiefel Spiro, a son of Herbert J. Spiro of Austin, Tex., and Elizabeth Spiro of Oslo.
Judge Laurence H. Silberman of the United States Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit in Washington, performed the ceremony at the Metropolitan Club of the City of Washington.
Mrs.
Spiro, 28, is an associate with the New York law firm of Shearman &amp; Sterling.
She graduated with honors from Vassar College and received a law degree from Fordham University.
Her father is the director of the legal department of the Air Line Pilots Association in Washington.
Her mother, Shia Green, is a psychotherapist in Gaithersburg, Md.


Corrections
An article in some regional copies of this section last Sunday about Florence Greenberg, founder of a recording company that flourished in the early days of rock-and-roll, referred to the company incorrectly.
It was Scepter Records.


Susan J. Larsen, Roger F. Assad
Susan Jane Larsen and Roger Frederick Assad, associates in the business reorganization department of the New York law firm of Weil, Gotshal &amp; Manges, were married yesterday in Ridgefield, Conn.
The Rev.
Charles Matonti, a Roman Catholic priest and cousin of the bride, performed the ceremony at St.
Mary's Church.
Mrs.
Assad, 28, graduated cum laude from Ithaca College and received a law degree from Boston University.
She is the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
George V. Larsen of Ridgefield.
Her father is the associate general tax counsel at Texaco Inc. in White Plains.


Other Takes on Recycling
To the Editor:
Commingled collection may help to alleviate the costs of mandated recycling goals.
Commingling allows pickup crews to handle all recyclables in one container instead of in two or three.
Material separation takes place at the recycling center, not at the curbside.
PETER OKARASINSKI Linden, N.J., May 3  The author is general manager and recycling coordinator of Advanced Recycling Technology Systems Inc.


Boone Memorial Service
A memorial service for Professor Sylvia A. Boone, a scholar of African and women's art at Yale University who died on April 27, will be held at 10 A.M. on Thursday in the chapel of the Interchurch Center at 475 Riverside Drive at 119th Street in Manhattan.
The service is sponsored by the Roothbert Fund, whose scholarship program for minority and other needy students was headed by Dr.
Boone.


Ronald Chester, Emily C. DiMaggio
Emily Collette DiMaggio, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Dominic P. DiMaggio of Marion, Mass., was married yesterday to Prof.
Charles Ronald Chester, a son of Mary Carroll M. Chester of Jacksonville, Ill., and the late Charles G. Chester.
The Rev.
Nancy Rockwell performed the Unitarian ceremony at the First Parish Church in Lincoln, Mass.
Mrs.
Chester, 39, is a former advertising manager for home furnishings at Gourmet magazine in New York.
She is the manager of membership services for the Center for Quality Management in Cambridge, Mass., which organizes courses in management for companies and universities.


Deborah L. Freedman and Erik P. Belt
Deborah Lynn Freedman, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Eugene M. Freedman of Weston, Mass., was married yesterday in Boston to Erik Paul Belt, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert Belt of West Hyannisport, Mass.
Rabbi Ronald M. Weiss performed the ceremony at the Four Seasons Hotel.
Mrs.
Belt, 29, graduated and received a master's degree in advertising from Northwestern University.
She is the marketing manager for the Boston Popcorn Company in Newton, Mass., which makes and sells prepackaged popcorn to stores and distributors.
Her father is the chairman of Coopers &amp; Lybrand, the accounting firm, in New York.


POSTINGS: 'Get the Lead Out'; How to Cope With the Peril Of Poisoning
When staff members of the New York Public Interest Research Group, a nonprofit civic organization, began looking into the issue of lead poisoning last year, they hoped to find a book that would offer a concise overview of the problem.
They couldn't find such a thing.
So they produced one themselves.
"Get the Lead Out," a 54-page book by Catherine McVay Hughes and Chris Meyer, was published last week.


NEW JERSEY GUIDE
BATTLESHIP TRIBUTE
History-making sea adventures will be recounted by men who served aboard the battleship New Jersey at a celebration of the 50th anniversary of her commissioning.
The tribute to the ship, which earned 16 battle stars serving in World War II, Korea, Vietnam and other actions, will be held on Saturday afternoon at the Monmouth County Library in Manalapan.


Men of Iwo Jima on a New Mission
MOTORISTS on the final section of Connecticut Route 9, from Newington to Farmington, are often surprised by a sign designating it the Iwo Jima Memorial Expressway.
Why Iwo Jima?
And for many, no doubt, what was Iwo Jima?
The battle for Iwo Jima, late in World War II, was a horror story that can still shock with its statistics.


Wall Street; If the Client's a Bummer, She Knows
SECURITIES regulators keep records on the misdeeds of brokers who have ripped off their clients, dispensing the gory details to anyone who bothers to ask.
And when clients rip off their brokers?
There's a clearinghouse of those sordid activities, too, but don't expect to find it among any public records.
Look instead inside the shopworn lower Manhattan offices of Compliance Data Center, a 30-year-old firm that's made a business of compiling the dirt on investors who stiff their brokers.
McKay White, its feisty 62-year-old senior vice president, reigns over the four-person team that operates as a command center for brokerage houses who are sizing up the ethics of prospective clients.


MAY 2-8: Workers Kill Workers; Yet Again, Violence In the Post Office
The coincidence was bizarre, but the events were disturbingly familiar.
On Thursday, in both Michigan and California, disgruntled postal workers brought guns to work and shot their colleagues.
Two of the victims died, one of the gunmen killed himself and the other fled into hiding.
Each case had its own twists.
The gunman in Dearborn, Mich., a postal mechanic who had threatened co-workers in the past, was distraught at being passed over for a promotion.
The man, Larry Jason, 45, opened fire with a handgun and a shotgun, killing one man and wounding two people before taking his own life.


Smoking Ban By Amtrak
Amtrak has banned smoking on all Northeast Corridor and Empire Corridor trains with scheduled running time of less than four and a half hours.
The Northeast Corridor trains affected include the Metroliner between Washington and New York, the New England Express between Boston and New York, and all conventional unreserved short-distance trains.
The Empire Corridor service includes trains between New York and Albany and New York and Schenectady.
Trains like the Washington-Boston service that operates via New York will continue to allow smoking on designated cars.


Reality Dawns
GALLOWS humor is the act of laughing about things that are not funny.
The female condom, which is about to be approved by the Food and Drug Administration for use in America, is bound to produce a veritable glut of gallows humor.
The condom, in development since 1987, is a byproduct of the wages of unprotected sex, which has produced, the World Health Organization notes, a million new cases of H.I.V. worldwide since mid-1992.
A second, if less dire, consequence is that 56 percent of all pregnancies are unintended, and that teen-agers have 66 percent of these unintended pregnancies.
Male condoms offer no guarantee; they can have a failure rate as high as a 15 percent, so you could argue that one useful name for couples who rely on them is parents.


Sex Talk on the Radio With Dr. Judy
NAME: Dr. Judy Kuriansky.
IDENTITY: The next Dr.
Ruth Westheimer; co-host, with Chris Jagger, of Lovephones, a six-month-old call-in show about sex, on WHTZ-FM (a k a Z-100), Monday through Thursday from 10 P.M. to midnight (with guests -- "honorary love doctors" -- like Sandra Bernhard and Arrested Development).
Married to Edward Kuriansky, a New York State Deputy Attorney General.


Sarah Stackpole, Arnold Eggers
Dr.
Sarah Alice Stackpole, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Robert H. Stackpole of Elizabeth, N.J., was married yesterday to Dr.
Arnold Edwin Eggers, a son of Mrs.
Harry Eggers of New York and the late Mr.
Eggers.
The Rev.
Robert F. Capon performed the ceremony at St.
Luke's Episcopal Church in East Hampton, L.I.
Mrs.
Eggers is a research fellow in surgery at the New York Hospital-Cornell Medical Center in New York.
She graduated cum laude from Amherst College and received an M.D. from Cornell University.
Her father is a urologist in Roselle, N.J.
Her mother, Dr.
Henriette Abel, is a dermatologist in Elizabeth and an assistant professor of medicine at the New York Hospital Cornell Medical Center.


Ms. Sidamon-Eristoff, Mr. Lewis
Mr. and Mrs.
Constantine Sidamon-Eristoff of New York have announced the engagement of their daughter, Elizabeth Sidamon-Eristoff, to Hunter Lewis, a son of Emily Spivey Lewis of New York and Welbourne Walker Lewis Jr. of Dayton, Ohio.
A July wedding is planned.
Ms.
Sidamon-Eristoff is a painter in New York City.
She graduated from Yale University.
Her father, until recently administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency's New York region, is of counsel to the New York law firm of Patterson, Belknap, Webb &amp; Tyler.
Her mother, Anne Phipps Sidamon-Eristoff, is a vice chairwoman of the American Museum of Natural History in New York, and the secretary of the World Wildlife Fund.
The propective bridegroom is treasurer of the fund.


U.S. Needs Paris Air Show to Attract Buyers
To the Editor:
I was amazed at your article ("U.S. to Be a No-Show at the Paris Air Show," Business Day, April 29), which says that the Pentagon in a change of policy has decided not to show any United States military aircraft at the Paris Air Show in June.
The reason given is ludicrous: that the aircraft manufacturers could be the object of French industrial espionage.
The Pentagon says, however, its personnel may attend as "observers only."


At Leisure: Americans' Use of Down Time
Thursday is a big day for fishing.
Sunday is water skiing day.
Every day is television day.
Americans were asked to explain what they do with time they consider their own.
Time spent doing things they felt obliged to do - jobs, sleep, commuting, child care, cooking, household chores, etc. - was not included. (However, some said they cooked, shopped or did yard work for fun.)


This Week's Numbers
Last
Consensus
Period
Estimates
(I.D.E.A. Inc.)
Monday
Consumer credit, change, billions of dollars
1.2
0.75
Wednesday
April producer prices, percent change
0.2
0.2
Thursday
April consumer prices, percent change
0.1
0.2
April retail sales, percent change
-1.0
0.8
Early May auto sales, millions, annual rate
6.9
6.5
Weekly jobless claims, thousands
346
343
Friday
April industrial production, percent change
0.0
0.3
Mar. business inventories, percent change
0.4
0.3
Tuesday: Treasury 3-year note auction  Wednesday: Treasury 10-year note auction  Thursday: Treasury 30-year bond auction


Knicks Looking to Walk, Not Run
In some ways they are similar.
In most ways, they are different.
But during the next two weeks, the Knicks and the Charlotte Hornets will be enemies.
And the survivor of their second-round, four-of-seven-game playoff series will be one step closer to a National Basketball Association championship.
"Charlotte has picked its game up to a whole new level," Knicks Coach Pat Riley said yesterday after the Knicks' three-hour practice to prepare for Game 1 of the series, this afternoon at Madison Square Garden (Channel 4, 3 P.M.).
"They're going to come at us with a lot of energy and a lot of enthusiasm. Their style of play can blow you out, but I think their style of play can also let you get back into the game. That's why you can never stop playing against them. You just have to keep working. It's going to take great effort and concentration on our part."


The Freer Makes the Old New Once More
The reopening today of the Freer Gallery of Art, after four and a half years of top-to-bottom renovation, is cause for rejoicing.
Not only is the Freer's great Asian collection back on view (300 of its finest objects) and reinstalled in a warmer, friendlier setting, but so is one of the most extravagant of 19th-century interiors, the Peacock Room designed by James McNeill Whistler -- now cleaned, conserved and utterly dazzling.
Though the Freer stands in the shadows of Washington's other renowned museums and has a reputation for being a somewhat forbidding place, it has always had its ardent fans.
Historically, it has the distinction of being the first American public collection devoted primarily to the art of Asia, though its holdings are what make it unique.
"America Meets Asia," the working title for the reinstallation, says it all.
Charles Lang Freer (1854-1919), the gallery's founder, collected both American and Asian art with equal fervor in the belief that all art springs from the same spiritual roots.


Temporary Berth


Why The Bronx?
To the Editor:
In your Q &amp; A column on April 18 you answer a question by Hymie Kindler of Brooklyn ("Why the Bronx?") by saying that nobody knows why.
You then compound your confession of ignorance by repeating an oft-quoted vaudeville joke about people saying that they were going to visit the Broncks.


'Cosi Fan Tutte' Marks Bronx Opera's 25th Year
OPERA fans will be pleased to note that Mozart's "Cosi Fan Tutte" is on the agenda next Friday and Saturday at 8 P.M. when the Bronx Opera celebrates its 25th anniversary.
The opera, in English with full orchestra, will be performed at the Lehman Center Theater.
The company has long been known for its inventive stagings and impressive casts, mostly drawn from the ranks of young singers.
For ticket or other information, the number to call is (212) 408-1661.
Christopher Beach, director of the Performing Arts Center at the State University of New York at Purchase, has started a 10-year plan to produce Gilbert and Sullivan's comic operas with first-rate soloists, full orchestra, and a professional chorus.
The first production will take place on Friday and Saturday at 8 P.M.
Half of the program will be devoted to a potpourri of songs and choruses and the other half to a complete, staged edition of "Trial by Jury."
The company includes such internationally known artists as Spiro Malas (who starred recently on Broadway in "The Most Happy Fella"), Ann Howard of the English National Opera and Eric Roberts, a member since 1988 of the New D'Oyly Carte Company in London.
For ticket information, the box office phone number is 251-6200.
A variety of other vocal programs are in the offing today and later in the week.
Today at 2:30 P.M., the soprano Deborah Horne sings Purcell, Mozart, Poulenc and more in a free recital at the White Plains Public Library, assisted by the flutist Linda Ganus and the pianist Nadja Rence.
The number to call for more details is 422-1400.
Tonight at 8 o'clock, Bruce McInnes leads the Sarah Lawrence Chorus and Orchestra in a Haydn double-header: the Te Deum and the "Mass in Time of War." This concert, in Reisinger Hall on the college's Yonkers campus, is free.
More information is available by calling 395-2412.
Last winter, the Westchester Chorale sang "Messiah" to mark the 250th anniversary of the oratorio's premiere.
Now the chorale will present Handel's "Samson," first performed in 1743.
The music director, Daniel Paget, is approximating the proportions of the original performance, using about 50 voices and a Baroque-style orchestra, with David Bender, Katherine Johnson, Lisa Monheit, Stephen Bryant and David Shapero as soloists.
The concert is scheduled next Saturday at 8 P.M. in the Sommer Center on the Bronxville campus of Concordia College.
For more details, the numbers to call are 965-1679 or 969-5786.
In a lighter vein, Jena Smith leads the Emelin Theater Chorus in its spring concert in Mamaroneck, offering selections from such favorites as "The Merry Widow," "Carousel," "Sweet Charity" and "West Side Story" along with an excerpt from Ms.
Smith's own operetta-in-progress, "Whatever Happened to Forever After?" For reservations, the number to call is 698-0098.
There is also plenty of instrumental music being offered.
Today at 4 P.M., 17-year old Ariel Kemp plays the Baroque recorder as a guest artist with the Philharmonia Virtuosi under the baton of Richard Knapp in the second program in the series of Concerts in Color at Union Church of Pocantico Hills.
On tap: music of Telemann, Vivaldi, Corelli, Handel and Bach.
The number to call for more information is 631-8200.
The number to call for information is 545-9033.
On Wednesday at 12:15 P.M. at Grace Episcopal Church in White Plains, the attractive combination of flute and harp is sure to give a lift to the Downtown Music at Grace series as Dianne Spitalny and Pattee Cohen join in works by Ibert, Gluck and Persichetti among others.
Further information is available by calling 277- 4419.
The even more exotic ensemble of mandolin, violin and piano will be part of the attraction at the New Rochelle Public Library on Saturday at 3 P.M. when Joyce and Sandor Balint (of Bronxville) and New Rochelle's own Adam Kent perform.
The number to call for more details is 632-7878.
On Saturday at 8 P.M. there will be a flute and piano recital by Michael Parloff, principal flutist of the Metropolitan Opera Orchestra, and Dennis Giauque, playing Bach, Donizetti, Copland, Mozart and Bartok in a benefit program at the Hoff-Barthelson Music School in Scarsdale.
More information can be got by calling 723-1169.
The fusion of clarinet and strings is the promise of the next Performers of Westchester concerts, with the prize-winning virtuoso Todd Palmer joining the recently formed Brentano String Quartet for the Clarinet Quintets of Mozart and Brahms.
A recital Friday at 8:30 P.M. will be repeated next Sunday at 4 P.M.
Both recitals will be at a private home in Larchmont.
For the location and to make reservations, the number to call is 693-1151.
Steve Gillette and Cindy Mangsen will appear in a folk-music program that will also introduce Ed Carey at the Treestar Coffeehouse Saturday at 8 P.M.
Treestar is in the Mount Kisco Presbyterian Church.
More information can be obtained by calling (203) 438-6102.
Next Sunday evening in Piermont, one of the truly great names in traditional music, Odetta -- known as America's folk diva -- appears at 6 and 9 P.M. at the Turning Point.
For driving directions, the number to call is 359-1089.


Why 'Cheers' Proved So Intoxicating
It was just a vague idea.
Two television writers who happened to be brothers had enjoyed success with "Taxi," a sitcom about a bunch of wisecracking cabdrivers in a Manhattan garage.
The writers, Glen and Les Charles, collaborating with their most frequent director, James Burrows, thought they could devise another workplace comedy -- perhaps in a more inviting locale.
That was 1981.
A year later, the invitation was extended to viewers: Come visit a basement bar in Boston and listen to small talk and smart talk among an odd lot group of patrons.
The bar, and the show, would be called "Cheers."


Wobbly Lines in the Sand
TWIN PILLARS TO DESERT STORM
America's Flawed Vision in the Middle East From Nixon to Bush.
By Howard Teicher and Gayle Radley Teicher.
Illustrated. 418 pp.
New York:  William Morrow &amp; Company. $23.


Madison Warwick and Michael Clark
Madison Warwick, an international production manager at Robert Lippman Inc., a sportswear company, was married yesterday to Michael Rickson Clark, a first vice president and divisional sales director at Shearson Lehman Brothers.
Both work in New York.
The Rev.
Denver L. Hart performed the Episcopal ceremony at St.
Bartholomew's Church in New York.
Ms.
Warwick, 31, is keeping her name.
She graduated from the Fashion Institute of Technology.
She is a daughter of James M. and Lois O. Warwick of Whittier, Calif.


Restic Will Retire
JOE RESTIC, Harvard's coach for 22 years, will retire after the 1993 season when his current five-year contract expires, according to The Boston Globe.
The Crimson's overall record under Restic is 114-90-6; it was 3-7 last season.


Mutual Funds; Beating Some Unbeaten Paths
After spending three weeks in Brazil, Argentina and Morocco, J. Mark Mobius, the granddaddy of emerging markets investing, touched down in New York in mid-April to begin a two-week whirlwind city-a-day tour around the United States to visit clients.
Then he left for Sri Lanka, all the while planning his summer trip to Russia, Poland and Czechoslovakia.
The agenda is typical for Mr.
Mobius, who spends so much time in transit, circling the globe thrice a year, that he fills up passports in 12 months and donates all his frequent-flier miles to relatives.


Data Bank/May 9, 1993


Cuban Groups Seek Lifting of U.S. Embargo
With Cuba facing an economic crisis, five of the country's most prominent dissident groups have written to President Clinton pleading for a change in American policies that are deepening the island's political and economic isolation.
In a two-page letter delivered to Administration officials this week, the dissident organizations called Washington's economic embargo against Cuba and its policy of encouraging its allies to also adopt trade restrictions "outdated" and "counterproductive."


Editors' Notes
A sports article last Sunday discussed personal problems that sometimes develop between male coaches and the female athletes they are coaching.
It mentioned examples of inappropriate behavior.
Discussing the case of a Manhattan figure skating coach by name, the article described an anonymous letter-writing campaign in which parents accused him of having abused students.


Kenneth Giddens, a Former Chief Of Voice of America, Dies at 84
Kenneth R. Giddens, who as head of the Voice of America participated in a stormy debate over whether the agency should be a propaganda organ or a broadcaster of unbiased news, died on Friday at a hospital in Mobile, Ala.
He was 84 and lived in Mobile and Washington.
He died of natural causes, his family said.


Animals That Ignore the 'Keep Out' Signs
IT was Jim Henson's popular puppet, Kermit the Frog, who sang "It's Not Easy Being Green."
Well, it's not easy being a black squirrel either, especially when the rest of the squirrel family is gray.
The squirrels in the neighborhood are the usual furry gray, except for one.
And for want of a more dynamic name, the neighbors have dubbed him Blackie.


Jane G. Kolb and Edward S. Quinn
Jane Gamble Kolb, the daughter of Philip and Barbara Kolb of Oceanside, L.I., was married yesterday to Edward Stephen Quinn, the son of Mary Quinn of Baldwin, L.I., and the late Capt.
Edward R. Quinn of the United States Air Force.
Cantor David Benedict officiated at the Cornell Club in New York.
Mr.
Quinn, 29, graduated from the University of Denver and received an M.B.A. from Rosary College.
She manages three Swiss Colony gourmet shops in Chicago.
Mr.
Quinn, 31, is a sales associate at Color Tile Inc., a flooring company in Chicago.


Forget to Miss Open
GUY FORGET, France's top hope, probably will miss the French Open this month because of an injury in his right knee.
"There is very little chance Guy will play," trainer PATRICE HAGELAUER said Friday.
"Wisdom requires that he stop, rest, heal and try to regain an iron health."


CURRENCY
Last
Prior
Year
Week
Week
Ago
Japanese Yen
110.40
110.10
132.53
per Dollar
German Mark
1.5860
1.5850
1.6440
per Dollar
Canadian Dollar
1.2685
1.2735
1.2031
per U.S. Dollar
British Pound
1.5690
1.5735
1.7985
U.S. Dollar
per British Pound
Gold
$356.30
$355.80
$335.40
Republic National Bank
Currency: Friday NY Close


Bobbi Wasserman, Harry Koplin
June wedding plans have been announced for Barbara Wasserman, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Leonard Wasserman of Bala-Cynwyd, Pa., and Harry Bruce Koplin, the son of Mildred S. Koplin of Horsham, Pa., and the late Abraham L. Koplin.
Ms.
Wasserman, who is 42 and is known as Bobbi, is a real-estate agent for Prudential Preferred Properties in Gladwyne, Pa.
Her father, the founder of the Lionel Kiddie City and Lionel Playworld chain of retail toy stores based in Philadelphia, is a president of Today's Man, a chain of men's clothing stores based in Moorestown, N.J.


Editors' Notes
The Times Book Review on April 18 carried a review of "Ladies of the Court," by Michael Mewshaw, an account of a year on the women's professional tennis circuit.
The reviewer was Robin Finn, a sports reporter for The Times.
Mr.
Mewshaw's book criticizes press coverage of the sport, including a news article written by the reviewer.


Queens Woman and 2 Children Slain
A 23-year-old woman and her two children were stabbed to death and another woman was critically injured at a Queens housing project yesterday after a man attacked them with a knife, the police said.
A family member said the man was a former boyfriend who had been recently released from prison.
Stephanie Pagan and her 8-month-old daughter were found dead at 5:45 A.M. in a sixth-floor apartment at the Queensbridge Houses at 41-01 Vernon Boulevard in Long Island City, said Amanita Duga, a spokeswoman for the New York City Housing Authority police.
The third slaying victim, a 7-year-old girl, was pronounced dead on arrival at Elmhurst Hospital Center, Ms.
Duga said.


Animals That Ignore the 'Keep Out' Signs
IT was Jim Henson's popular puppet, Kermit the Frog, who sang "It's Not Easy Being Green."
Well, it's not easy being a black squirrel either, especially when the rest of the squirrel family is gray.
The squirrels in the neighborhood are the usual furry gray, except for one.
And for want of a more dynamic name, the neighbors have dubbed him Blackie.


Janet L. Showers, Day L. Patterson
Dr. and Mrs.
Ralph M. Showers of Havertown, Pa., have announced the engagement of their daughter Janet Lynne Showers to Day Lewis Patterson, a son of the late William D. Patterson and the late Ellen Day Patterson.
A June wedding is planned.
Ms.
Showers is a director in fixed-income research at Salomon Brothers in New York.
A magna cum laude graduate of Brown University, she received a master's degree from Stanford University and a doctorate from Columbia University, both in operations research.
Her father is a professor emeritus of electrical engineering at the University of Pennsylvania.


Holywood Gothic
CHIMNEY ROCK
By Charlie Smith. 388 pp. New York:  Henry Holt &amp; Company. $22.50.


For Ex-Governor Wilson, a Bridge to Immortality
The bill probably will not be a favorite of those high-in-the-sky radio traffic reporters, but there is no reason to think it will not sail through the Legislature.
Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo has proposed lengthening the name of the Tappan Zee Bridge to the Malcolm Wilson Tappan Zee Bridge, in honor of the state's 50th governor.


Confidence in Clinton Is Slipping Among Many Business Leaders
From his economic summit meeting in December to his budget speech to Congress in mid-February, President Clinton wooed, and seemed to have won over, many of America's top executives, most of whom are lifelong Republicans.
The corporate world was charmed by the President's sincerity and intelligence, disarmed by his plans to tackle the deficit and promote economic growth and more than ready to give him a chance.
Three months later, the chorus of executive complaints is growing in volume, as expectations about the economy have deteriorated.
And many business leaders, including some who are Democrats and others who supported Mr.
Clinton during the election campaign, now say bluntly that the President's handling of economic policy has left them disillusioned and uneasy.


Foreign Affairs; Smog of Peace
Generations in world affairs are marked by their greatest challenges.
Castlereagh of Britain and Metternich of the Austro-Hungarian Empire maneuvered to create stability and legitimacy in a Europe reeling from Napoleon's victories and defeat.
Roosevelt, Churchill and de Gaulle rallied their nations to defeat Nazi Germany and Japan.
From Truman to Bush, the task was to contain Soviet Communism and nurture freedom, and it was done.
For the Clinton generation, the challenges are much more diffuse, multiple and uncertain.
Bill Clinton and his partners in world diplomacy are playing on a chessboard where international and domestic transactions form a seamless web, where the number of public and private players are barely countable let alone controllable, where the rules are yet to be defined, where the true nature of threats remains shrouded by their very multiplicity and complexity and where it is hard to judge what constitutes winning and losing.


Taggarty Patrick, Brian T. Horey
Taggarty Marie Patrick, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
H.
J.
Peter Patrick of Ithaca, N.Y., was married there yesterday to Brian Thomas Horey, a son of Ellen M. Horey of Pittsford, N.Y., and the late Thomas A. Horey.
The Rev.
Michael Mahler performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at the Sage Chapel on the campus of Cornell University.
Ms.
Patrick, who is keeping her name, is president of Patrick Inc., a communications consulting firm in New York.
She graduated from St.
Mary's College in Notre Dame, Ind., and received a master's degree in public affairs from Boston University.
Her father is a dentist in Ithaca.


Talk and Dance At Spoleto
Two new events will be included in this year's Spoleto Festival in Charleston, S.C., which opens May 28.
"Conversation With . . . ," a series of informal afternoon interviews at the Dock Street Theater, begins June 1 with Ginger Rogers, followed by dialogues with the choreographer Murray Louis on June 2, the novelist Josephine Humphreys on June 7 and Gian Carlo Menotti, the festival's founder, on June 8.
Tickets: $15.


On Sunday; Pursuing Hope In the Trenches At Head Start
AT 9:30 on weekday mornings, in a classroom full of toys and books at St.
Bernard's Roman Catholic Church here, Dr.
Paul Donahue and his staff of four -- a social worker and three teachers -- welcome 12 preschoolers to what may be the roughest Head Start class in America.
These 3- to 5-year-olds were expelled from other Head Starts.
All are homeless, but too wild for the "regular" Head Start classes for the homeless at St.
Bernard's.
Their mothers are crack addicts, mentally ill or abused, or all those things.
The children suffer and can be insufferable.
"We've made a lot of progress," Dr.
Donahue, a psychologist who started the class two years ago, said as he awaited their arrival.
"Here they are now. Stan! Stan the man. Stan, put down that barrel. Stan! . . .  Didi, good morning. I heard you were hitting on the bus? . . . Stan, let's stop smashing that doll. Stan! We're not going to smash that baby all day, are we?"


Taking Names for Cleaner Politics
Maybe it was the fragrance of the Rose Garden that got President Clinton feeling so hyperbolic.
His new campaign finance legislation "will change the way Washington works," Mr.
Clinton said Friday.
Well, it is a start.
What we have here is an important, if imperfect step toward cleaner politics.
The plan contains breakthrough provisions for public financing of Congressional races and for eliminating soft money in Presidential campaigns.


Maria Grady, Jay Murphy
Mr. and Mrs.
John C. Grady of Greenwich, Conn., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Maria Shanley Grady, to Jay George Murphy, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Raymond J. Murphy of Ballston Spa, N.Y.
A July wedding is planned.
Miss Grady, 28, is the director of meetings for the National Association of Life Underwriters in Washington.
She is a graduate of the University of Richmond.
Her father is a regional sales executive in New York with the John D. Lucas Printing Company.
Her mother, Michelle Grady, is the assistant vice president of public relations for the Greenwich Hospital.


Technology; Wrestling Over the Key to the Codes
In the obscure world of computer cryptography, there may be no more self-consciously ornery group of coders than the Cypherpunks, an alliance of some of Silicon Valley's best programmers and hardware designers, who preach absolute privacy in the information age.
The Cypherpunks, who often communicate among themselves by electronic mail protected with an encryption system popular in the computing underground, feel certain about one thing: The Government should not be creating a national encoding standard, as the Clinton Administration has recently proposed.


The Unwitting Star Of Clashing Values I and II
Kathie Lee Gifford has finally met some publicity she doesn't like.
Two weeks ago, Mrs.
Gifford, the co-host of "Regis and Kathie Lee," tried to disassociate herself from an interview she had given to Maternity Fashion &amp; Beauty magazine, after learning that it is owned by Larry Flynt, the publisher of Hustler.
"It would go against my values," she said, "to associate myself with a publisher who produces magazines that are offensive to me." She also tried but failed to get out of an agreement to appear on the magazine's cover.
How then does Mrs.
Gifford explain her appearance on the cover of the May issue of Longevity, owned by Bob Guccione, publisher of Penthouse?
"Longevity magazine itself," she said by fax, "is an established publication that performs a useful service for men and women, and I initially granted the interview on that basis. By the time I realized who the publisher was, the magazine had passed its deadline."


Putting A Crimp Therein
To the Editor:
David Richards's article on the 25th anniversary of "Hair"  [ "Lighting a Candle for 'Hair' at 25," April 25 ]  omitted one important aspect of the musical's history: the censorship struggles that plagued "Hair" despite its popularity.
In Boston, Atlanta, Chattanooga, Tenn., and elsewhere, government officials, relying on obscenity or "public nudity" laws, banned the musical from local stages.
The Chattanooga ban led to a major Supreme Court decision, Southeastern Promotions Ltd. v.
Conrad, in which the court recognized the First Amendment value of live theater and set strict limits on the power of local governments to prevent theatrical performances.


Sports of The Times; Golf Balls, Batteries And Bitter Insults
IT will be like this at the Garden again today -- hot and bright and noisy and emotional.
The Knicks are going to run into young legs, and there will also be an element of meanness loose in the Garden, and I am not referring to Patrick and Alonzo.
They are paid to be mean.
I am talking about the rest of us.
Last Sunday in the Garden, a fan in the very expensive seats was screaming at the refs on every play.
"Hey, give us a break! Hey, you're killing us! Hey, that wasn't your call!" He was impassioned.
He was loud.
And he had a child on his lap.


What's Hot In Summer Movies?
The busiest people in Hollywood right now are probably the shrinks.
Even from a distance, you can feel the industry's mass hysteria rising as the studios gear up for a summer of bruising competition among 60 or so films.
There is such a glut that the traditional opening date for the season's first films, Memorial Day, has been jumped by nearly a month.
Summer started for Hollywood two days ago, with the release of a big comedy, "Dave," a big action film, "Dragon: The Bruce Lee Story," and a piece of upscale counterprogramming, 'Much Ado About Nothing."
While executives are hyperventiliating about whether "Jurassic Park" will give Universal Studios a desperately needed hit, whether "Cliffhanger" can save Sylvester Stallone's career, whether "The Last Action Hero" will be ready for its June 18 release, the rest of us can say, "Relax. It's just a movie."


Manager's Profile; J. Mark Mobius
Fund: Templeton Emerging Markets; $222 million in assets.
Manager since inception in 1987. (Sponsor: Templeton International, Fort Lauderdale, Fla.)
Born: Aug. 17, 1936; New York City.


If You're Thinking of Living in: Plainfield
WITH nine districts on the National Register of Historic Places, this Union County city probably has New Jersey's most diverse housing stock.
Stately turretted Queen Annes stand next to Second Empires with mansard roofs and Italianate houses on broad lawns.
Most of these large homes were built by turn-of the century businessmen who moved their families to the suburbs and commuted by rail to New York City.


Astronomers Rage Against the Light
For the past century astronomers have waged an unequal battle against the mounting glare of electric lighting across night skies -- a smog of light pollution that renders faint galaxies all but invisible.
Two of the latest threats to astronomy stem from America's faltering economy and a widespread fear of crime.


Germanic Fare With a Lighter Touch
FRITZ'S in Woodbury is a rarity in Connecticut, one of a handful of restaurants specializing in German cuisine.
In this cholesterol-conscious era of healthful dining, an interest in German food, with its emphasis on heavy meat-potato-and-dumpling dishes, has undergone a decline all over the United States.
Yet there's more to German cooking than an abundance of red meat.
The Austrian chef and proprietor Gottfried Fritz Halbedl proves this, as the dishes on his German-Continental menu have a light touch and considerable sophistication.
The restaurant itself, small as it is, has a similar light look and style.
Pale peach walls of slatted wood, brass rails separating a small upper dining area from the lower one, subdued lighting and neatly napped tables with fresh tulips on each, all contribute to the upbeat, handsome decor.


Guillotine Dreams
A PLACE OF GREATER SAFETY
By Hilary Mantel. 749 pp. New York: Atheneum. $25.


South America
To the Editor: As I hastened to leave my room at the Capilla del Mar Hotel in Cartagena, Colombia, to fly to Guayaquil, Ecuador, I left my underarm money pouch containing $3,990, plus tickets from Guayaquil to Lima, Peru; Santo Domingo, Dominican Republic; Kingston, Jamaica, and back to Kennedy in New York.
I realized the error just before landing in Guayaquil.
I called the hotel and found that my pouch, with money and tickets intact, had been turned in by the maid.
Jenny Garcia, the field supervisor, and Cynthia Martinez, the station agent for Continental Airlines in Guayaquil, arranged for the Capilla del Mar to advance me $700 through Continental's agents in Quito, to be carried overnight by messenger to the airline in Guayaquil, so I could fly back to Cartagena to recover my belongings. (Money cannot be forwarded out of Colombia by courier service, and I had only $100 in my pocket.)


SITTING PRETTY
I experienced a number of conflicting emotions while reading Margo Kaufman's Hers column "Sitting Pretty" (April 18).
As a child of the 1960's, I rejected all superficial efforts to make myself attractive according to a male definition of beauty.
However, I have, with age (and the moderation that naturally attends that process), moved back into a mainstream position -- in practice.
In theory, I continue to struggle with it.


Josef Koudelka's Melancholy Visions Of Gypsy Life
It was the music, plaintive and dark, that in 1962 led Josef Koudelka to begin photographing the Gypsies of his native Czechoslovakia.
"I was playing Gypsy music myself," he explained recently.
Then a 24-year-old aeronautical engineer in Prague, Mr.
Koudelka eventually became a photojournalist in exile, famous for enigmatic and evocative images of cultures on the margins of industrial society.
"I just began to photograph them. And once I started I couldn't stop."
Mr.
Koudelka's pictures of Gypsies, most of them made during the 60's, brought him worldwide attention.
They are at the heart of a 42-print retrospective at the Pace-MacGill Gallery on East 57th Street through June 12, along with examples of his work as a theater photographer in Prague.
Also on view are the riveting photographs he made in 1968 of the invasion of Czechoslovakia by Warsaw Pact troops, two years before he fled to the West, first to London, then to Paris, where he now lives.


New York's Comptroller Denies Ethics Conflict on Underwriter
To the Editor:
On March 17 Fleet Securities was selected by the Mayor's Office and the Office of the Comptroller as one of 23 co-managers on New York City's bond underwriting team.
My Deputy Comptroller for Finance recommended Fleet and four other firms be promoted to this position based on evaluations by her professional staff, Fleet's No. 1 ranking as a seller of city bonds, and other indicia of Fleet's strong past performance.
Before making her recommendation, my deputy consulted with the city's financial adviser; her recommendation was concurred in by representatives of the Office of Management and Budget and the Deputy Mayor for Finance.


POSTINGS: Staten Island, Too; 'Landmarks' Reaches Out
Everyone knows that the Landmarks Preservation Commission takes in Manhattan, but a new exhibition opening Tuesday at Federal Hall tries to show that the commission increasingly takes in the Bronx and Staten Island, too -- as well as Brooklyn and Queens.
The exhibition of photographs, text and architectural artifacts, entitled "Reaching Out: The Landmarks Commission 1990-1993," was created to celebrate National Preservation Week.
It features the restoration of the red, blue and yellow Parachute Jump at Coney Island, Astor Row in Harlem, the adaptive reuse of old store and loft buildings in SoHo, and the construction on a vacant lot at 27 Tompkins Place in Brooklyn of a house reminiscent of the mid-19th-century Greek Revival rowhouses that occupy the rest of the block.


Officials Seek to Widen Jury-Duty Lists
A RECENT survey by the Eagleton Institute of Politics shows that 63 percent of those summoned for jury duty in the state never actually serve.
Included in that figure, some legal experts say, are many people who never respond to jury summonses.
What causes such numbers, experts say, are legal exemptions from jury duty, based on occupation, and lists that are inadequate to identify all potential jurors.
In addition, thousands of residents simply disregard the summonses and are never pursued.


Did He Get What He Deserved?
To the Editor:
Louis Simpson's review of John Gross's "Shylock" (April 4) praises Mr.
Gross for restoring "The Merchant of Venice" to a kind of historically accurate meaning based on Shakespeare's true intentions: "Shakespeare was writing about a villainous, usurious Jew." Mr.
Gross answers the post-modernist "sophistry" that has discovered layers of subtle flavoring in what is supposed to be a he-got-what-he-deserved standard comedy.


Tour Marks Rescue of Jews
On Oct. 1, 1943 -- Rosh ha-Shanah, the start of the Jewish New Year -- Nazis raided synagogues and homes in Denmark, intent on rounding up the country's 7,800 Jews and sending them to concentration camps.
But they did not find them.
The Jews had been hidden by Danes in homes, farms and churches, then ferried across the Oresund Strait to safety in neutral Sweden.
For the 50th anniversary of the rescue, Friends of Scandinavia Tours is offering two-week tours this summer retracing the rescue routes and offering participants a chance to meet people who helped hide and transport the Jews, and some of the rescued Jews who now live in Stockholm, Oslo and Helsinki.


Rave at Close of Day? You Betcha
It's 10 P.M. at a Deer Park 7-Eleven, and the rave boys wander in for supplies: five jars of Vicks Vaporub, three asthma inhalers and what seems like the entire contents of the Hostess cupcake stand.
Bundled inside Day-Glo raincoats and dangling sock hats, they might be fast-food bandits on a sugar high, turnpike kids who rented "A Clockwork Orange" and have frightened the neighbors ever since.
What they are is the latest group of Long Island boys to play dress-up.
Back in the 1970's and 80's, many like them -- out of high school, not quite in college -- put on fishnet tights and drove to see "The Rocky Horror Picture Show" in deepest Uniondale.
Now, local boys head for Deer Park, in Suffolk County, and a former gay disco known on Fridays -- rave nights -- as Caffeine.
"It's all natural," explains a fountain-haired cashier as the boys head out toward the parental Buick.
"Caffeine stands for natural highs. Rave is, like, natural speed, just dancing, no gang stuff. It's like" -- and she pauses, watching a hot dog roll over inside a roaster -- "it's like the 60's."


They See America Rolling
ROAD SCHOLAR
Coast to Coast Late in the Century.
By Andrei Codrescu.
Photographs by David Graham. 194 pp.
New York: Hyperion. $19.95.
STORM COUNTRY
A Journey Through the Heart of America.
By Pete Davies. 260 pp.
New York: Random House. $22.
STATES OF MIND
A Personal Journey Through the Mid-Atlantic.
By Jonathan Yardley. 289 pp.
New York: Villard Books. $23.
HIGHWAY 50
Ain't That America.
By Jim Lilliefors.
Illustrated. 219 pp.
Golden, Colo.: Fulcrum Publishing. $19.95.
SOUTH OF HAUNTED DREAMS
A Ride Through Slavery's Old Back Yard.
By Eddy L. Harris. 254 pp.
New York: Simon &amp; Schuster. $19.


Battling the Swirls of the Yellowstone
I BEACHED the kayak and took my lunch at the head of the rapids, which proved to be a mistake.
As the rough current swirled away in front of me, fear had a chance to build in my mind.
At this bend of the Yellowstone River in Montana's Paradise Valley, the water drops two or three feet off a gravel bar, gathers speed, and slams into a wall of granite boulders.
To shoot these rapids in my touring kayak without dumping, I thought at first I would have to keep to the main current where haystacks, or billows of white water, would wash over the boat, and me.
Then I would have to negotiate a very hard and immediate left turn.
If I did not swing left in time, there was a chance I would be turned sideways to the flow, capsize, and be washed upside down under the boulders.


Other Takes on Recycling
To the Editor:
Packaging industries are helping to bear the burden for the cost of recycling.
Our industry, for one, has been instrumental in providing technical and educational support to municipal recycling programs.
In many states, we have subsidized the growth of recyclers.
Most important, we are committed to creating markets for all industrial-grade recycled glass.
We have, in fact, spent tens of millions of dollars to recycle glass in the last decade.
And it's working.
In 1992, one of every three glass containers was recycled.
LEWIS D. ANDREWS Jr.
Washington, April 27  The author is president of the Glass Packaging Institute.


Jazz and Politics Meet Over the Keyboard
Gonzalo Rubalcaba was playing "Green Dolphin Street" on a beat-up electric piano at a Havana jazz festival in 1986 when the American bassist Charlie Haden, who has worked with most of the great jazz pianists of the last 30 years, saw him for the first time.
He was immediately dazzled.
"I fell on the floor and asked, 'Who is that guy,' his solo was so unbelievable," Mr.
Haden recalled recently.
"He was 23 at the time, but it was like hearing a combination of Art Tatum, Herbie Hancock and Bill Evans."
Since that encounter, which led to a recording contract and invitations with Mr.
Haden to perform abroad, musicians and audiences around the world have had much the same response to Mr.
Rubalcaba's music, a heady mixture of Latin and classical influences and jazz.


Science Fiction
There is a grandeur to the career of Isaac Asimov quite aside from his legendary productivity.
Asimov, who died a year ago at the age of 72, published more than 450 books in his lifetime, most of them nonfiction.
He was one of the great explainers of his day.
Like a missionary sworn to spread the gospel of reason to the unenlightened, he helped introduce an entire generation to the insights of modern science, writing lucidly about everything from the mysteries of matter and energy to the mysteries of the human mind.
While he occasionally dabbled in subjects outside his chosen field -- the Bible, say, or the works of William Shakespeare -- he took his self-imposed burden seriously.
No one knew better than Asimov how quickly books about science become obsolete.
Even those written from a historical perspective have a relatively short half-life.
Twice between 1964 and 1982, Asimov updated his comprehensive Biographical Encyclopedia of Science and Technology, revising and adding hundreds of entries; the 1982 edition offered a sampling of "The Lives and Achievements of 1,510 Great Scientists From Ancient Times to the Present Chronologically Arranged."


Alhambra Tickets
To the Editor: I would like to tell about a rule at the Alhambra in Granada, Spain.
When you get your entrance ticket, you have exactly 30 minutes to enter the main Alcazar and Palacio Real building.
My family and I, as well as three or four other groups we met that day, were not informed of this when we purchased our tickets, and instead first visited the older Alcazaba and the Generalife gardens at our leisure.
When we tried to enter the Alcazar 20 minutes after our 30-minute allowance had expired, we were forced to buy new tickets.


POSTINGS: Free Mortgage Insurance; Dime Offers a Special, but Just for May
In this economy, anyone who loses a job has a bucket of things to worry about.
Those who apply for a mortgage at the Dime Savings Bank of New York this month can eliminate one: Meeting their mortgage payments, at least for the short term.
Until June 1, the Dime is covering new mortgagees under an insurance policy that will pick up three months of mortgage payments, up to $3,500 a month, if they lose their job within six months after their loan closes.


The Flora of the Pine Barrens, Blooming in Watercolors
KNIESKERN'S beak-rush, spatterdock, bladderworts naked and horned: these are not coinages by Lewis Carroll but the names of plants growing in the New Jersey Pine Barrens.
Together with the sweet bay (or swamp magnolia) reproduced on this page and three dozen other species, they are the subjects of the botanical illustrations by Robin A. Jess that are now at the Noyes Museum here.
Ms.
Jess, whom the State Council on the Arts pronounced a Distinguished Artist for 1990, brings much experience to bear, having illustrated textbooks for the New York Botanical Garden, in the Bronx, as well as Audubon field guides and similar publications.


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
. . .
THE GRAND PIANO CAME BY CAMEL  Arthur C. Mace, the Neglected Egyptologist.
By Christopher C. Lee.
Mainstream/Trafalgar Square, $34.95.


Florida Trial Odyssey Ends For an Officer in 2 Killings
After being shifted five times from one city to another, the racially charged retrial of a Miami police officer on charges of killing two young black men is scheduled to begin on Monday in Orlando.
The case of William Lozano has preoccupied Florida for more than four years, and Judge W. Thomas Spencer of Dade County Circuit Court has been stymied in his effort to hold the trial in a city where blacks are likely to be on the jury.
Orlando, where the second trial of Mr.
Lozano has settled, is conservative, overwhelmingly white and none too happy to be saddled with what the rest of Florida views as Miami's problem.


Other Takes on Recycling
To the Editor:
Regarding "Who Foots the Bill for Recycling?" (April 25), it is true that we are spending increasing amounts of money to dispose of solid waste and that the financial burden falls largely on local governments' already strained coffers, competing for funding with other needed services.
However, the cost of recycling is not the main culprit.
In fact, almost $29 billion of the $30 billion Americans will spend this year to dispose of municipal solid wastes pays for landfilling and incineration -- not recycling.


Prague to Warsaw
To the Editor: Our unhappy experience in December on the overnight train Silesia from Prague to Warsaw is worth sharing, and we'd like to warn others.
We used the Eurailpass for senior citizens, and on weeknights we usually had a first-class compartment to ourselves for overnight trips.
The seat cushions can be pulled forward and the seatbacks slide down, leaving no room for anyone to walk inside the compartment.


The Tearing Apart Of Yugoslavia: Place by Place, Family by Family
WHETHER or not peace is restored to the former Yugoslavia any time soon, the trauma and psychological dislocation of its inhabitants is already so profound after two years of fighting that peacemaking could well take generations rather than months or years.
Nowhere has the disintegration of Yugoslavia been more lacerating than in the former nation's many mixed marriages -- unions that cut across ethnic lines that have now become the frontiers of war.


Sue Thornton, Adrian Chanler
Sue Hay Thornton, a lawyer in Charleston, S.C., was married yesterday to Adrian J. Chanler, a real-estate broker on Kiawah Island, S.C.
The Rev.
Alanson B. Houghton will perform the ceremony at the St.
Stephen's Episcopal Church in Charleston.
Mrs.
Chanler is a partner in the law firm of Geoffrey Smith &amp; Associates.
She graduated from Boston University and received a law degree from the University of South Carolina.
She is the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
James D. Thornton Jr. of Westerly, R.I.
Her father is of counsel to Thornton, Thornton &amp; Thomsen, a law firm in Westerly.


Anne K. Morris, Ricardo Salinas
Anne Kendall Morris, a daughter of Barbara and James K. Morris of Summit, N.J., and Ricardo Salinas, a son of Ricardo Salinas of Miami and Evangelina Arechiga of Mexico City, were married yesterday.
The Rev.
Dr.
William R. Phillippe performed the ceremony at the Fifth Avenue Presbyterian Church in New York.
Mrs.
Salinas, 29, is an account executive in San Francisco for Young &amp; Rubicam, the advertising agency.
She graduated from Trinity College in Hartford.
Her father is the chief executive of Savoy Brands International in Summit and Miami, a snack-food business operating in South America.


MAY 2-8: Terror in Cambodia; Khmer Rouge Campaign To Sabotage Elections
What had long been feared in Cambodia, a Khmer Rouge campaign of terror to destabilize the nation in the weeks leading to a major election, has begun.
The Maoist rebels, determined to sabottage the United Nations-supervised election beginning May 23, launched attacks throughout the country aimed at convincing Cambodians that they will risk their lives if they vote.


Shifting List of Prospects To Be Justice
President Clinton is expected to announce an appointment to the Supreme Court within the next two or three weeks, White House officials said, although no one has emerged in the two-month search as a front runner.
Mr.
Clinton is described by aides as preferring a woman, but several men have been on a list of candidates that has been growing and shrinking almost daily since Associate Justice Byron R. White announced in March that he would be retiring this summer when the Court term ends.
Senate aides say it will take six weeks between a nomination and the beginning of hearings, and the White House wants confirmation proceedings to be completed in July, before the Senate leaves Aug. 9 for a monthlong recess.


Hell Night At the 92d Street Y
IN a week when the New York book crowd was hopping between parties for Dominick Dunne's trashy novel "A Season in Purgatory" and Dr.
Ruth's coffeetable catalogue, "The Art of Arousal," a murderer's row of poets came together for an evening in hell.
Gathered at the 92d Street Y to read from their joint translation of Dante's "Inferno" was a dream team conjured in the glow of a bottle of Sangiovese uncorked three years ago in a Detroit restaurant by the poets Daniel Halpern and James Merrill.


When Thousands Vanished
DOSSIER SECRETO
Argentina's Desaparecidos and the Myth of the "Dirty War." By Martin Edwin Andersen.
Illustrated. 412 pp.
Boulder, Colo.: Westview Press.
Cloth, $59.
Paper, $17.95.


Borg Receives a Lesson From His Elders
Experience counts and so does skill, but when it comes to old-guy tennis, youth must be served -- and often as not, 36-year-old Bjorn Borg will answer with a crackling return too hot to handle.
That more, or less, was the story of the Manhattan Masters through the first three rounds of the six-team doubles round robin as Borg and his 46-year-old partner, Ilie Nastase, swept to a 3-0 record against far older opponents at the 69th Regiment Armory on Lexington Avenue at 26th Street.


Most Paints Have Latex Bases, but Alkyds Have Improved
CHOOSING outdoor house paint has always been challenging, especially since air-pollution laws have become stricter.
As a result, manufacturers are reformulating products, causing some, specifically oil- or alkyd-based varieties, to have different qualities.
Most paint today is latex based.
The term refers to the chemicals in the binders, which make up the film that forms when the paint dries.
The best latex-based paint contains 100 percent acrylic binders, which adhere more strongly than other types and also bond to a wider range of surfaces.


MAY 2-8: Civil Rights Nominee; Lani Guinier's Agenda Provokes Old Enemies
After being introduced to the press as President Clinton's choice to head the Justice Department's civil rights division, Lani Guinier made it clear she felt the Government's civil rights agenda had been trashed by 12 years of Republican White House rule.
Asked who was responsible for much of the damage, she spat out the name: "William Bradford Reynolds." Mr.
Reynolds was point man for the Reagan Administration's counter-revolution on civil rights.
The retrenchment was suffused with a political calculation that many white Americans, seething over issues like affirmative action, thought things had gone too far.


First Free Elections to Be Held Today in Paraguay
For the first time since Paraguay won independence from Spain in 1811, no one here knows who will win the presidential election.
Breaking a long tradition of military coups and rigged civilian elections, Paraguayans are to vote on Sunday in the first free presidential elections in their history.
With three centrist candidates in a dead heat, the winner is to be chosen by the voters, a new concept in this landlocked nation in the heart of South America.


Gotti Prosecutor Seeks Vergari Seat
WESTCHESTER'S Democratic leaders reached into the office of Manhattan District Attorney Robert M. Morgenthau last week to select an experienced prosecutor, Michael G. Cherkasky, as their candidate to succeed District Attorney Carl A. Vergari, a Republican who is retiring after 25 years.
In choosing the 43-year-old Mr.
Cherkasky to represent the party in what is likely to be one of the most sharply contested races in an unusually active election year, the Democrats weighed Mr.
Cherkasky's impressive background and experience against the likelihood that he will be tagged as an outsider.


Corrections
Because of a producer's last-minute program change, a picture and caption on page 28 of the Arts and Leisure section today, referring to a performance this afternoon at Carnegie Hall, are outdated.
The soloist with the Metropolitan Opera Orchestra will be Itzhak Perlman, not Anne-Sophie Mutter.


Verdict Seen As a Rebuke Of L.I. Politics
When Browning-Ferris Industries of Houston wanted the contract to build an incinerator here, it did something any newcomer hoping for a cut of the garbage disposal business in the Republican stronghold of Nassau County would do: it turned to Armand P. D'Amato, younger brother of United States Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato.
True, Armand D'Amato had made many a foe in starting up the Hempstead Resource Recovery Plant, a hulking environmental hazard that Browning-Ferris was proposing to replace.
But the company hired Mr.
D'Amato anyway to represent Browning-Ferris in its bids, which totaled $1 billion over 20 years.
Eliminating the Competition
His approach for the new client was vintage D'Amato: he introduced corporate executives to the local powers, saw that their proposals got through the right channels, and virtually eliminated any competition as industry insiders presumed that his association with Browning-Ferris assured it the garbage contract.


Korean Gangsters Held in Extortion
The leader and four members of a Korean street gang have been arrested in connection with the extortion of at least 100 Asian restaurateurs and business owners in Manhattan, the police said yesterday.
The five members of Korean Power, or K.P., were arrested about 8:40 P.M on Friday in an apartment at 50 West 34th Street.
The arrests culminated two months of surveillance and efforts to get the cooperation of business owners, said Lieut.
Joseph A. Pollini, executive officer of the department's Major Case Squad.


Exploring Essentials Of Life And Death
MICHAEL RUSH did not mean "Foirades/Fizzles" to be a response to "Angels in America," but chance governs all, so why not.
The statement Mr.
Rush does mean to make by staging the 1976 limited-edition volume that combined Samuel Beckett's words with Jasper Johns's etchings is: "Too many too young are dying." And it's made in less than one hour.


CONNECTICUT GUIDE
PRESERVATION PLANNING
Scenic roads to outdoor sculpture and town greens to Main Streets will be discussed in Wethersfield on Thursday from 9 A.M. to 2:30 P.M. when the Connecticut Trust for Historic Preservation will hold a statewide caucus titled Preservation Connecticut, at the Keeney Memorial Center, 200 Main Street.


Nets Fans Are Asking: Who's Laughing Now?
At one point during the Nets' victory over the Cleveland Cavaliers in New Jersey on Friday night, Derrick Coleman jumped onto the scorer's table, waving his hands high.
The crowd responded by raising the decibel level to highs not heard at Byrne Meadowlands Arena in a long time.
Later, Dwayne Schintzius, who has turned into a virtual folk hero during this first-round playoff series, was asked the last time he got so many cheers.
"When I was cut by Sacramento," he joked.


IN THESE GIRLS, HOPE IS A MUSCLE
Blais caught the spirit of the game and the closeness of young women on a high-school team.


Modernist


In the Region: New Jersey; Recent Sales
Clinton  $160,000
12 Marudy Drive  3-bedroom, 1-bath, 29-year-old ranch, den, h/w floors, ceiling fans; taxes $2,560.
Edison  $150,000
75 Wooding Avenue  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 25-year-old ranch; above-ground pool, finished full basement, 1-car garage; taxes $2,944.
Metuchen  $133,500
32 Volkmar Place  3-bedroom, 1-bath, 30-year-old ranch; c/a, fenced yard, new roof and hot-water heater; taxes $3,008.
Midland Park  $275,000
72 Faner Road  6-bedroom, 3 1/2-bath, over 50-year-old three family; 2-car garage, full basement; taxes $5,771.
Menlo Park  $140,000
95 Isabelle Street  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 37-year-old split level; finished recreation room, pool, recently painted, ceiling fans; taxes $2,425.
Morristown  $215,000
18-24 Franklin Place  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 5-year-old condominium town house; deck, porch, 1-car garage; monthly maintenance $225; taxes $4,224.
OTHER AREAS Wilton, Conn.  $353,000
22 Powder Horn Hill  3-bedroom, 3-bath, 41-year-old Cape Cod; security system, open floor plan, 2 acres; taxes $3,983.
Greenburgh, N.Y.  $148,000
25 Biltom Road  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 37-year-old ranch; patio, eat-in kitchen, family room, carport, handyman's special; taxes $5,168.
East Norwich, L.I.  $343,000
114 Split Oak Drive  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 33-year-old contemporary; new eat-in kitchen, fireplace, den, family room, 2-car garage; taxes $5,900.


Far Eastern Grilling, Part II: Spicy Seasonings for Seafood
HAMBURGERS and hot dogs were -- and still are -- the most popular items for the outdoor grill.
But the old-style barbecue has undergone many changes since the fashion for it first swept the nation in the 1940's.
The current status symbols are gas grills that cost half as much as a car, flavored wood chips, exotic marinades and fancy salsas.
And as Americans look for food that is low in fat and calories, without preservatives, sugar or rich creamy sauces, so the search for new flavors and ingredients continues.
As noted last week, Oriental seasonings -- soy sauce, sesame oil, fresh coriander -- do a great job of enhancing the taste of grilled foods, especially seafood.
I like to buy shrimp in Chinatown, where they are sold with their heads on, and soak them for a couple of hours in heavily salted ice water, which leaches out impurities.
They are then patted dry and tossed in a mixture of peanut oil and black and red peppers with garlic.
Cooking them in their shells concentrates their flavor -- and the shells can also be eaten, if you like.


Enchanting a Citybound Youngster
IF you ask William Perry 3d to flip for it, he just may take you literally.
The shy 9-year-old from the Bronx has made a hobby of walking up the sides of walls and flipping off backward into midair.
"They call him Flipman around here," said his mother, Hongfar Perry, who lives with her four children in an apartment on 116th Street and Teller Avenue near Yankee Stadium.
"He does all kinds of neat things for the kids in the neighborhood. He's very gymnastic."


Media and Fans Show Hypocrisy
To the Sports Editor:
Why am I not outraged about the way Dale Hunter hit on Pierre Turgeon?
The broadcaster and columnist Mike Lupica inadvertently gave me the answer.


Sound Bytes; Under Indictment
Gordon EubanksGordon Eubanks is president and chief executive of the Symantec Corporation of Cupertino, Calif.
A former Navy officer on nuclear attack and missile submarines, Mr.
Eubanks has skippered Symantec to more than $200 million in annual sales through such products as the Norton Utilities, Symantec Antivirus and various development tools.
Last week, the company acquired ACT!, maker of the leading contact management software, useful for keeping track of sales leads.
In March, Mr.
Eubanks was indicted, along with Gene Wang, now a Symantec vice president, on 33 felony counts for allegedly using electronic mail to steal trade secrets while Mr.
Wang was employed at Borland International Inc., a Symantec rival.
A trial date in the case, filed in Santa Clara and involving California trade secret and conspiracy law, has not been set.


Capital Ghosts
My family learned about the vicissitudes of politics early.
One morning in 1948, my brother, Michael, then a chubby-cheeked 13-year-old, showed up for his first day at work as a Senate page.
He was proud and nervous in his brand new navy-blue suit, black tie and white shirt, just like the pages in "Mr. Smith Goes to Washington."


POSTINGS: Taking Wing on Long Island; Aerospace Training For the Fledglings
It doesn't fly, but it looks like it might.
Among its features is a 200-foot-long curved roof that resembles the wing of an airplane -- which is perfectly appropriate, considering its use.
It's the design for the new $3.1 million, 20,000-square-foot Aerospace Training Facility being constructed at Republic Airport on Long Island for the aviation program at the State University College of Technology at Farmingdale.
Designed by Siris/Coombs Architects of Manhattan, the building is to be two miles from the main campus.
It is to include an airplane maintenance hangar, electrical fabrication and engine laboratories, classrooms, administrative offices, a flight simulation lab and a flight control and navigation center, all organized around a central skylighted court that will function as a student lounge and lobby.


Lisa A. Leslie, James E. Swiggett
Lisa Ann Leslie, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
M.
Russell Leslie Jr. of Pittsburgh, was married yesterday to James Henry Swiggett, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
James E. Swiggett of Lloyd Harbor, L.I.
The Rev.
John T. Galloway performed the ceremony at Fox Chapel Presbyterian Church in Pittsburgh.
Mrs.
Swiggett is an assistant knitwear merchandise manager for the Donna Karan Company in New York.
She graduated from the College of Wooster.
Her father is a surgeon with Oakland Orthopaedic Associates in Pittsburgh.


WESTCHESTER GUIDE
AIRPORT ANNIVERSARY
Westchester County Airport will celebrate its 50th anniversary with an open house on Saturday from 9 A.M. to 3:30 P.M.
Sponsored by the Westchester Aviation Association, the Federal Aviation Administration and the county, the event is designed to be informative and entertaining, and may encourage some young people to take up flying as a career.


Among Blacks, New Voices Emerge; A Younger Generation Tests the Levers of Power and Change
In Brooklyn, at the Concord Baptist Church, the Rev.
Gary Simpson talks of Malcolm X and rage, the rap group X-Clan and community growth.
The result: more young blacks at Sunday services.
In Harlem, a group called HIT, or Harlem Initiatives Together, brings together embittered residents to let them share complaints, aggravations and ideas.
The result: a campaign to get Harlem shops to carry fresher meat and vegetables.


IN THESE GIRLS, HOPE IS A MUSCLE
I have no interest at all in basketball.
As a man in his 70's, I have no interest whatsoever in girls of high-school age.
Or, aside from my wife, of any age.


CD's Hit the Road in Bigger Numbers
Getting the car spruced up for spring has been an American ritual since the days of Henry Ford's tin lizzie.
This year, the seasonal overhaul may well involve updating the car's sound system for the digital era.
After all, traveling is often the best time for undisturbed listening.
In fact, more music is heard in cars than in concert, and with Americans averaging 15 percent of their waking time behind the wheel, many listeners think that their car stereo should be on par with their home music system.


Profile; From Political Prisoner to a Banker for Billionaires
Nemir A. Kirdar grew up in Iraq and dreamed of following his family into government service.
Then, on his way home for lunch 24 years ago, he was picked up by the police and thrown into a windowless cell with 30 or 40 other prisoners.
Save the provisions brought in by his wife, he went without food and water for 12 days.
No charges were ever filed, and he was never told why he was detained.
He fled the country shortly after his release and went, almost broke, to the United States.


The Good Life as Led a Century Ago
MANY collectors of art have started modestly with the tried and true -- old prints, even postage stamps -- then moved forward to the art of their own time.
Richard Manoogian, however, reversed the procedure when, in the 1970's, he began with works by Jackson Pollock, Franz Kline, Frank Stella and their like.
After that he turned his attention to the late 19th and early 20th centuries, acquiring works of artists from Martin Johnson Heade to William Merritt Chase, and from the trompe l'oeil specialists, John Peto and William Harnett, to the portraitist, John Singer Sargent, and assorted American Impressionists.
It is the kind of art making up the Yale University Art Gallery show, "A Private View: American Painting From the Manoogian Collection." Evidently the collector has sustained a change of heart as well as of taste, for the show is very much a celebration of the good life as it was led in the Victorian and Edwardian eras.
Indeed he is quoted in the catalogue saying that "those from an ethnic background like myself often have a great appreciation for America" because of the opportunities it has created for their families.


Late Thunder Saves Yanks From Tigers
The Yankees must feel as if they are playing in baseball's version of the Twilight Zone.
No lead is safe at Tiger Stadium.
The Yankees have charged to 6-0 leads in the first two games of the series, but the Tigers stormed back each time to regain the lead.
There are even more reasons for the Yankees to feel that the ghost of Rod Serling is lingering somewhere.
Reliever Steve Howe tripped running down the clubhouse stairs near the dugout before the game, sprained his ankle and is expected to be placed on the 15-day disabled list Sunday.
Jim Abbott came back to his home state was given a 6-0 lead and lasted only three innings.


'Sleeping Dogs' Bark at Buck
Sparky against Buck?
Bad blood brewing?
There was Friday, but both managers tried to squelch it tonight.
In the sixth inning Friday, with the Yankees leading, 6-0, Pat Kelly, the runner on first, sprinted for second base.
Sparky Anderson, the Tigers' manager, was outraged.
Television cameras caught him screaming at Yankees Manager Buck Showalter.


Low-Tech Medicine
To the Editor:
I concur with Dr.
Rahman's criticisms of the limitations of the Health Care Task Force with its current membership.
I am puzzled, though, by his omission of nurses from a list of those who should be included on this team.
As the largest group of direct providers of health care, nurses must be represented.
STEPHANIE SIMPSON, R.N./C.R.R.N.
Bridgeport, Conn., April 24


Melissa Neubert, Drew Steffens
Melissa Page Neubert, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Jeffrey P. Neubert of Columbus, Ohio, was married yesterday to Drew Cullen Steffens, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
John L. Steffens of Princeton, N.J.
Msgr.
William Genuario performed the ceremony at St.
Catherine of Siena Roman Catholic Church in Riverside, Conn.
Mrs.
Steffens is an associate in the global asset management division of J. P. Morgan &amp; Company in New York.
She and her husband graduated from Dartmouth College.
Her father is an executive vice president of the Banc One Corporation, the bank holding company, in Columbus.


Results Plus
BOXING De La Hoya Stops Foe Oscar De La Hoya maintained his pace of a victory a month by stopping Frankie Avelar in the fourth round of a scheduled 10-round lightweight fight yesterday in Stateline, Nev.
Avelar had never been down as a pro until being dropped in the second and third rounds.
He went down again in the fourth, just seconds before the referee, Vic Drakulich, stopped the fight 2 minutes 3 seconds into the round.
"My timing was right on the dot. I was using my combinations very well," De La Hoya said.
"I was hitting him very hard and a few seconds later, he just fell." De La Hoya, 131 pounds, improved his record to 7-0 with six knockouts.
Avelar, 131 1/2, of Las Vegas, dropped to 15-3.
Avelar, who fought for El Salvador in the 1988 Olympics, said he was unable to put pressure on De La Hoya, who has fought monthly since turning pro in November. (AP) TENNIS Stich vs.
Chesnokov Michael Stich and Andrei Chesnokov of Russia won semifinal matches yesterday in the German Open in Hamburg.
Stich ended Emilio Sanchez's run of upsets, outlasting the Spaniard, 5-7, 7-6 (7-3), 7-6 (7-2).
Chesnokov spoiled an all-German final when he beat Bernd Karbacher, 6-2, 6-4.
Stich, the 1991 Wimbledon champion, overcame his own erratic play and finally converted his fifth match point against Sanchez. (AP) Yzaga and Fromberg in Final: Defending champion Jaime Yzaga of Peru and Richard Fromberg of Australia won semifinal victories to advance to the title match of the $260,000 U.S.T.A.
Men's Clay Courts in Tampa, Fla.
Yzaga downed Patrick McEnroe, 7-6 (7-5), 6-3, while Fromberg defeated Bryan Shelton, 6-7 (5-7), 6-3, 7-5.
Yzaga had a 5-2 lead in the tie breaker of the first set when McEnroe rallied to tie it.
But McEnroe then became overanxious, netting a forehand return and spraying another forehand past the baseline. (AP) TRACK AND FIELD Met Title to Rutgers Rutgers's men's track team took the top five places in the pole vault to overcome an early Manhattan lead and win the team title in the Metropolitan Intercollegiate Track and Field Championships at St.
John's yesterday.
The Scarlet Knights scored 147 points to Manhattan's 131.
Manhattan beat St.
John's for the women's title, 195-179.
Evan Clarke of New York Tech won the 100- and 200-meter dashes, and David Frazier of Manhattan won the long jump and triple jump. 3 Gold Medals for Senior: Jermaine Stafford made his trip from Rochester to White Plains for the Nestle-Loucks Games a worthwhile one yesterday, winning three gold medals.
Stafford, a senior at Ben Franklin High School, easily won the 100-meter (10.81) and 200-meter (21.90) dashes and capped his efforts with a blazing anchor leg to give Franklin a 41.94 victory in the 400-meter relay.
Stacey Minott almost matched Stafford's feats in the girls' events.
The 15-year-old sophomore won the 100 in 12.10 and the 200 in a meet-record 24.46, and she gave New Rochelle the lead on the opening leg of the 400 relay.
But the Hugenots failed to hold it and finished third.
WATER POLO


Firefighters to Rescue? A Plan Hits Snags
Three years ago, as part of his Safe Streets, Safe City program, Mayor David N. Dinkins announced a plan common in many cities: to send firefighters to some critical emergencies, like heart attacks, to which Emergency Medical Service workers had responded exclusively.
To proponents of the plan the logic was inescapable.
The Fire Department, they reasoned, could respond more quickly to such emergencies, and with the number of fires declining over the years, the plan would help relieve the workload on the ambulance service.


Retro Speed Ahead
Lenny Kravitz stepped out of a limo onto Lafayette Street wearing hip-hugging flared blue jeans, black suede platform boots, a brownish see-through shirt open to the midriff, several rings in his ears (and one through his nose), a big turquoise necklace and a black pin-striped blazer with shoulder-width lapels.
And these are his day clothes.


Crisis Care Comes Home to Bridgeport
DAVID MANNING REED is a doctor to Russians, Kurds, Iraqis, Peruvians, Somalis, Armenians and Americans regardless of politics.
And later this spring, the 42-year-old surgeon from Stamford, who has worked for the disaster and emergency relief program Americares, will address the need for similar aid in Connecticut when he heads an all-volunteer, public clinic in an Americares program called Doctors to All Peoples.
The program, the Bridgeport Free Medical Clinic, will be in the former Ralpholo Taylor Community Center in East Bridgeport.
"It is intended as a model to be used with our affiliate centers," Dr.
Reed said.
"For example, Yale School of Medicine has expressed interest in a similar project."


Carving Out a Garden
She's an expert on day lilies, so I was saving her garden until July.
But when Sydney Eddison called to say, "You must come to see my primroses," I couldn't resist.
I knew that spring would reveal to me not only the primroses of her garden, but more of its soul, before the trees leafed out over the rocky hills around Newtown.
"I think the least you do to the landscape is the best," Mrs.
Eddison said in late April, as we walked northward across a sweep of grass that stretches across the hill behind her house like a long green terrace.


For Achievers, Young and Not So
Benefits honor leaders in the arts, fashion and social work.


Questioning Accomplishments
To the Editor:
I am puzzled by the inclusion of the "Low-Fi Rockers" story in the Styles section on April 11.
If the accomplishments of the two young men who are the subjects of the story  [ Mickey Melchiondo and Aaron Freeman ]  deserve a half page of space, why is the information about their recording career confined to less than one-quarter of the article?


It's Closing Time at 'Cheers'
You must remember this. . . .Classic episodes from the hit NBC comedy, which ends its 11-year run on May 20.
In 1982, viewers got an invitation: C'mon down to a Boston bar.
The rest was laughter.


Mother and Son Drown in Creek in Park
A Long Island mother and her young son drowned in a creek in Rockville Centre yesterday after the woman tried to rescue the boy, the Nassau County police said.
The mother, Kausar Shah, took her two sons, ages 4 and 5, and a 5-year-old nephew to Mill River Park from their home in Lynbrook yesterday morning.
When the younger son, Midhat Shah, waded into Mill Creek and slipped into deep water, his mother tried to rescue him, said Officer Andrew DeSimone, a police spokesman.


The War Against U.S. Movies and TV
To the Editor:
"The Administration's Trade War" (editorial, May 3), which is critical of Mickey Kantor, the United States Trade Representative, puzzles me.
I cannot believe that you are unaware of trade barriers, border hedgerows, discriminatory taxation, restrictive entry rules, vexing regulations that many American products confront in the world, all aimed at shrinking American companies' access to the marketplaces of too many countries.


Traffic Deaths in New York Say a Lot About New Yorkers
Around the nation one person is killed in an urban traffic accident for every 67 million miles driven.
In New York City it is one death for every 29 million miles.
Nationally the victim is six times more likely to be a driver or a passenger than to be a pedestrian.
In New York pedestrians make up half the fatalities.
Among them were three children killed in the last several weeks in accidents involving drivers whose licenses had been suspended many times.


Shell Life: The Art and Science of Harvesting Oysters
One of the charms of gathering oysters is that they cannot elude you.
Immobile and visible, they await your depredations.
Inclement weather and other factors can get in the way of an oyster expedition, however, which is why my companion, Ruth Kirchmeier, and I have made only two such sorties thus far this spring.
We harvest oysters on Tisbury Great Pond on Martha's Vineyard Island, Mass., a salt pond that is periodically opened to the ocean with a bulldozer.
One purpose of the openings is to maintain the proper salinity for the bivalves to grow and reproduce.


Karen Barker, George Marcou
Mr. and Mrs.
James R. Barker of Darien, Conn., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Karen Elizabeth Barker, to George Thomas Marcou, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
George T. Marcou of Chevy Chase, Md.
A July wedding is planned.
Ms.
Barker, 27, is a first-year law student at American University in Washington.
She graduated from Middlebury College.
Her father is the chairman and chief executive of the Interlake Steamship Company and vice chairman of Mormac Marine Group in Stamford, Conn.
Her mother is a social worker at Family and Children's Services there.


In the Region: Connecticut; Investor Buys a Major Piece of Stamford
ALMOST 20 percent of Stamford's 6.4 million square feet of prime downtown office space has been rescued from foreclosure by Zell/Merrill Lynch of Chicago, one of the nation's largest real estate investment concerns.
With the acquisition last month of 1.2 million square feet in five buildings, for which it paid $132 million, Zell/Merrill Lynch Real Estate Opportunity Partners Limited Partnership became the largest office landlord in Stamford, which has a total of 13.6 million square feet of offices.


Golf Courses, Marina, Stores and a U.N. Campus
The proposals for Morewood:
The Muss Development Corporation of Forest Hills wants to attract the Professional Golfers of America tour with a Tournament Players Club course.
Eugene Holloway, general manager of Potomac Investment Associates of Gaithersburg, Md., which represents the P.G.A. tour, said: "We are very happy with the components offered there. It's a beautiful site."


Gregory Berzolla and Randy Lewis
Randy Barbara Lewis, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Jeffrey B. Lewis of Harrison, N.Y., was married last evening to Gregory Renato Berzolla, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Renato Berzolla of Riverside, Conn.
The groom's father, a deacon at St.
Catherine of Siena Church in Riverside, officiated at the Metropolitan Club in New York.
Rabbi Charles Lippman took part in the ceremony.
Mrs.
Berzolla, 28 and a graduate of Wellesley College, received an M.B.A. degree from Dartmouth College, as did her husband.
She is a management consultant at A. T. Kearney, a management consulting firm in New York.
Her father is the president of the two Lewis of Woodhaven department stores in Woodhaven, Queens.
Her mother, Marlin Lewis, is a real estate saleswoman with Julia B. Fee, a real estate agency in Rye, N.Y.


Far Eastern Grilling, Part II: Spicy Seasonings for Seafood
HAMBURGERS and hot dogs were -- and still are -- the most popular items for the outdoor grill.
But the old-style barbecue has undergone many changes since the fashion for it first swept the nation in the 1940's.
The current status symbols are gas grills that cost half as much as a car, flavored wood chips, exotic marinades and fancy salsas.
And as Americans look for food that is low in fat and calories, without preservatives, sugar or rich creamy sauces, so the search for new flavors and ingredients continues.
As noted last week, Oriental seasonings -- soy sauce, sesame oil, fresh coriander -- do a great job of enhancing the taste of grilled foods, especially seafood.
I like to buy shrimp in Chinatown, where they are sold with their heads on, and soak them for a couple of hours in heavily salted ice water, which leaches out impurities.
They are then patted dry and tossed in a mixture of peanut oil and black and red peppers with garlic.
Cooking them in their shells concentrates their flavor -- and the shells can also be eaten, if you like.


Ethnic Pride Confounds The Census
I'm Nobody! Who are you? Are you -- Nobody -- too?
HALF a century after Germany exported the science of statistics, fueling the 19th century's rage to classify absolutely everything, a reclusive Massachusetts poet wrote this paean to the unclassified and unclassifiable.
But Emily Dickinson's idyll of anonymity, written in 1861, is something the American body politic has never been able to accommodate.


Don't Joke About This Stock Market
In his private trading room at a local securities firm, Millions Yang peers intently at a parade of price charts flowing across a computer screen.
Mr.
Yang, a rotund former Red Guard who earned his nickname the easy way, by making millions in the stock market, breaks into a smile.
"Today I made 100,000 yuan," almost $20,000, he says, laughing. "Not bad for a day."


In U.S., Hong Kong Governor Backs China, His Tormentor
Hong Kong's Governor, Christopher Patten, has been called a colorful assortment of names by Chinese officials in recent months, including "prostitute," "serpent" and -- his own favorite -- "tango dancer."
So it was unusual for Mr.
Patten, during a visit to Washington and New York last week, to find himself squarely on China's side of a debate over its trade status in the United States.
A man China regards as its enemy came to argue China's case to President Clinton, Congress and whoever else would listen.


Lewis Defeats Tucker In First Title Defense
Lennox Lewis had a championship belt before he ever had a championship fight, so few trusted his wherewithal until tonight.
Wielding a strong right hand, he floored Tony Tucker in the third round, kept status quo through the seventh round, assaulted Tucker unmercifully in the eighth and ninth and breathed far too heavily the remainder of the evening.
He won the 12-round decision, in the first defense of his World Boxing Council Heavyweight title, but his hands were held dangerously low the final three rounds -- out of exhaustion.


Conflict in the Balkans; Croatia's Serb Enclave Feels Betrayed
When the Yugoslav Government announced this week that it was severing supply lines to the Bosnian Serbs, betrayal was felt in this remote Croatian mountain town.
The self-proclaimed Republic of the Serbian Krajina, formed when Croatia declared its sovereignty, was counting on Belgrade to lead it to independence and eventual union in a greater Serbia.
But the severing of supply lines would cut off shipments of oil and manufactured goods and that could determine the area's future.


Tour Marks Rescue of Jews
On Oct. 1, 1943 -- Rosh ha-Shanah, the start of the Jewish New Year -- Nazis raided synagogues and homes in Denmark, intent on rounding up the country's 7,800 Jews and sending them to concentration camps.
But they did not find them.
The Jews had been hidden by Danes in homes, farms and churches, then ferried across the Oresund Strait to safety in neutral Sweden.
For the 50th anniversary of the rescue, Friends of Scandinavia Tours is offering two-week tours this summer retracing the rescue routes and offering participants a chance to meet people who helped hide and transport the Jews, and some of the rescued Jews who now live in Stockholm, Oslo and Helsinki.


Mafia Tale: Looting the Steel of the West Side Highway
When workers ripped out the last slab of steel from the West Side Highway four years ago, the crumbling hulk disappeared from the Manhattan landscape and faded from New York City's memory.
At the time, few people were aware that the final section of the elevated road was demolished mainly by carpenters, not by ironworkers, who traditionally performed that job.
Now, two high-ranking Mafia defectors have come forward to tell the tale of how the carpenters were hired in an intricate mob scheme to reap a windfall from the highway's demise.
The plot involved the cooperation of three organized-crime families, each trading favors and pulling strings with contractors and unions.
In the end, the defectors said, the mobsters manipulated a $12 million state contract to walk off with 11,000 tons of salvageable steel and at least $800,000 in payoffs.


COLONIALISM'S BACK
Johnson's article distorts colonial history, gives no explanation of why many non-Western countries are in difficulties and offers no reason why former colonial powers, having made a mess of things the first time around, are now in a position to act in an "altruistic" manner to save former colonial populations from themselves.


Live or in Living Color?
Chris Rock, a featured comedian on NBC's "Saturday Night Live," may be leaving for the rival Fox comedy show "In Living Color," said a person involved in the negotiations.
Mr.
Rock, who also starred in the film "CB4," is said to feel underutilized on "Saturday Night Live."


Swedish Master


BENEFITS
For City Center's 50th
MONDAY -- The actress Joanne Woodward will lead City Center's 50th anniversary celebration, which will feature dance performances by the Alvin Ailey, the Joffrey, the Martha Graham and the Paul Taylor dance companies; musical tributes from Bobby Short, Barbara Cook and Maureen McGovern, and dramatic readings by Celeste Holm and Kevin Kline.
The gala begins at 7 P.M. at City Center, 130 West 55th Street (Seventh Avenue), followed by a 9 o'clock supper and a dance at the Pierre.
Black tie.
Tickets, $500, from (212) 614-0400, or $25 for the performance alone, from Citytix, at (212) 581-1212.


U.S. CITES EVIDENCE IN A PLOT ON BUSH
The Clinton Administration has found strong evidence that the Iraqi Government directed a 17-member squad in a plot to assassinate former President Bush during his visit to Kuwait three weeks ago, Government officials said today.
They said signs of Iraqi sponsorship were not yet conclusive.
But some senior policymakers were said to have become convinced that Iraq was behind the attack, and the officials said early consideration was being given to how the United States should respond.


William Dedman and Pamela Belluck
Pamela Joan Belluck, the Atlantic City and New Jersey shore reporter for The Philadelphia Inquirer, and William Griswold Dedman, a freelance journalist in New York, have announced September wedding plans.
Ms.
Belluck, 29, graduated cum laude from Princeton University.
She is the daughter of Raymond E. Belluck and Frances Schell Belluck of Roslyn Heights, L.I.
The bride's father, now retired, was an engineering manager in Lake Success, L.I., for the Sperry division of Unisys, the computer manufacturer.
Her mother is a medical social worker at Long Island Jewish Medical Center in New Hyde Park, L.I.


IN SHORT: FICTION
UNDERTOW By Lynn Stegner.
Baskerville Publishers, 7540 L.B.J.
Freeway, Suite 125, Dallas, Tex. 75251-1008, $21.


Under Cherry Blossoms
The Crystal Ball, Mount Sinai Medical Center, May 6.


Paris Report
What a stew Paris has cooked up for fall!
Loosely held together by that heady froth of broth, the ephemeral Paris fashion spirit, there are enough disparate ideas to stock the biggest pot-au- feu.
At the base are the familiar meat-and-potato styles of such names as Saint Laurent, Dior, Ungaro, Givenchy, Rykiel and Lacroix.
They know their metier and we know their product.
No surprises here.
What makes this season's stew so tantalizing are the spicy ideas that conjure up romantic allusions, the sharp garnishes of silhouette, the odd combinations of ingredients like velvet and knit used together and even the raw gizzards of experimental design.
This is not going to be a season for the woman who likes her fashion recipe neat and simple.
But it will be gobbled up by those who love to dig into the mix.
First of all there is the mix itself.
One of the strongest movements in Paris was the idea of assembling unexpected combinations of fabrics in one outfit.
This was done with the most sprightly attitude by the terrific new talent Lamine Kouyate for his company, Xuly-Bet; in a refreshing and thoroughly wearable way by Dries van Noten; in an intellectual mode by Rei Kawakubo for Comme des Garcons, and in a brilliantly commercial manner by Karl Lagerfeld for Chanel.
Thanks to Lagerfeld some of the most chic women in the world may well be walking around next fall wearing oversized white shirts with tails sticking out and cuffs dangling over their hands.
These will be under nipped and shortened Chanel tweed jackets scattered with sequins, and accessorized with long velvet ribbons knotted like men's neckties mixed with gilded biker chains.
Their tights will be tucked into sneaker like booties emblazoned with Chanel's double C's.


Far Eastern Grilling, Part II: Spicy Seasonings for Seafood
HAMBURGERS and hot dogs were -- and still are -- the most popular items for the outdoor grill.
But the old-style barbecue has undergone many changes since the fashion for it first swept the nation in the 1940's.
The current status symbols are gas grills that cost half as much as a car, flavored wood chips, exotic marinades and fancy salsas.
And as Americans look for food that is low in fat and calories, without preservatives, sugar or rich creamy sauces, so the search for new flavors and ingredients continues.
As noted last week, Oriental seasonings -- soy sauce, sesame oil, fresh coriander -- do a great job of enhancing the taste of grilled foods, especially seafood.
I like to buy shrimp in Chinatown, where they are sold with their heads on, and soak them for a couple of hours in heavily salted ice water, which leaches out impurities.
They are then patted dry and tossed in a mixture of peanut oil and black and red peppers with garlic.
Cooking them in their shells concentrates their flavor -- and the shells can also be eaten, if you like.


Most Paints Have Latex Bases, but Alkyds Have Improved
CHOOSING outdoor house paint has always been challenging, especially since air-pollution laws have become stricter.
As a result, manufacturers are reformulating products, causing some, specifically oil- or alkyd-based varieties, to have different qualities.
Most paint today is latex based.
The term refers to the chemicals in the binders, which make up the film that forms when the paint dries.
The best latex-based paint contains 100 percent acrylic binders, which adhere more strongly than other types and also bond to a wider range of surfaces.


Letting the Opposition Win a Tourney for You
ALEXANDER SHABALOV won the Hudson International Tournament at Pace University in Pleasantville, N.Y., April 13-23 by letting his opponents make the mistakes.
He did not make any: the 25-year-old Latvian grandmaster was the only undefeated player.
In Round 8, he laid on strong positional pressure against the Estonian grandmaster Jaan Ehlvest with several nice pawn sacrifices.


Sharon Holmes, Henner Kuckuck
Sharon Robin Holmes, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Theodore Holmes of Flushing, Queens, was married last evening to Henner Kuckuck, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Karl H. Kuckuck of Hanover, Germany.
Rabbi David Benedict officiated at Water's Edge, a restaurant in Long Island City, Queens.


In the Region: Long Island; Recent Sales
Blue Point  $87,500
18 Oakwood Street  2-bedroom, 1-bath, 35-year-old ranch; eat-in kitchen, basement; taxes $1,900.
Brookhaven  $149,000
393 South Country Road  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 16-year-old colonial; dining room, screened porch, basement, 2-car garage; taxes $5,000.
Brookville  $420,000
183 Wheatley Road  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 70-year-old brick estate gatehouse; dining room, eat-in kitchen, sunporch, 3-car garage; taxes $6,000.
Cove Neck  $842,500
18 Tennis Court Road  4-bedroom, 3 1/2-bath, 5-year-old post-modern; dining room, eat-in kitchen with fireplace, great room with fireplace, 3 acres, pond, walk to beach; taxes $10,000.
East Norwich  $343,000
114 Split Oak Drive  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 33-year-old contemporary; new eat-in kitchen, fireplace, den, family room, 2-car garage; taxes $5,900.
Patchogue  $135,000
58 Robert Street  4-bedroom, 2-bath, 33-year-old Cape Cod; eat-in kitchen, fireplace, basement, deck, 1- car garage; taxes $3,100.
OTHER AREAS Wilton, Conn.  $353,000
22 Powder Horn Hill  3-bedroom, 3-bath, 41-year-old Cape Cod; security system, open floor plan, 2 acres; taxes $3,983.
Greenburgh, N.Y.  $148,000
25 Biltom Road  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 37-year-old ranch; patio, eat-in kitchen, family room, carport, handyman's special; taxes $5,168.
Clinton, N.J.  $160,000
12 Marudy Drive  3-bedroom, 1-bath, 29-year-old ranch, den, h/w floors, ceiling fans; taxes $2,560.


Jennifer Watts, Albert Rodiger
Jennifer Hamner Watts, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
George B. Watts Jr. of Cohassett, Mass., was married there yesterday to Albert Amory Rodiger, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Walter G. Rodiger Jr. of New Canaan, Conn.
The Rev.
E.
Clifford Cutler performed the ceremony at St.
Stephen's Episcopal Church.
Mrs.
Rodiger is an aide in Boston to State Senator Lucile Hicks, a Republican from Wayland, Mass.
She graduated from Simmons College.
Her father is a vice president in the investment services division in Boston of the Shawmut Bank.
Her mother is a real estate saleswoman in Cohassett for Hunneman &amp; Company/Coldwell Banker.


Jolie N. Spector, Marc Rothschild
Jolie Nan Spector, the daughter of Michael Harris Spector and Dr.
Joan Spector of Kings Point, L.I., was married last evening to Marc Evan Rothschild, a son of Herbert Rothschild of Rockville Centre, L.I., and Eleanor Rothschild of Roslyn, L.I.
Rabbi Gerald Davidson performed the ceremony at the Essex House in New York.
Mrs.
Rothschild, 25, graduated from the University of Michigan and received a master's degree in social work from Columbia University.
Her father, an architect, is the chairman and owner of the Spector Group, an architectural concern in North Hills, L.I.
Her mother is a clinical social worker in Great Neck, L.I.


Whoever's on First, He Probably Isn't Hitting What You Expect
Surprises abound among first basemen this season.
Who would have expected Andres Galarraga, John Olerud and Mo Vaughn to soar into the stratosphere of hitting?
Who would have expected Fred McGriff, Will Clark and Rafael Palmeiro to wallow in a morass of weak hitting?
Then there are J. T. Snow, a promising rookie whose early season brilliance has melted into a startling slump, and Glenn Davis, an enigmatic veteran whose early career stardom has deteriorated in a meteoric dive.


Nicholas Kiernan and Susan Costanzo
Susan Florence Costanzo, a daughter of Rita Zimmer and Daniel Costanzo, both of South Plainfield, N.J., was married yesterday evening to Nicholas Raymond Kiernan, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Nicholas F. Kiernan of Long Branch, N.J.
The Rev.
Damian O'Connell performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at the Church of Saint Ignatius Loyola in New York.
Mrs.
Kiernan, 30, is an account supervisor for TMG, a field marketing company in New York.
She graduated from Villanova University.
Her father is the business manager of Queen City Pontiac in Greenbrook, N.J.
Her mother is a business systems specialist for the American Telephone &amp; Telegraph Company in Berkeley Heights, N.J.


Wall Street; Trying to Copy the Fat Cats at Vanguard
Investors who can't take the pain of choosing among the mind-boggling number of mutual funds on the market frequently try the copycat strategy: mimicking the rich insiders who run a fund company.
The top two at Vanguard are most bullish on the Windsor Fund, the popular growth and income fund with $8.2 billion in assets.
Daniel Wiener, editor of The Vanguard Adviser, which tracks the goings-on of Vanguard funds, went through 32 recent Vanguard proxies to determine the Vanguard funds most popular with Vanguard management and directors.
Vanguard's chairman, John Bogle, has $2.2 million in Windsor, by Mr.
Wiener's estimate, and Vanguard's president, John Brennan, has $907,000 there.


Clinton Works on Welfare Plan
An interagency group has begun work on President Clinton's campaign pledge to "end welfare as we know it" and hopes to unveil its proposal in the fall, a White House official said today.
The group is considering several basic elements to overhaul the welfare system, said Bruce Reed, a White House domestic policy adviser.
They include a proposal to limit a person's stay on welfare, tracking and collecting child-support payments, and ways to make work more attractive than being on welfare -- ideas often mentioned by Mr.
Clinton himself.


Americans on Health Care
From Iowa City and Cedar Rapids to Moline, Ill., across the Mississippi, Americans express deep anxieties about a capricious and fragmented network of doctors, companies and institutions that can impoverish even those it serves best.
At the same time, many worry that a Government solution may deprive them of something they value, the freedom to choose their own doctors.
Even among the majority of Americans who say they are happy with their health coverage, it is hard to find anyone who questions why President Clinton seeks to change the health-care system.


World Markets; For Coffee, the Slump Goes On
ALTHOUGH the average Brazilian coffee grower is tearing out bushes with both hands, large crops this year of Brazilian robusta coffee beans as well as Colombian arabicas are expected to prolong a slump in world coffee prices.
While worldwide coffee consumption is climbing slowly, thanks to Asia's newly affluent nations, per capita consumption in the United States and Brazil has been cut almost in half over the last 30 years.


Ellen T. O'Toole And J. C. Hoeffel
Ellen Treadway O'Toole, a communications coordinator at Ann Taylor Inc., the apparel chain, and J. Christopher Hoeffel, a vice president of Eastdil Realty Inc., a real estate investment banking company, both in New York City, were married yesterday.
The Rev.
Robert Dunne performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at Church of St.
Thomas More.
Mrs.
Hoeffel, 30, graduated from Northwestern University.
She is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John E. O'Toole of Greenwich, Conn.
Her father is the president of the American Association of Advertising Agencies, a trade association based in New York.


History Repeating Itself?
To the Editor:
In his article on the Holocaust Museum, "Shaping a Monument to Memory"  [ April 11 ] , Herbert Muschamp refers to "floating glass bridges engraved with the names of devastated cities." More specifically, they are the names of the destroyed Jewish communities, country by country.
Ironically, the segment shown in one of the photographs accompanying the article is of towns and cities in Yugoslavia, many of which are suffering today through the tragedy of "ethnic cleansing."  FELICE ITZKOFF Forest Hills, N. Y.


When Teacher's Pet Falls Prey to Teacher's Petting
My friend the former world-class swimmer has never quite separated out her sex life from her sports-conditioned role as a pleaser of men.
In dank locker rooms that stank of chlorine, her age-group coach would stroke her to orgasm in reward for a personal best.
She was flattered yet confused by his attentions, and later devastated when he began spending time with a younger, faster swimmer.
She never fulfilled her early potential, and hung on in sports by becoming the mistress of a leading official who would dash up to her hotel room between Olympic committee meetings.
She spun off into hippiedom and drugs for years.


Tet and Television
To the Editor:
Picking a network television star to review a serious work of history is always risky.
What if the star is too busy to do his homework?
Morley Safer, a onetime CBS reporter in Vietnam, now a presence on "60 Minutes," seems a case in point (April 11).
He assesses Ronald H. Spector's "After Tet," a vivid but balanced account of the Americans' grinding war in South Vietnam in 1968, after Hanoi's surprise Tet offensive in January and February.


Washington Is Star-Struck As Hollywood Gets Serious
It's hard to pinpoint the exact moment when things began spinning out of control on the celebrity front.
Was it when Michael Douglas eclipsed President Clinton at last weekend's White House Correspondents' Association dinner?


Bigger
And Better A preview of the restored and expanded Jewish Museum, May 3.


Conversations/Mildred Benson; A Ghostwriter and Her Sleuth: 63 Years of Smarts and Gumption
MILDRED AUGUSTINE WIRT BENSON had just arrived in Chicago from Toledo, carrying a red leather pocketbook and wearing a crinkly plastic rain bonnet.
The writer of 23 of the first 30 original Nancy Drew Mystery Stories had missed her connecting flight to Iowa, where she would be guest of honor at the first-ever Nancy Drew Conference.
Mrs.
Benson -- who is 87 but does not like to discuss her age because she is still a working professional -- was lugging a sack of Nancy Drew books through O'Hare Airport's endless corridors and carrying a copy of the day's edition of The Toledo Blade, where she writes a weekly column called "On the Go with Millie Benson." On the front page was the headline: "Her Novels a Treasure: University of Iowa Honors Benson, Nancy Drew Author."


Democracy's Obsolete Secrets
President Clinton has ordered a sweeping review of government secrecy now that the cold war is over.
And he has posed some telling questions:
What information continues to require classification for the sake of national security?
What can be done to avoid excessive classification and to declassify information as quickly as possible?


The Indelible Memories Of a Ghetto in Wartime
JOINING in the memorials of the Holocaust, Theater Three in Port Jefferson is presenting through Wednesday "The Puppetmaster of Lodz," a deeply moving play by Gilles Segal.
In the theater, an attempt to understand an event as enormous as the murder of more than six million people can best be made through the experience of one character.


George McCorkle, 71, Publisher and Biologist
George M. McCorkle, a retired cryptographer, book publisher and biologist, died on Thursday at Yale-New Haven Hospital in Connecticut.
He was 71.
Dr.
McCorkle, who lived in Hamden, Conn., died of complications following a stroke, his son, James, said.


LONG ISLAND JOURNAL
Luminary Gridlock
IT was a red dot that separated the "high profiles" from the no-so-high in East Hampton last weekend.
And Peggy Siegal was the keeper of the dots.
As Hamptonites lined up by the side door of the East Hampton Cinema, Ms.
Siegal, a well-known publicity agent from Manhattan and Wainscott, stood before them, 90 red-dot invitations clutched to her oh-so-trim body.


A Fusion Of Grieg And Ibsen
A CASUALTY of last year's Hartford Symphony strike was the performance of a new edition of "Peer Gynt"; a second chance to hear the fusion of Ibsen's drama and Grieg's music, as conceived by Michael Lankester, music director of the Hartford Symphony, and the actor Christopher Plummer.
The premiere will close out the Symphony's subscription season at the Bushnell, on Wednesday and Thursday at 8 P.M.
"Ibsen wrote 'Peer Gynt' as a dramatic poem," Mr.
Lankester said, "a play to be read, not staged, and Grieg wrote music to make the audience understand the poet's intentions, to color, punctuate and heighten Ibsen's play." Mr.
Plummer described most concert versions as unbalanced: "Grieg's score allowed a generous hearing," he said, "while the Ibsen text is sparsely and sketchily represented. So off we went, Michael and I, daring to attack the music of Grieg and the massive text of Ibsen, somewhat presumptuously cutting it down to a palatable length, but still keeping the key themes intact."


IN THESE GIRLS, HOPE IS A MUSCLE
Teams like the Amherst Hurricanes are showing the way for future female athletes.
It is up to those of us of the lost generation of "wannabes" to make sure that women's teams are supported with quality coaching and are well sponsored.
JEAN LINVILLE Valley Cottage, N.Y.


Where a 'Good Read' Is a 'Good Listen'
HEARD any good books lately?
Listening instead of reading is a growing practice.
Joggers and commuters are plugging in to Tom Clancy and Anne Rice, as well as light FM.
A best seller is a best seller, and New York City has its first store devoted solely to the spoken word on audio tape.
Heller &amp; Jed Audiobooks, in Manhattan's financial district, sells more than 2,500 titles.
About half the stock is fiction, which is also available for rental ($2.99 for three days for most abridged fiction; there's a $10 membership fee).


'A Sense of Touch, a Tenderness'
The large, slightly almond-shaped eyes of Dorothy Norman, so arresting in Alfred Stieglitz's portraits of her, are startlingly unchanged: They stare at a visitor with an open, friendly luminosity, as if she expects you to be marvelous and so you will.
Even though her beautifully cropped hair is silver and her speech (but not her thinking) slowed somewhat by a stroke, the face is a smooth, Modigliani oval, the jaw clean and strong.
Age and illness seem to have taken her back in time: at 88 she looks more like the young woman of Stieglitz's photographs than she did at 70, when Arnold Newman took her picture.
Stieglitz photographed Mrs.
Norman repeatedly in the two decades before his death in 1946.
They had met in 1926, in his small but influential domain, the Intimate Gallery on Park Avenue, where she was entranced by a John Marin exhibition.
Although both were married and neither was interested in divorce, they gradually fell in love.


The Inquisition in Mississippi
TUMULT AND SILENCE AT SECOND CREEK
An Inquiry Into a Civil War Slave Conspiracy.
By Winthrop D. Jordan.
Illustrated. 391 pp.
Baton Rouge: Louisiana State University Press. $24.95.


Data Update
*4*MEDIAN RESALE HOUSE PRICES
Mar. 93
Feb. 93
Mar. 92
Nation
$ 106,000
103,600
$ 104,300
Northeast
140,800
136,900
145,000
Midwest
85,200
83,800
81,100
South
92,200
90,100
92,200
West
144,100
141,100
144,000
*4*Source: National Association of Realtors
*4*MORTGAGE INTEREST RATES (Averages)
Last Week
Previous Week
Year Ago
New York
Conventional (30-yr)
7.65
7.55
9.03
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
4.73
4.76
6.14
New Jersey
Conventional (30-yr)
7.54
7.43
8.89
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
4.61
4.58
5.88
Connecticut
Conventional (30-yr)
7.56
7.45
8.93
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
4.42
4.46
5.94
Co-ops (N.Y.)
Conventional (30-yr)
7.78
7.61
9.15
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
5.39
5.37
6.51
*4*Indexes for Adjustable-Rate Mortgages*
1-yr. Treasury security
3.25
3.18
4.34
National Mortgage Contract Rate
7.17
7.28
8.14
*Rates on most adjustable mortgages are set 1 to 3 percentage points above these indexes.  (Source: HSH Associates)


Sky Beauty Runs to Daylight in The Acorn
Sky Beauty made a smashing return to New York racing yesterday when she won the Acorn Stakes at Belmont Park by more than five lengths over Educated Risk and went up by one in the Triple Tiara series for 3-year-old fillies.
Eliza wasn't there, and Dispute wasn't there.
But they will be there one day soon, challenging Sky Beauty for the championship of their class.
Meanwhile, five other fillies of some distinction were there, but none came close to Sky Beauty as she finished first for the fifth time in six starts.


Valvano No Saint
To the Sports Editor:
While Jim Valvano might have been a funny guy and an inspirational leader, he and coaches of his ilk were -- to say the least -- anything but people to be admired.
Sometimes death causes the living to glorify the deceased and, more important, to ignore their faults.
When he coached, Jim Valvano was exactly what the National Collegiate Athletic Association was trying to get rid of.
His goal was to win, no matter what rules were broken.


Downtown's Empty Feeling
It was once a proud building, as the gilded mosaic over one entrance testifies: An angel grasping a lightning bolt, symbol of technology's mastery over that era, adorns 67 Broad Street, built to house ITT's headquarters in 1928.
But now, the 33-story lower Manhattan building is three-fourths empty, the mosaic entrance is unused, and the building was foreclosed upon in January.
Across the way, at 80 Broad Street, a whimsical quartet of metal seahorses hovers over the entrance of the stately 36-story building, which is 51 percent vacant.


Demonic Choreographers, Angelic Ballerinas
Choreographers can seem like meanies.
They give ballerinas such daunting things to do.
But great choreographers are really softies.
Even as they tax ballerinas, they bestow riches on them.
Take, for instance, the challenges of such classics as "The Sleeping Beauty," "Swan Lake" and "Giselle."
All three ballets are grueling to perform.
Nonetheless, ballerinas and audiences adore them.
"The Sleeping Beauty" is in the spring repertory of both American Ballet Theater and the New York City Ballet.
Ballet Theater is also doing "Swan Lake," which the San Francisco Ballet offered earlier this year at the New York State Theater.
And the Dance Theater of Harlem's "Giselle" delighted audiences at the State Theater this winter.


Anne P. Bowers, Seth C. Ward
Anne Pendleton Bowers, a daughter of Philippa S. Bowers of Charlottesville, Va., and the late Alexander S. Bowers, was married yesterday to Seth Crawford Ward, a son of Mrs.
Hugh C. Ward Jr. of Hamilton, Mass., and the late Mr.
Ward.
The Rev.
Dr.
William F. Foley performed the ceremony at St.
Matthew's Episcopal Church in Bedford, N.Y.
Mrs.
Ward, 32, is the marketing manager for DBI Architects, an architecture and interior-design firm in Washington.
She graduated from the University of Virginia.
Her father was president and founder of the Stewart Capital Corporation, a venture-capital concern in New York.
He also owned and operated Hickory Ridge Farm, a horse farm in Charlottesville.


Editors' Notes
A review of "The Stories and Recollections of Umberto Saba" on page 14 of The Times Book Review today was written by Irving Howe.


A Time to Plant
Hardly anybody I know got peas into the ground -- it was too wet.
Now it's too late, so wait until next year.
Get those potatoes in, and plant more lettuce, arugula and carrots.
Plant a whole field of basil if you have the space, and don't skimp on the parsley and dill.
Plant zinnia, cosmos, marigold and sunflower seeds right in the garden.
Or plant the seedlings of these hardy flowers now.
Transplant evergreens and shrubs, and continue to plant potted roses and perennials.


A Lesson In Language
To the Editor:
Re the Out There column "History on the Head" (April 25), "kaffiyeh" does not come from the word "Kufa," which is a city in Iraq, but rather kaffiyeh in Arabic means "handkerchief," and that is what it is -- just a large handkerchief that one covers his head with.
It did not start only 1,000 years ago.
For over 2,000 years, the Jews used it in Baghdad and in Yemen, and they still use it in Yemen.
HESKEL M. HADDAD, M.D.
President, World Organization for Jews From Arab Countries Inc.


Katherine Kelly, Adam L. Greene
Dr.
Katherine Julia Violante Kelly, a postdoctoral fellow in nephrology at Massachusetts General Hospital and the Harvard Medical School in Boston, was married yesterday to Dr.
Adam L. Greene, a postdoctoral fellow in cardiology at Beth Israel Hospital in Boston and the Harvard Medical School.
The Rev.
Charles Gusmer, a Roman Catholic priest, officiated at St.
Catherine of Siena Church in Cedar Grove, N.J.
Rabbi Howard Schwartz took part in the ceremony.
Dr.
Kelly, who is keeping her name, graduated from Swarthmore College, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa, and received an M.D. degree from Columbia University.
She is a daughter of John D. Kelly of Cedar Grove and the late Ann C. Kelly.
Her father, now retired, was a laboratory director at Sinclair, Valentine &amp; Company, which makes printing ink in Carlstadt, N.J.


Aiming for New Heights, but Trying to Elude the Tree Branches


Conflict in the Balkans; U.S. AND ITS ALLIES STILL SEEM DIVIDED ON BOSNIA ACTION
A day after President Clinton said he expected to produce "a common approach" with Europe soon on stronger action in Bosnia, Washington and its allies were increasingly at odds today over precisely what the next steps should be.
The Clinton Administration, officials said, would like to move ahead quickly with some form of military action that could pressure the Bosnian Serbs to accept the peace settlement.
But Secretary of State Warren Christopher reported to President Clinton today that the Europeans -- particularly Russia -- wanted to wait and see if a Bosnian Serb referendum scheduled for May 15 and 16 resulted in a vote in favor of the settlement.
This might spare the Europeans -- and the United States -- from having to take any military action.


Far Eastern Grilling, Part II: Spicy Seasonings for Seafood
HAMBURGERS and hot dogs were -- and still are -- the most popular items for the outdoor grill.
But the old-style barbecue has undergone many changes since the fashion for it first swept the nation in the 1940's.
The current status symbols are gas grills that cost half as much as a car, flavored wood chips, exotic marinades and fancy salsas.
And as Americans look for food that is low in fat and calories, without preservatives, sugar or rich creamy sauces, so the search for new flavors and ingredients continues.
As noted last week, Oriental seasonings -- soy sauce, sesame oil, fresh coriander -- do a great job of enhancing the taste of grilled foods, especially seafood.
I like to buy shrimp in Chinatown, where they are sold with their heads on, and soak them for a couple of hours in heavily salted ice water, which leaches out impurities.
They are then patted dry and tossed in a mixture of peanut oil and black and red peppers with garlic.
Cooking them in their shells concentrates their flavor -- and the shells can also be eaten, if you like.


Out of the Closet, Into the Limelight
To the Editor:
As a homosexual performer, writer and producer, I am at once encouraged and dismayed by the sudden proliferation of mainstream plays and films with homosexual themes, such as the Pulitzer Prize-winning stage epic "Angels in America"  [ "Finding a Devil Within to Portray Roy Cohn," April 18 ]  and the big-budget film "Philadelphia." I am heartened that such artistic endeavors are taking place but distressed that they are seemingly being done without gay actors in their leading roles.


Bosnia's Serbs Smirk, and Keep Shooting
WITH the American decision to press the Serbs to make peace in Bosnia, and the defiant rejection of that initiative by the renegade Bosnian Serb parliament last week, all sides are now staring down an unmarked road in the Balkans that they fear may be the pathway to hell.
The decision by the Serb legislators, meeting at the Heavenly Valley Hotel in the ski resort of Pale, was followed by reports that the Serbs had moved on Zepa, one of only two remaining Muslim enclaves in eastern Bosnia.
This seemed to mock the intense diplomatic cajoling by the world's most powerful nations, testing their will and making it harder than ever to evade a somber choice: military intervention to force the Bosnian Serbs to end their aggression.


The '95 Cup: Koch May Well Skip It
Time is running out on Bill Koch's self-imposed deadline for resolving a major predicament: whether to campaign for the America's Cup defense of 1995, or to be content with the glory of his 1992 cup victory.
"I'm leaning 60, 70, 80 percent toward not doing it again," Koch said last week in a telephone interview from his home in West Palm Beach, Fla.
"But that's not to say I won't wake up one morning and say, 'To heck with it all, I'm going to do it.' "


Funeral Held for Six Killed in East Harlem


At SUNY Purchase, G.&amp;S. From A to Z
LONG before there was Samuel Beckett and the Theater of the Absurd, there were W. S. Gilbert and Arthur Sullivan and their theater of witty absurdity.
It has been 122 years since their first opera, "Thespis," opened and quickly closed in London -- rarely to be heard of again -- but time seems only to burnish the luster of the other 13 works they created together between 1871 and 1896.


Conflict in the Balkans; MUSLIMS AND SERBS BACK BOSNIA TRUCE
Commanders of Muslim and Serbian forces in Bosnia and Herzegovina signed a cease-fire accord on Saturday that provides for peacekeepers to move into the besieged Muslim enclave of Zepa, the senior United Nations officer in the country said.
Although the agreement was not signed by any representative of the Croats, the third warring faction in Bosnia, the United Nations officer, Lieut.
Gen.
Philippe Morillon, said the cease-fire applied to all of Bosnia.


What's So Funny About Bananas?
The word
banana
makes people smile; why?
Maybe it's the spelling.
Hubert Horatio Humphrey, who knew he had a tendency to speechify at great length, liked to say, "I'm like the little boy who knew how to spell
banana
, but never knew when to stop."


Nina Mendelson, Riyaz A. Kanji
Nina A. Mendelson and Riyaz A. Kanji, both lawyers, were married yesterday.
Judge Betty B. Fletcher of the United States Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit in Seattle and Judge John M. Walker of the United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit in New York jointly officiated at the Brooklyn Botanic Garden.
Ms.
Mendelson, who is keeping her name, is an associate at Heller, Erhman, White &amp; McAuliffe, a law firm in Seattle.
She and her husband graduated from Harvard University and received law degrees from Yale University.
She is a daughter of Jon E. Mendelson of Park Forest, Ill., and Dr.
Ellen B. Mendelson of Pittsburgh.
The bride is a stepdaughter of Judy D. Mendelson.


COMMERCIAL PROPERTY: The World Trade Center; A Kinder, Gentler Trade Center
SUPERFICIALLY, it's business as usual at the World Trade Center.
People throng the concourse and the plaza, going to shops and subways and, of course, to and from work.
Free PATH rides last week from the center increased traffic even more, and center-subsidized sales at stores and restaurants in the complex this coming week will probably bring even more people in.


Tour Marks Rescue of Jews
On Oct. 1, 1943 -- Rosh ha-Shanah, the start of the Jewish New Year -- Nazis raided synagogues and homes in Denmark, intent on rounding up the country's 7,800 Jews and sending them to concentration camps.
But they did not find them.
The Jews had been hidden by Danes in homes, farms and churches, then ferried across the Oresund Strait to safety in neutral Sweden.
For the 50th anniversary of the rescue, Friends of Scandinavia Tours is offering two-week tours this summer retracing the rescue routes and offering participants a chance to meet people who helped hide and transport the Jews, and some of the rescued Jews who now live in Stockholm, Oslo and Helsinki.


Going Long: Bond Buyers Are Sanguine
There is no better indication of the confidence of a society in its industrial and financial system than its willingness to buy truly long-term bonds.
It takes a lot of trust to lend money for 30 years or more on fixed terms.
You have to believe the issuer will be around, and capable of repaying, for all that time, and you have to believe that the currency in question will retain its value.
By that standard, American confidence is growing, but it is not even close to the level it once reached.
Both Texaco and Boeing have sold 50-year bonds this year, hitting a maturity that had not been seen for decades.
The companies are betting that the current level of long-term interest rates is a bargain for issuers; buyers are hoping the reverse is true.
Texaco hedged its bet by reserving the right to buy back the bonds in 20 years, but there is no such provision in the Boeing issue.


Carter, at Rice, Urges Help for the Less Fortunate in the World
Former President Jimmy Carter urged more than 1,000 graduates at Rice University in Houston yesterday to use their educational opportunities and their commitment to freedom to help less fortunate people around the world.
Mr.
Carter devoted most of his commencement address to global conflicts.
So-called ethnic cleansing, he said, is not unique to Bosnia, with racial and religious divisions now fueling more wars than at any other time in history.
"Racial, religious, ethnic differences still cause tremendous suffering, deliberately perpetrated by one human being upon another," he said.


Islanders Ride Wave At Coliseum
The Islanders have a chance, just a do-they-dare-believe-it chance to upset the Pittsburgh Penguins, the two-time champions, and oust them from the Stanley Cup playoffs.
Their odds got better tonight when they beat the Penguins, 6-5, in a wild one amid the fury and the din of Nassau Coliseum.
The victory evened the four-of-seven Patrick Division final series at two games each.
Among the Islander heroes was Derek King, who broke out of his post-season slump with two goals, including the winner.
Another was Tom Fitzgerald, who scored two shorthanded goals on the same Pittsburgh power play.
A third was Ray Ferraro, who scored his 11th goal in 10 post-season games, most in the league.
A fourth was Vladimir Malakhov, the rookie defenseman from Russia, who scored the other goal and added one assist and played a dynamic game at both ends of the ice.


Mimi H. Kim, Stewart M. Kim
Mimi Haesoo Kim, a vice president in the fixed-income division at Lehman Brothers in New York, was married yesterday to Stewart Michael Kim, an investment banker in the investment banking group of Merrill Lynch &amp; Company in New York.
The Rev.
Ann Tottenham, an Episcopal minister, performed the ceremony at Tappan Hill in Tarrytown, N.Y.
Mrs.
Kim, 28, graduated from Barnard College and received a master's degree in international finance from Columbia University.
She is the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Hunt D. Kim of Norwood, N.J.
Her father is the president of Pioneer Sports Inc., a sportswear distributor based in New York.


Jennifer O'Brien, B. H. Livingstone
Jennifer Claire O'Brien, a retail manager, was married yesterday to Brandegee Hugh Livingstone, a banking consultant.
The Rev.
Sam Matarazzo performed the ceremony at St.
Vincent Ferrer Roman Catholic Church in New York.
Mrs.
Livingstone, 30, works for Bath and Body Works in New York.
She graduated from Skidmore College, as did her husband.
She is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John F. O'Brien of Short Hills, N.J.
Her father is a vice president of Kidder Peabody &amp; Company in New York.
Her mother, Arline O'Brien, is an interior designer in Short Hills.


Business is Blooming
Nothing smells sweeter than Mother's Day if you grow, buy or sell flowers for a living.
Not even Valentine's Day comes close.
Ever since Anna Jarvis organized the first Mother's Day memorial service on May 10, 1908, at the Andrews Methodist Church in Grafton, W.Va., and gave each attendee a carnation, her late mother's favorite bloom, the event has been a blessing for the flower industry.
President Wilson proclaimed Mother's Day a national sentiment in 1914, and it soon found itself on calendars in other lands, complete with the floral accent.
Each year the flower powers in the United States, Germany, Belgium and the Netherlands try to devise new ways to put bouquets in the hands of every mother's son and daughter on the second Sunday in May.
Crucial to the delivery of these bright offerings is a group of Dutch men (and a few women) who gather five days a week in a building 10 miles outside of Amsterdam.
The Verenigde Bloemenveilingen Aalsmeer, a cooperative of about 5,000 growers, is the Wall Street of the flower business, the largest auction of its kind in the world.
From as far away as Zimbabwe, Colombia, Israel and Thailand, and throughout Europe, products are shipped to Aalsmeer for assessment by its 2,500 buyers and delivery around the globe by some 400 export companies.
Last year, more than 800 kinds of cut flowers and plants, bringing more than $1.8 billion, passed through its doors.


Ford's SHO, an Ocelot in Bull's Clothing
ONE of the bad things about driving a passel of cars is that they all run together in the mind.
Ask anyone who travels a lot and rents a different car at each airport.
They'll say they liked the last car, really liked it.
They'll say it was a Pontiac Grand Am.
Or, wait, maybe a Toyota?
It may be a failure of concentration or just ennui.
But what it amounts to is multihued confusion, even when you're paying attention, and I can guarantee my own occasional fuddle.


DOCUMENT
"Dear Susan:
"Thank you so much for your generosity with my article. It's been a pleasure doing business with you.
"By the way, however thrilled my hairdresser, Paul LeBlanc, was, my lovely makeup artist of three pictures, Tricia Sawyer, and my personal trainer, Lisa Cloud, were equally disappointed not to be mentioned by name.


Andrea L. Zales, Keith D. Hughes
Mr. and Mrs.
William Zales of Greenwich, Conn., have announced the engagement of their daughter Andrea Lee Zales to Keith Douglas Hughes, a son of Ellen Hughes of Pleasantville, N.Y., and Anthony Hughes of New York.
A July wedding is planned.
Miss Zales, 25, is an account executive at Ketchum Public Relations in New York, where her fiance, 31, is a vice president.
She graduated from Denison University.
Her father is the vice president of Kaleidoscope International Ltd., a maker of decorative home furnishings in New York.


D. E. Brightman, Gino A. Farone
Mr. and Mrs.
Henry S. Brightman of Short Hills, N.J., have announced the engagement of their daughter Deborah Elizabeth Brightman to Dr.
Gino A. Farone, a son of the late Dominick and Josephine Farone.
A July wedding is planned.
Ms.
Brightman is the manager of client development and public relations at the law firm of Debevoise &amp; Plimpton in New York.
She graduated magna cum laude from Boston University.
Her father is president of Newton Industries, a pharmaceutical manufacturer in Newton, N.J.
Her mother, Phyllis Brightman, is a sales associate with Degnan Boyle Real Estate in Millburn, N.J.


Dana Baker, David Williams
Wilder D. Baker of New York and Dorothy W. Baker of Darien, Conn., have announced September wedding plans for their daughter Dana Elizabeth Baker and David Andrew Williams, the son of Neville and Sally Williams of St.
Michaels, Md.


South African Whites Demand Their Own Bantustan


Should Masako Owada Forgo Career to Marry Crown Prince of Japan?
SUSAN BROWNMILLER, feminist and author of "Femininity" (Ballantine, 1984): Maybe she'll have a change of heart.
How many ceremonies at Kyoto can you go through?
Who knows what she will think in a couple of years?
We all know how unhappy Di has become.
There's a tradition, although Queen Sirikit developed a nice life for herself, by doing a lot of charity work.
IVANA M. TRUMP, businesswoman, fashion designer and author: I would not do it.
No, I would not do it.
You give up everything.
She is a very educated lady, she had higher goals, she went to Europe.
There's nothing wrong with marrying a man and taking care of a husband.


Bookshelf
Additional titles of interest:
JULIUS.
By Angela Johnson.
Illustrated by Dav Pilkey.
Orchard. $14.95. (Ages 4 to 8) Granddaddy brought Maya an Alaskan pig named Julius as a gift.
They become inseparable friends.
The ebullient illustrations -- combining watercolor paintings and patchwork -- show them at home, shopping, hanging out and just being high-spirited.


The Man Who Reinvented the Who's 'Tommy'
Backstage at the St.
James Theater, the director Des McAnuff was summoned to the phone just after the audience had finally stopped cheering for "Tommy" and gone home.
"That was sort of the love call," he explained a few moments later, referring to his conversation with Pete Townshend, on whose celebrated rock opera the show is based.
Twenty-four hours earlier, Mr.
Townshend had been at the St.
James on a triumphant opening night, after which "Tommy" set a day-after-opening record of nearly $500,000 for ticket sales.
Now, back in London, he was maintaining enough of a spiritual presence in New York to time his good wishes precisely to the final curtain.
No wonder.
When he wrote "the crowd went crazy as Tommy hit the stage" 24 years ago (in the lyrics to "Sally Simpson"), Mr.
Townshend nicely anticipated the effect his work would one day have on Broadway audiences.
But it took Mr.
McAnuff, the artistic director of the La Jolla Playhouse in California and the Tony-winning director of "Big River," to collaborate with the Who's mastermind in finding the theatrical heart of "Tommy." Together, they have dusted off this rock-and-roll chestnut and coaxed forth a daring Broadway musical.


Corrections
A foreign exchange listing in the Travel Watch column on April 25 misstated the rate for the British pound on April 19.
One dollar was worth 63 pence.


Transference And Coaches
To the Sports Editor:
Coaches are beginning to discover what psychotherapists have understood for years ("When Coaches Cross the Line," The Times, May 2).
Intimate situations wherein one adult cares for or teaches another individual evoke strong emotions that psychiatrists call "transference." These emotions often include loving and sexual feelings.
Emotions specific to the professional situation can often be misunderstood as personal by either party or both.


Warmth, and Relief, Greet Bushes' Return to Maine
A greeting in pink chalk appeared today on the daily menu board next to the "Help Wanted" sign at the Old Salt's Pantry on Dock Square, "Welcome Home, Mr. and Mrs. Bush."
A couple of blocks away 900 townspeople assembled on the Village Green to cheer the return of this seaside community's most famous summer residents.


Union Chief Backs Plan For Teachers
Conceding that New York City teachers must greatly lower their salary expectations, the president of the teachers' union yesterday urged her members to accept a state panel's recommendations for a wage increase that is only slightly above what other city workers have received.
City officials said the action by Sandra Feldman, the union president, was a "positive step" toward settling the 20-month dispute between the city and its 85,000 teachers, a nettlesome standoff that Mayor David N. Dinkins badly wants to resolve before the mayoral campaign begins in earnest.


PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: May 9, 1993
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Fiction
1
12
THE PELICAN BRIEF, by John Grisham. (Island/Dell, $6.99.) A woman law student probes the murder of two Supreme Court justices.
2
3
"I" IS FOR INNOCENT, by Sue Grafton. (Fawcett, $5.99.) Kinsey Millhone investigates a man once charged with murdering his rich wife.
3
67
THE FIRM, by John Grisham. (Island/Dell, $5.99.) A young lawyer learns that his firm is engaged in secret, possibly illegal activities.
4
42
JURASSIC PARK, by Michael Crichton. (Ballantine, $5.99.) A biotechnician clones dinosaurs for use in a theme park.
5
2
JEWELS, by Danielle Steel. (Dell, $6.99.) The life of a woman who becomes rich by dealing in precious stones.
6
56
A TIME TO KILL, by John Grisham. (Island/Dell, $5.99.) Racial tensions surface during the trial of a man charged with murder in rural Mississippi.
7
2
WAITING TO EXHALE, by Terry McMillan. (Pocket, $5.99.) The friendships and romances of four black women in Phoenix.
8
3
THE WITCHING HOUR, by Anne Rice. (Ballantine, $6.99.) A woman descended from witches brings a drowned man back to life.
9
1
SHADOWFIRES, by Dean Koontz. (Berkley, $6.99.) A woman is stalked by her supposedly deceased husband.
10 *
2
SWEET LIAR, by Jude Deveraux. (Pocket, $5.99.) In New York, a Kentucky woman copes with a mystery dating back to the Roaring Twenties.
11
3
DANGEROUS, by Amanda Quick. (Bantam, $5.99.) Romance and danger in the ballrooms and country houses of Regency England.
12
3
THE ASSASSIN, by W. E. B. Griffin. (Jove, $5.99.) The Philadelphia police contend with a plot to kill the visiting Vice President.
13
2
FRENCH SILK, by Sandra Brown. (Warner, $5.99.) The ordeal of a New Orleans woman suspected of killing a television evangelist.
14
9
ON THE PULSE OF MORNING, by Maya Angelou. (Random House, $5.) The poem read at President Clinton's inauguration.
15 *
20
RISING SUN, by Michael Crichton. (Ballantine, $5.99.) A woman's death leads to an investigation involving the American-Japanese rivalry.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
NonFiction
1
2
THE SILENT PASSAGE, by Gail Sheehy. (Pocket, $5.50.) The psychological and social significance of menopause for today's women.
2
496
THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $10.95.) Inspiration. (LP)
3
82
A YEAR IN PROVENCE, by Peter Mayle. (Vintage, $10.) A sojourn in the south of France.
4
12
I KNOW WHY THE CAGED BIRD SINGS, by Maya Angelou. (Bantam, $4.99.) The poet's account of her childhood and adolescence.
5
103
YOU JUST DON'T UNDERSTAND, by Deborah Tannen. (Ballantine, $10.) The different languages men and women speak.
6
1
NOT FOR SALE AT ANY PRICE, by Ross Perot. (Hyperion, $5.95.) The Texas billionaire discusses the economic and political problems Americans face today.
7
17
REVOLUTION FROM WITHIN, by Gloria Steinem. (Little, Brown, $11.95.) The reflections of a leading feminist on the struggle to achieve self-esteem.
8 *
28
BACKLASH, by Susan Faludi. (Anchor/ Doubleday, $12.50.) A journalist contends that the media and political groups are staging a war against women's rights.
9 *
12
WOMEN ON TOP, by Nancy Friday. (Pocket, $5.99.) The changes in social life during the past two decades that have affected the sexual fantasies of women.
10
11
ROGUE WARRIOR, by Richard Marcinko with John Weisman. (Pocket, $5.99.) The memoirs of the retired commander of a counterterrorist unit.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Advice, How-To and Miscellaneous
1
5
LIFE'S LITTLE INSTRUCTION BOOK: Volume Two, by H. Jackson Brown Jr. (Rutledge Hill, $5.95.) More tips for achieving a self-fulfilling life.
2
133
THE T-FACTOR FAT GRAM COUNTER, by Jamie Pope-Cordle and Martin Katahn. (Norton, $2.99.) How to reduce fat in one's diet.
3
116
THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE, by Stephen R. Covey. (Fireside/S&amp;S, $9.95.) Principles for success.
4
91
LIFE'S LITTLE INSTRUCTION BOOK, by H. Jackson Brown Jr. (Rutledge Hill, $5.95.) Some 500 tips for achieving a self-fulfilling life.
5
13
WHAT TO EXPECT WHEN YOU'RE EXPECTING, by Arlene Eisenberg, Heidi E. Murkoff and Sandee E. Hathaway. (Workman, $10.95.) Counsel for parents-to-be.
6 *
8
RAND MCNALLY ROAD ATLAS. (Rand McNally, $7.95.) The 1993 edition.
These listings are based on computer-processed sales figures from 3,000 bookstores and from representative wholesalers with more than 38,000 other retail outlets, including variety stores and supermarkets.
The figures are statistically adjusted to represent sales in all such outlets across the United States. *An asterisk before a book's title indicates that its sales, weighted to reflect the book-selling industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
LP indicates that a book is available in large print.


COLONIALISM'S BACK
What?
"Colonialism's Back -- And Not a Moment Too Soon" (by Paul Johnson, April 18)?
O.K., I get it.
If you can't run your own affairs and get into a mess, then the world can take you over, like a demented relative or something.
You lose all sovereignty for, say, "50 years, or 100," until you can be declared competent by "civilized" standards.


IN THESE GIRLS, HOPE IS A MUSCLE
Madeleine H. Blais's article "In These Girls, Hope Is a Muscle" (April 18), about the Amherst, Mass., Hurricanes, is a great American story.
I got goose bumps.
I cried; I laughed; I identified.
I was there.
Finally, the true female personality is revealed.
Finally, the lives of courageous, scrappy, stouthearted, fierce, intelligent young women are celebrated.


A la Carte; For Sea Cliff, a Tiny but Exceptional Newcomer
THERE are not enough seats in Ken's Place, a tiny Sea Cliff storefront restaurant, to serve all the people who will want to eat there once the word gets out about this exceptional, inexpensive spot.
Ken's Place, at 64 Roslyn Avenue (674-3752), is the creation of Ken Lammer, a chef from Manhattan, who has worked with masters like David Bouley and David Burke at the River Cafe, as well as Contrapunto, Yellowfingers and the former Zanghis on Long Island.
He learned his lessons well.


J.F.K. Assassination Records Still Secret
To the Editor:
On April 26, President Clinton issued a directive that purportedly would result in the declassification of millions of secret Government documents.
His directive rings hollow in light of his failure to implement legislation that would have a similar impact in connection with the assassination of President John F. Kennedy.


Animals That Ignore the 'Keep Out' Signs
IT was Jim Henson's popular puppet, Kermit the Frog, who sang "It's Not Easy Being Green."
Well, it's not easy being a black squirrel either, especially when the rest of the squirrel family is gray.
The squirrels in the neighborhood are the usual furry gray, except for one.
And for want of a more dynamic name, the neighbors have dubbed him Blackie.


Sabatini To Play Martinez In Final
Gabriela Sabatini combined patience and power here today to defeat top-seeded Arantxa Sanchez Vicario, 6-1, 6-3, in the semifinals of the Italian Open.
The Sabatini victory ended Sanchez Vicario's winning streak at 18 matches, and gave the Argentine star a chance to win her third consecutive Rome title.
On Sunday, Sabatini will play sixth-seeded Conchita Martinez of Spain, who beat fourth-seeded Mary Joe Fernandez, 7-5, 6-4.


Battle of the Action Heroes
Here they come: men with big guns, rippling torsos, a way with bad dialogue.
Arnold, Sly, Clint -- they're on a first-name basis with our basest instincts.
This summer, watch them duke it out at the box office with a Bruce Lee biopic!
A silly action-hero spoof!
A Steven Spielberg extravaganza about dinosaurs!


Ask the Magpie About 'Blood Brothers'
Willy Russell's "Blood Brothers" is a musical about the deleterious effects of the British class system on a pair of twins separated at birth.
From the very beginning you know it's going to end badly.
The prologue tells you so.
But even if it didn't, you would get the idea in short order.
There are omens everywhere.
Mr.
Russell rarely lets a moment go by without foreshadowing his foregone conclusion.
The portents in "Macbeth" pale by comparison.


MAY 2-8: Turmoil in Sri Lanka; Fear for the Future Follows an Assassination
With the cremation last week of the body of Sri Lanka's assassinated President, Ranasignhe Premadasa, this island looked to the future with anxiety.
Despite Mr.
Premadasa's efforts to quarantine the 10-year-old civil war being waged in the north and the east by a guerrilla army of the Tamil minority, he himself became the victim of their terror in a suicide bombing last weekend.
There had been broad unhappiness with aspects of his rule.


Political Sculpture Alfresco In Upstate New York
The Storm King Art Center in Mountainville, N.Y., will show new work by the sculptor Siah Armajani as part of its annual sculpture exhibition, which opens May 15 and runs through Oct. 31.
Situated 55 miles north of New York City, the center features more than 100 postwar-era outdoor sculptures on 400 acres of fields.
The sculptors represented include David Smith, Henry Moore, Alexander Calder and Isamu Noguchi.
There is also an indoor collection.


Corrections
A picture caption with the theater listings on page 38 of the Arts and Leisure section today, about the play "Shaviana," includes erroneous identifications, supplied by the play's producers, in some copies.
The performers pictured are Kevin Dwyer and Sheri Delaine.


Irene E. Stuart, Jeffrey E. Dinger
Irene Elise Stuart, a model and actress in New York, was married yesterday to Jeffrey Edward Dinger, a vice president at Morgan Stanley &amp; Company in New York.
Msgr.
John F. Corr, a Roman Catholic priest, performed the ceremony at the Church of Christ the King in New Vernon, N.J.
Mrs.
Dinger graduated from Dartmouth College.
She is the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Eugene A. Suchta of Wilmington, Del.
Her father was an administrator for Amtrak there.
The bride changed her last name for professional reasons.


Low-Tech Medicine
To the Editor:
Fazlur Rahman, in "Let's Hear It for Low-Tech Medicine" (Viewpoints, April 18), has rounded up many of the usual suspects -- high-tech procedures, defensive medicine, specialists.
But some of those suspects may have genuine alibis.


To the Met: Well Done. Do More.
What should we expect from the Metropolitan Opera?
And what have we received of late?
The season ended last weekend with the twilight of Wagner's gods; some people talk about the Met as though it deserved a similar send-off.
For all the triumph of the Wagner "Ring" performances, overall attendance dropped this season (to 89 percent of capacity, from 92 percent last season), and there was many a mundane evening (including the first performances of Rossini's "Semiramide" and Verdi's "Ballo in Maschera").
It would be easy to compile a damning list of callow tenors, worn sopranos, uneven casts, dull conductors, misjudged theatrics, neglected opportunities.
But the Met's track record this season was actually one that any company in the world might envy.
It included the revival of a 1964 production of Verdi's "Falstaff" in a sterling performance that almost made it seem as if Paul Plishka, Marilyn Horne and Mirella Freni were part of a polished repertory company -- alert to one another and to the score.
Otto Schenk's new production of Wagner's "Meistersinger" was suffused with good sense and exceptional ensemble work; its Nuremburg included Hermann Prey, Donald McIntyre and Karita Mattila.
To my ears, "Die Walkure" was the musical standard-bearer for the Met "Ring," and the Met orchestra played it nearly seamlessly.
And all of these Verdi and Wagner performances were conducted with authoritative breadth and supple energy by James Levine.


A Noble Gateway for Gotham
Rebecca West once astutely remarked that America's cathedrals were the great railway terminals like Grand Central and Pennsylvania Station in New York.
But in an act of unthinking desecration, Penn Station was demolished three decades ago to make way for a new sports arena.
Ever since, 300,000 daily commuters and intercity rail passengers have scurried like beetles through the bowels of a makeshift terminal beneath Madison Square Garden that Amtrak describes as "minimally acceptable."
Fortunately, some alert and imaginative train lover gazed across Eighth Avenue and 34th Street at the striking but obsolescent General Post Office, which like the lamented Penn Station was also designed by McKim, Mead and White.
The tracks pass right under the post office, most of whose workers will soon move to a new facility.
Thus the thought occurred: Why not wrest a great urban gateway out of the bureaucratic shuffle?


Kristin Thompson, Christopher Bonacci
Mr. and Mrs.
Richard L. Thompson of McLean, Va., have announced the engagement of their daughter Kristin Anne Thompson to Dr.
Christopher Eugene Bonacci, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Eugene C. Bonacci of Titusville, N.J.
An August wedding is planned.
Miss Thompson, 25, is a national account support specialist at the MCI Telecommunications Corporation, in McLean.
She graduated from Denison University.
Her father is a vice president at the Bristol-Myers Squibb Company, in Washington.
She is a granddaughter of the former United States Representative John H. Terry, Republican of New York.


Germany Pays to Keep Ethnic Germans in Russia
Katerina A. Zarya is one of several thousand ethnic Germans who have returned from Central Asian exile to the land their forebears settled more than 200 years ago, near the Volga River in central Russia.
Though fluent in Russian, Mrs.
Zarya can still speak Schwabisch, a southern German dialect learned from her parents and preserved in her heart like ancestral linen.
And she intends to remake her life here, where her parents were born.


What to Do With the Central Park Reservoir
Last week was a big week for Central Park.
The park's 843 acres just sat there, of course, but New York City officials announced projects that will carry the park into the 21st century.
On Friday Mayor David N. Dinkins announced a $51 million restoration plan that will include replanting the Great Lawn, a 1930's addition to the grand plan of Frederick Law Olmsted.
Everything from bridges to bridle paths on the west side of the park will also get a touching-up.


Missy Humphrey, William R. Little
Margaret McClay Humphrey, the daughter of Henry H. Humphrey Jr. of Short Hills, N.J., and the late Margaret B. Humphrey, was married there yesterday to William Richard Little, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Edward S. Little of Jamesville, N.Y.
The Rev.
Canon Leonard Freeman, an Episcopal minister, officiated at Christ Church.
The Rev.
Joseph McShane, a Jesuit priest, was also in attendance.
Mrs.
Little, who is 25, is known as Missy.
She was until recently the assistant to the president and chairman at Sotheby's in New York.
She graduated from St.
Lawrence University.
Her father is a partner of Spencer Stuart Associates, an executive search firm in New York.
The bride is also the stepdaughter of Ann Humphrey of Short Hills.


15,000 Portraits of His Friends
There is nothing more fascinating to regard than the human face.
Sixty-one extraordinary faces -- most belonging to well-known writers, artists and performers -- are on view in the elegant volume THE PASSIONATE OBSERVER: Photographs by Carl Van Vechten (Hallmark Cards/University of New Mexico, cloth, $40; paper, $25).
Carl Van Vechten (1880-1964) was a connoisseur of avant-garde art, dance and music, an early and knowledgeable enthusiast of black American culture, and a writer whose work included music criticism for The New York Times early in the century, seven novels, and eight volumes of music and literary criticism.
Gregarious and a bit of a dandy (he was known for gold and jade bracelets and outrageous neckties), Van Vechten counted among his friends Gertrude Stein, George Gershwin, Paul Robeson, W. Somerset Maugham, Langston Hughes, Eugene O'Neill and Mabel Dodge.
He was an inveterate collector and cataloguer; at the age of 15 he began taking photographs with a box camera.
Of the more than 15,000 photographs he made over the last 30 years of his life, most are portraits, many of friends or acquaintances.
"His artistic vision was founded on a belief in the primacy of the talented individual and a recognition of the varied backgrounds, temperaments and tastes from which such accomplishment could arise," Keith F. Davis, the fine-arts programs director at Hallmark Cards, writes in a graceful and informative essay.
Van Vechten's photographs combine the informality and immediacy of the snapshot with a highly personal and studied documentation of his subjects.
In portraits of subjects like Gershwin, Maugham, Bill (Bojangles) Robinson, Bessie Smith, Willa Cather, Anna May Wong, Marlon Brando and Thomas Mann, Van Vechten created strange, evocative images that reveal aspects not only of the subject but also of the photographer and of his era.


When It's Spring, It's Time For Nonpartisan Elections
ON Tuesday, voters in Hackensack will elect a five-member City Council, choosing among candidates presented as two opposing slates, each headed by a Council incumbent.
One slate is led by John Zisa, a Republican who has been serving as the city's Mayor, a designation bestowed by the Council on one of its members.
The Deputy Mayor, Sandra Robinson, a Democrat, has broken with Mr.
Zisa and is running for the Council with her own group of candidates.


INSIDE
Among Blacks, New Voices
Embodying a new sense of activism and impatience with the present, a younger generation of blacks is calling for change in New York.
Page 25.
TV Package for Baseball
In a departure from previous deals, NBC, ABC and Major League Baseball have agreed on a revenue-sharing pact.
SportsSunday, Section 8.
U.S.
Sees Iraqi Plot on Bush
The Clinton Administration says it has found evidence that Iraq directed a plot to assassinate former President Bush during his visit to Kuwait three weeks ago.
Page 9.


Adopted Child's Heredity Is Not a Blank Slate
To the Editor:
Life begins with birth, not adoption ("Adoption Is Getting Some Harder Looks," Week in Review, April 25).
There is no closer human relationship than that of a child to its own mother.
It is the defining human relationship in which one person is nurtured to life in the body of another.


Your Home: Reverse Mortgage; Options Widen Appeal
OLDER homeowners who might have dismissed the benefits of a reverse equity mortgage in the past should take a fresh look.
An extended range of options, tailoring the opportunity more directly to the needs of the particular borrower, are transforming these loans into a more appealing deal for a lot more people.
A reverse equity mortgage pays a homeowner a fixed monthly sum, drawn from the capital locked up in the home.
The amount is based on the existing equity in the property, the current value of the home and the age of the borrower.


Business Diary/May 2-7
THE ECONOMY Job Growth Stalls, but New Jersey Screeches Into Reverse


This Blessed Plot, This Glitzy Mall, This England
IT rises like a pastel apparition from the surrounding English countryside, more than 1.35 million square feet of landscaped atriums, shops, fast-food restaurants, movie theaters, fountains and bubble elevators, all of it under a single roof topped by glass domes and surrounded by 9,000 parking places.
The Lakeside Centre is metropolitan London's largest shopping mall, a two-year-old retailing fortress set among the rolling hills of far Essex, 17 miles east of central London.
On its busiest weeks, it will draw as many as 350,000 shoppers and 175,000 automobiles, and cause traffic on the nearby London beltway to back up for miles in both directions.
More than three decades after the push toward the suburbs remade America's cities, and introduced the shopping mall as the permanent alternative to Main Street, the last 10 years have seen British retailers mount their own invasion of the shires and sleepy hamlets beyond London, Birmingham and other cities.


The Mommy Snack
Mother's Day demands a temporary turn of the tables, or at least a partial one.
Get up early, prepare an elaborate breakfast, carry it triumphantly on a tray to Mother, who tries to smile while knowing that every available cooking utensil has been burned or encrusted, every surface in the kitchen left looking like a Jackson Pollock canvas.
Good intentions can be sloppy; good will can wreak havoc with order.
But tidy bouquets and Mother's Day cards bespeak a certain emotional entropy.
Cooking, on the other hand, remains a living, breathing sentiment, a task that summons forth both sorcerer and nurturer.
For the budding cook, breakfast is the simplest meal to negotiate between these two urges.
First, the timing is felicitous: inhibition and self-doubt are slow risers, so the early-morning chef is more likely to favor instinct and invention rather than the dictates of a recipe.
This is the difference between cooking and rendering a formula, between a dish with life and static sustenance.
The cook who is confident of his or her instincts grows into a cook who is seldom foiled by the nuance of ingredients, cookware, weather and heat source, all the things that make recipes, however well intentioned, fallible.


Dress Code Decoded
"Don't mess with our skirt lengths" appeared to be the overwhelming fashion message from the 1,200 women -- executives, corporate wives and society leaders -- who attended the Central Park Conservancy's Frederick Law Olmsted Awards Luncheon last Wednesday at the luxuriant Conservatory Garden, Fifth Avenue and 104th Street.
"This event has replaced the Easter Parade," one guest said.


On the Radio, Weee-ooo
IF you had been strolling on a recent Saturday night on Main Street in East Hampton, L.I. -- past the movie theater, where a screening of Columbia Pictures' "Lost in Yonkers" was in progress; past Bookhampton, where people were browsing with the determination of war generals; past the windmill that adds a small-town charm -- you would have come upon a little white building housing a new radio station owned by big-timers who like to play small-towners.
Behind a storefront window and a pink neon sign that said "WEHM 96.7 FM," a disk jockey was airing a commercial for "Lost in Yonkers" in a spanking-new on-air studio.
Then he played a song by Billy Joel, who lives a few miles away, in Amagansett.


Natalie Wolcott, Hugo Williams
Mr. and Mrs.
Samuel H. Wolcott 3d of Locust Valley, L.I., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Natalie Wolcott, to Hugo Andrew Younger Williams, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
David M. Y. Williams of London.
A July wedding is planned.
Miss Wolcott, 29, is the supervisor of the consignor-account department at Sotheby's in London.
She graduated cum laude from Harvard University.
Her father is a managing director of investment banking at Dean Witter, Discover &amp; Company in New York.


Christian Music's Up-to-Date Sound
A RECORDING artist and songwriter originally from East Islip, Margaret Becker, has made a musical odyssey from the steps of the Metropolitan Opera to the gates of heaven.
Ms.
Becker is part of a growing group of musicians who are gaining recognition for spreading "music with a message."
In the last decade such music, called "contemporary Christian music," has nearly tripled in popularity, according to reported record sales.
From its fringe associations as a 60's counterculture associated with the "Jesus movement," the genre has progressed to a significant industry with recording stars, awards and radio stations.


Potholes on Parquet: Celtics Search for Blueprint of Bright Future
Now Red.
Red Auerbach is in the hospital. What can happen next?


Susan E. Boyle, Dexter Wood Jr.
Mrs.
William A. Boyle Jr. of Summit, N.J., has announced the engagement of her daughter, Susan Ellen Boyle, to Dexter Edward Wood Jr., a son of Dexter and Joanne Wood of Scituate Harbor, Mass.
A June 1994 wedding is planned.
Ms.
Boyle, 27, is the executive vice president of Boyle Hotels in Union, N.J., a company founded by her late father.
She graduated from Cornell University, as did her fiance.


TV Coverage of Unrest in Moscow: a Blurred Reception
THE raw film footage from Leninski Prospekt on the 9 P.M. television news was the first that most Russians knew of the violent clashes that day between Communist demonstrators and police in Moscow.
After a brief introduction, the anchorwoman said grimly: "We think these scenes speak for themselves."
There followed no commentary, just the noises and shouts picked up by the soundman as the camera followed the mini-riot: the fights, the beatings, the trucks on fire, the arrival of the mounted police.
The film clip opened with a charge by young men wielding rods and clubs against the police.
It closed with a chilling image of Leninski Prospekt, one of the broadest and cleanest of Moscow's six-lane avenues, littered with rocks, thick with smoke, scattered with people running about in anger and panic.


Connecticut Q&amp;A: Dr. Ron Miller; Helping Families With Aging Relatives
CARING for an aging relative has become a common experience in family life, and the disabilities associated with aging have profound effects on the family as well as the elderly loved ones they care for.
The Dorothy Adler Geriatric Assessment Center at Yale-New Haven Hospital was started in 1981 as a volunteer program by Nanne Scholhamer, now the center's social worker, and Dr.
Andrea Schaffner, who was then working at the hospital on a fellowship in geriatrics.


SURFACING
LOOKS -- The male waif: Just as delicate models like Kate Moss replaced statuesque goddesses as this season's standard of beauty, so too have fragile hunks like the actor Johnny Depp begun to supplant the likes of Marky Mark as icons of maleness.
MARKETING -- African-American perfume: A French company hired a black-owned advertising firm from Los Angeles to develop the name, logo and marketing for a line of fragrances for African-Americans.
The result?
Azende! (named after the Azande tribe, which once ruled the Congo area).
STATEMENTS -- Fake nose rings: For ersatz rebels and weekend anarchists.
Unlike the real thing, these sterling-silver rings are painless to install.
They're $6 at Liliana's Boutique in Manhattan.


NEWS SUMMARY
International 3-15  U.S. AND EUROPE SPLIT ON BOSNIA


Batman the Ride
WHAT: The inverted roller coaster, officially known in these parts as Batman the Ride.
With their legs dangling, passengers sit in plastic chairs suspended under a monorail.
Imagine a ski lift that flips riders upside down at 50 miles per hour.
WHERE: The Movietown section of the Six Flags Great Adventure amusement park in Jackson, N.J., about 60 miles from New York and Philadelphia. (Only two other inverted roller coasters exist -- another Batman the Ride at the Six Flags Great America in Gurnee, Ill., and one called Topgun at the Paramount Great America in Santa Clara, Calif.)


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
OBJECTS OF DESIRE Conversations With Luis Bunuel.
By Jose de la Colina  and Tomas Perez Turrent.
Marsilio, $24.


Lemieux Playing in Fear and Out of Step
He has become the specter of this series to determine the Patrick Division champion -- a tall, brooding and irritable figure, ramrod stiff on his skates, who arrives and departs with a ghostly menace.
As usual, he is a solitary man in a sport devoted to team play, but this time the reason for his separation from the masses is not his superior talent but a nagging, stabbing pain in his lower back that has rendered him barely locomotive.
Mario Lemieux said his back hurt him all day today, but nonetheless, when it came time for the Penguins to try to take a commanding three-games-to-one series lead back home to Pittsburgh, Lemieux wore a jersey and a grimace into the lineup.
And with goalie Tom Barrasso yanked in the final 96 seconds in favor of a sixth, albeit ailing, attacker, there was Lemieux, frantically trying to force overtime with shots launched with 35, and later just 7 seconds to go.


Can the Philharmonic Conquer The Angst of 'Der Freischutz'?
To New York's major opera companies, "Der Freischutz" must resemble an ill-mannered house guest who has repaid their kindly invitations by busting up the furniture and leaving cigarette burns in the carpet.
Prospects for a return invitation to either home any time soon seem dim.
So Carl Maria von Weber's ungrateful opera has had to find another route back into town.
On Thursday evening, Sir Colin Davis conducts the first of three concert performances with the New York Philharmonic at Avery Fisher Hall.


Grant E. Curtis, 72, Student-Aid Expert At Tufts University
Grant E. Curtis, who helped expand scholarship programs to needy students across the nation after working his way through college as a waiter, died on Thursday at his home in Winchester, Mass.
He was 72.
The cause was leukemia, said officials at Tufts University, where he was the emeritus dean of financial aid.
Mr.
Curtis was a leader in the movement in the 1950's to start considering the financial need of applicants as well as academic promise in awarding scholarships.


Apparel That Is Meant to Be Worn
"ART WEAR" at the Gallery here is a show with a surprise around every corner.
The title is deceptively bland; it might lead one to expect the timeless elegance of silk scarves but hardly the timely environmental suits made of grass.
About 60 pieces by 21 artists reflect a broad diversity of attitudes toward the creation of objects meant to be worn.
While some simply are intended to enhance the figure, others strain the limits of the theme.
Representing several Westchester residents as well as artists from as far away as New Mexico, the show was organized by Sue Fankhauser, Suzan Franz, Meredith Kent and Linda Schneiderman, members of the Gallery board.
Ruth Raible of Hastings-on-Hudson, a well-known authority on contemporary crafts, served as a consultant.


Sobering Words About Drugs
To the Editor:
We read the article "Tripping, but Not Falling"  [ May 2 ]  and were aghast that the reporter Trip Gabriel made no mention of the harmful side effects of hallucinogenic drugs such as LSD.
He could have asked any number of experts in the field of drug treatment about LSD and been told about debilitating hallucinogenic flashbacks, delusional and mood disorders suffered by LSD users.
Surely the fact that Terence McKenna says that the psilocybin mushroom "is the megaphone used by an alien, intergalactic Other to communicate with mankind" is enough for us to wonder if taking LSD has done something to his mental faculties.


Laura Sloss, Peter Lowet
Laura J. Sloss, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Leon Sloss of Chevy Chase, Md., was married yesterday evening to Peter F. Lowet, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Henry A. Lowet of Rye Brook, N.Y.
Rabbi Mindy Portnoy performed the ceremony at the Carlton Hotel in Washington.
Ms.
Sloss, 30, is keeping her name.
She is a manager at Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center in New York.
She graduated from Stanford University.
She received a master's degree in public and private management from Yale University, as did her husband.
Her father is the president of Leon Sloss Associates, national-security policy consultants in Chevy Chase.


American Voices on Health Care: Even in Security, Anxiety
Interviews by Peter T. Kilborn with Americans in Iowa City and Cedar Rapids and across the Mississippi in Moline, Ill., disclose a growing diversity in health insurance coverage and care arrangements.
Here are the stories of five families.
The Coens Cradled, for Now, By Medicare
Married for 57 years, William and Gertrude Coen talk about their health like a team, with more amusement than complaint.


Baseball Breaks With Its Television Past
In a deal that ends the tradition of the Saturday Game of the Week and takes CBS out of the business of baseball broadcasting, NBC, ABC and major league baseball have agreed to create a joint revenue-sharing venture to televise baseball entirely in prime time starting next year and through 1999.
Using a wrinkle borrowed from college and pro football broadcasts, the plan calls for all regular-season games and the great majority of playoff games to be regionalized.
This means that a viewer in one section of the country will not be able to see a game broadcast to another section.


Figuring the Cost of Car Rentals in Europe
IF you think air fares are confusing, wait till you contemplate renting a car in Europe.
Not only are there a multitude of variables to consider (type of transmission, mileage allowance, insurance coverage, taxes, car size and currency exchange), but there are also such questions as whether to make a reservation, whether to prepay, whether to pay a surcharge for the convenience of picking up the car at the airport and whether to choose longer-term leasing over short-term renting.
Even a survey of only three major rental companies with headquarters in the United States -- Avis, Hertz and National -- opens a can of worms.
The companies were asked to supply details on the countries where a visitor to western Europe would be most likely to find the least-expensive economy cars for one week in the summer season and, for comparison, the cost of upgrading to the least-expensive car with automatic transmission.
Only two of the three companies gave a breakdown of basic rates and rates with the collision-damage waiver (C.D.W.).
Avis offered rates as an inclusive package with unlimited mileage, waiver and tax, or as an exclusive package with unlimited mileage only.
All three offered unlimited mileage with a weekly rental; not all do for a one-day rental.
The C.D.W.
Factor
As most people who have rented cars in the United States know, one complicating factor is the collision- damage waiver (C.D.W.), which is not actually true insurance.
The car-rental companies are not selling a policy; they are collecting an extra fee for offering to forgive the cost of any damage.
Like the basic car rental rates, the C.D.W. fee can be as much or as little as the traffic will bear.


Hilary French, Wayne Edelman
Hilary Dines French, a daughter of Mrs.
Colden Florance of Washington and John R. French of Greenwich, Conn., was married yesterday to Wayne Mark Edelman, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Lawrence Edelman of North Woodmere, L.I.
Rabbi Ray Branlon performed the ceremony at the Circle Z Ranch in Patagonia, Ariz.
Mrs.
Edelman, 27, is a coordinator of social events for the Metropolitan Museum of Art in New York.
She graduated from Duke University.


Sheila Collins, Mark Schulman
MARK SCHULMAN, 47, is the chairman of the communications department at the New School for Social Research in Greenwich Village.
An antiwar protester in the 1960's, he has never given up his ponytail or his political activism.
He recently said, "Getting older for me has meant not deciding we were wrong about radical change, but wrong about how long it would take."
He met Sheila Collins in 1986.
The father of four, he was separated at the time; she was a single working mother, anything but starry-eyed about romance, and a student in one of his night classes.
Today, at 39, she is a master's degree candidate at the Annenberg School of Communications at the University of Pennsylvania.


Doing Shakespeare, on the Run
LIKE countless other lovers of the English language, I have long been transfixed by the works of Shakespeare, and, still in my teens, I resolved someday to draw the Cotswold air he once drew.
I envisioned a leisurely weeklong tour through Shakespeare's life, embracing sightseeing and a few evenings at the theater, perhaps a lecture or two, and some quiet hours for reading and reflection.
This travel fantasy, like many, proved too time-consuming to realize.
When I finally got around to making my trip, I found myself with just one free day.
To attempt such a pilgrimage in so short a time is of course folly, but having waited so long, I was determined not to cancel.
How much Shakespeare, I wondered, could I fit into a single day in Stratford?
Dusk was settling over the town as I arrived in my rented car that Friday.


Did He Get What He Deserved?
To the Editor:
I am surprised that Louis Simpson, in his scholarly treatment of the character of Shylock, makes no mention of the original Shylock story, in which the victim is the Jew.
In "Shylock: The History of a Character," by Hermann Sinsheimer, and "The Truth About Shylock," by Bernard Grebanier, this aspect of Shylock is well documented.
In the original myths it is the Jew whose pound of flesh was demanded by a Christian!
GEORGE SILBERMAN Brooklyn


Crime in County Falls for Second Time in 2 Years
FOLLOWING a nationwide trend, the number of serious crimes committed in Westchester decreased 10.8 percent last year, the second in a row for the county, according to the State Division of Criminal Justice Services.
But that good news in last week's preliminary Uniform Crime Report of Offenses Known to the Police was tempered by some disturbing statistics: for one, a 21 percent increase in the number of murders.


Corrections
An article yesterday about a best-selling French book on men and women misidentified one of the authors.
He is Bernard-Henri Levy.


PERU CITIZENSHIP SELLS FOR $25,000
Struggling to attract foreign investment, primarily from Hong Kong and elsewhere in Asia, Peru will soon begin selling what many here consider an inappropriate item for free-market commerce: Peruvian citizenship.
The price will be $25,000 for the head of a family and $2,000 each for immediate family members.


Lofton and Raiders Reportedly Have a Deal
Receiver JAMES LOFTON, who played two years for the Los Angeles Raiders before going to the Buffalo Bills four years ago, has reportedly agreed to a two-year deal with the Raiders for $1.8 million.
The Los Angeles Times reported yesterday that an announcement is expected tomorrow.
Lofton, 36, had 51 receptions for 786 yards and 6 touchdowns for Buffalo last season.


Scouting Honolulu's Real Neighborhoods
NEIGHBORHOODS like Manoa, Moiliili, Kaimuki and Kapahulu, only minutes from Waikiki by car or bus, are often overlooked by visitors to Hawaii, yet these are the areas where Honolulu residents live, work, buy flowers, congregate in coffee houses and order dim sum or Chinese cake noodles from their favorite holes in the wall.
An hour from downtown, the North Shore town of Haleiwa, a hideaway for writers, artists, business types and backpackers, also offers surfer cafes, offbeat boutiques and some of the best wave watching around.
You won't find expensive mai tais or plastic aloha in any of these places -- just a few pleasing, inexpensive places to shop and dine.
Manoa
Four miles from downtown Honolulu and mauka (toward the mountain) from the University of Hawaii, Manoa is a green, deep, rainbow-veiled valley framed by the Koolau mountain range.
Following a rain, waterfalls gush down the valley walls.


E. K. Strigenz, Mark D. Bensen
Dr.
Elizabeth Katherine Strigenz, a resident in general medicine at Overlook Hospital in Summit, N.J, was married yesterday to Mark David Bensen, an associate at the Newark law firm of McCarter &amp; English.
The Rev.
Roger A. Zens performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at St.
Michael's Church in Kewaskum, Wis.
The bride, 27, is a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Anthony Strigenz of Kewaskum.
She graduated from Marquette University, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa, and received her medical degree from the University of Wisconsin, from which her husband received his law degree.


Ol' Love-Him Tender Becomes Legal Tender
WASN'T it bound to happen?
First, those paintings on black velvet.
Then, decorated dinner plates.
Then the much-ballyhooed United States postage stamps.
And now, yes -- Elvis coins.
The Marshall Islands has released three legal-tender coins to mark the 40th anniversary of the year that Elvis cut his first record, "My Happiness" and "That's When Your Heartaches Begin."
One might wonder what connection a small island republic in the South Pacific might have to the King of the Rock-and-Roll.
In a news release, the Finance Minister, Ruben R. Zachras, explains all: "In the Republic, music is an artistic medium practiced by young and old alike. It is an important part of weekly religious activities and of particular importance to the traditional Christmas annual holiday events."


Milan Report
The Milanese should have hired Meryl Streep as she was in "Death Becomes Her" to be Fashion Week's official greeter.
At the first sight of her heading backward into the future, we would have been better prepared for the Chesterfield jackets worn over chiffon gowns
and
tuxedo pants, the wenchy camisoles under redingotes, the gauzy pre-Raphaelite dresses with shredded denim shorts, and the other hybrid forms of glitz coming down the runway at Anna Molinari Blumarine.
Blumarine rarely offers an inventive collection, but Molinari's reputation as a lightning-speed assimilator of trends makes this an indicative one.
And though the city's current preoccupation with Italy's political scandals may have something to do with it (one bilingual editor was furious that the local news wasn't televising a lot of fashion, "considering that we're only here for a week"), it's obvious that Milan is having a hard time dealing with the present.


Sports of The Times; The New 'Doctor' In Town
DR.
J once soared above the rim for the Nets and Dr.
K is still flashing his fastball for the Mets, but now New York has another physician specializing in perspiration: Doc Rivers of the Knicks.
Call him Dr. Trey.


NOTES
A Larry Gatlin fan club composed entirely of celebrities materialized at the annual Manhattan Theater Club gala on Monday.
Lynn Redgrave, a host, was the first to proclaim her lust for Mr.
Gatlin (below right), the current star of "The Will Rogers Follies."
"I'm not taking hormones, I've had no plastic surgery, and I want Larry Gatlin," she said.
Later, Stephen Collins, a star of the Manhattan Theater Club's play "Putting It Together," said in jest: "I have a confession to make. I want Larry Gatlin. There goes the career in the military."


IN THESE GIRLS, HOPE IS A MUSCLE
It's hard to say which I enjoyed more -- the story itself or the humorous and dead-on way in which Madeleine Blais captured the town of Amherst.


Getaway Car Kills Man After Robbery of a Plant in Brooklyn
A man standing on a street corner was run over and killed on Friday afternoon as two armed men raced their car away from a bottling company in Brooklyn that they had just robbed, the police said.
Two men who police said jumped out of the car after it hit a police car fled on foot and were later captured.
But eight hours after the robbery -- in what may be a coincidence -- another office of the bottling company was also robbed.
In all, $50,000 was taken.


COLONIALISM'S BACK
Paul Johnson's article dignifies what some of us in foreign service (in my case, retired from that of the United States) increasingly felt but seldom dared to say for fear of banishment from our profession.
As a result of close exposure to the Middle East and parts of Asia from the 1950's into the 1970's, I shifted from the liberal to the conservative position on self-determination.
Some countries simply were unable to govern themselves and were better off under 20th-century colonialism or trusteeship.
Underscore 20th century.


Chinese Support for Khmer Rouge Grows Cooler
Back in 1965, when China was still a deep shade of red, an impressionable Cambodian in his 30's hiked through the jungles from Indochina and began a long friendship with the Chinese authorities.
His name was Pol Pot, and the support he received from China's leadership proved crucial throughout his subsequent career.


Warmth, and Relief, Greet Bushes' Return to Maine
A greeting in pink chalk appeared today on the daily menu board next to the "Help Wanted" sign at the Old Salt's Pantry on Dock Square, "Welcome Home, Mr. and Mrs. Bush."
A couple of blocks away 900 townspeople assembled on the Village Green to cheer the return of this seaside community's most famous summer residents.


For Korean Immigrants, America Is Land of Golf
Shouts of "Gong!" -- Korean for "Fore!" -- echoed across the damp, verdant fairways of the Great Gorge Country Club near McAfee, N.J., as clusters of grocers attacked the course from a half-dozen separate starting tees.
"It's called shotgun play," said Myong Y. Juch, president of the Korean-American Grocers Association of New York.
"We can start and finish at the same time and save almost two hours." Although shotgun play is commonly used so all the players in a tournament can start at the same time, the technique seemed particularly fitting to these golfers, who approached the game with aggressive enthusiasm.


Corrections
An article on April 18 about Burgos, Spain, misidentified the wife of Alfonso VIII, the Spanish King of Castile from 1158 to 1214.
She was Eleanor, daughter of Eleanor of Aquitaine and Henry II of England.


Michelle DePaulo, Thomas Dewey
Michelle Clare DePaulo, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
S.
F.
DePaulo of Centreville, Del., was married yesterday to Thomas E. L. Dewey, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Thomas E. Dewey Jr. of New York.
Msgr.
Clement Lemon performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at St.
Joseph's on the Brandywine in Greenville, Del.
Mrs.
Dewey is a marketing services manager at Revlon Inc. in New York.
She graduated from Georgetown University and received an M.B.A. from New York University.
Her father is the president of Erectors Inc. and the Continental Equipment Company, construction companies in Wilmington, Del.


Public &amp; Private; Mother and Child
This is a Mother's Day story about a drug with a tongue-twister name.
It's called diethylstilbestrol, or DES.
Those of us who were affected by it were Flavor-of-the-Month about 20 years ago, when doctors discovered that the synthetic estrogen given to millions of women to prevent miscarriage caused vaginal cancer in some of their female offspring.


Health Insurance Merger: A Risky Mix?
By pledging that workers' compensation and automobile insurance will be part of an overhaul of the nation's health-care system, the Clinton Administration appears ready to plunge into quagmires that until now have never been the territory of the Federal Government.
The two insurance systems pay more than $42 billion annually for injuries and illnesses resulting from workplace and traffic accidents.
By merging both into standard health coverage, the Administration hopes to save billions of dollars, bringing medical treatments paid for by all three systems under tighter cost controls.


Student-Faculty Dating: It's Not in the Rule Book
A scenario that has been raising concern on college campuses might go something like this: He is a middle-aged English professor, an expert on Henry James, who appears worldly and sophisticated in his tweed jacket while lecturing to his class.
She is an 18-year-old freshman, starry eyed and entranced by her teacher's apparent brilliance and sensitivity.
He is flattered by her attention.
An after-class tutorial leads to drinks.
Drinks lead to a sexual encounter.
Are they two consenting adults in love, or is it sexual harassment and exploitation?
The appropriateness of faculty-student dating is being discussed on campuses throughout Westchester, echoing a nationwide debate about whether such relationships should be tolerated, regulated or banned altogether.
Faculty members at the University of Virginia recently voted to prohibit sexual relationships between professors and the students they supervise.
A more stringent regulation, which would have banned romance between all professors and undergraduates, was voted down.


Phoenix Network Inc. (NSC) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


New Croat-Muslim Fighting Erupts in Southern Bosnia
A 10-day-old cease-fire agreement collapsed tonight as Bosnian Croats attacked the southern city of Mostar, setting buildings on the west bank of the Neretva River aflame and forcing 10 busloads of Muslim civilians out of town.
While that battle raged, the first United Nations observers finally reached the long-besieged Muslim enclave of Zepa in eastern Bosnia, finding the town in ruins and nearly all the 30,000 Muslims who had been trapped there gone.


Mourning Has to Wait His Turn
There was this play in Charlotte late last month, on the night the Hornets accommodated the Knicks in their Eastern Conference pennant race by eliminating the Bulls, when Alonzo Mourning twice tried to get in Michael Jordan's face.
The first time came after Jordan ball-faked Johnny Newman into a sky box and drove into the lane.
Up stepped Mourning for a shot block.
Jordan dunked so viciously that Mourning couldn't help going to the bench for an ensuing timeout with a goofy smile on his face.


Phoenix Re (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Report Assails Newark Schools As Mismanaged
A confidential state report on the Newark schools portrays a chronically failing system hindered by pervasive political cronyism and paralyzed by a lack of teamwork or direction, officials familiar with its findings said today.
The report directly challenges a view often uttered by school board members and administrators that Newark needs more money to solve its educational problems.
In fact, the report asserts, Newark does less with more than almost any other district of its kind in the state.


Classical Music in Review
People's Symphony  Town Hall
People's Symphony Concerts continued its long-running, budget-priced and good-quality performance series with chamber music on the afternoon of May 2.
With the prominent help of Daniel Phillips, the violinist, the Levine family took care of business, including a Mozart trio, a Brahms piano quartet and Schubert's "Trout" Quintet.
Dena and Amy Levine played the piano and the cello.
Caroline Levine was the violist.
Julius Levine was Schubert's bassist in the "Trout."


No Catching This Brown Speedboat
The race was for second place, not first, today at the Eastern Sprints championship.
Brown had the victory put away early and no one was going to catch this undefeated crew, which won the first leg of intercollegiate rowing's triple crown.
The other men's varsity eights scrambled for second, which Penn snatched away from Yale in the last 300 meters of the 2,000-meter course on the flat waters of Lake Quinsigamond.
Northeastern was fourth, Navy fifth and Harvard sixth, a rare position for the Crimson, which has won more sprint championships by far than any other college.


Corrections
A picture caption yesterday about the Asian/Pacific American Association's Heritage Festival at Union Square Park misidentified the group shown.
They were Japanese, not Korean.


Chief of Tribe Addresses Graduation at Syracuse
Yesterday, in this year designated by the United Nations as "The Year of Indigenous Peoples," a graduating class of Syracuse University was addressed for the first time by an American Indian.
Oren R. Lyons, chief of the Onondaga Nation, just south of Syracuse, delivered the keynote address in the Carrier Dome at the university's 139th commencement ceremony.
He told the 5,140 graduates that Americans still suffered the consequences of the "frontier attitude" instilled through the 19th-century doctrine of Manifest Destiny.


Nucorp Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


For Baseball, It Looks Like a Whole New Ball Game, on TV, That Is
Major league baseball's decision to create a joint venture with ABC and NBC that puts all games in prime time mimics the regionalization of college football and ends the tradition of annual network rights payments in exchange for a revenue-sharing deal that should be viewed as a move of pragmatic desperation.
Baseball's television committee couched the package in terms of a bold move to help regenerate the game.
In part it is.
But if the sport's potentates were to display any foresight during this period of commissioner-less inertia, the proposed new venture was its only viable choice short of certain embarrassment.


John Rouse Webster; Educator, 89
John Rouse Webster, a retired headmaster of Greenwich Country Day School in Greenwich, Conn., died on Friday at his home in Potomac, Md.
He was 89.
The cause was an aneurism of the heart, his family said.


Classical Music in Review
Danish Radio Symphony Orchestra  Avery Fisher Hall
It has long been customary to open orchestral programs with a bang.
The Danish Radio Symphony Orchestra, arriving in Avery Fisher Hall in the afternoon of May 2, delivered nothing less than the Apocalypse itself.
Poul Ruders's "Thus Saw St. John" is a 10-minute Revelation onslaught, with detonations for full orchestra surrounding doom-laden chorales for the lower brass.
Flashes of Messiaen are apparent in the percussion-heavy instrumentation, and the solitary gong stroke at the end is a nod to Strauss's "Death and Transfiguration." But Mr.
Ruders avoids the ponderous cliches of 20th-century crisis-music and makes a savage virtue of concision.
Leif Segerstam, himself a composer of anarchic tendencies, led a brilliant performance.


Some New Jets Say: Been There, Done That
Suddenly, the practice field is filled with Jets players who have, as they like to put it, been there.
They sport Super Bowl rings and Pro Bowl resumes.
And one of them even used to be a Giant, of all things.
"Oh, yes, it's strange," said Leonard Marshall, who spent most of his 20's and part of his 30's dressing in a room down the hall from the Jets' locker room at Giants Stadium.
Like most Giants, he would make fun of the Jets' repeated failed forays into respectability.
The Giants, everyone knew, owned Gotham.


Marshak Memorial Service
City College will hold a memorial service for President Emeritus Robert Eugene Marshak at 3 P.M.
Wednesday in the college's Aaron Davis Hall at 135th Street and Convent Avenue in Manhattan.
The speakers will include Albert W. Bowker, Chancellor Emeritus of The City University of New York; James P. Murphy, chairman of the university's board of trustees; W. Ann Reynolds, chancellor of the university; Augusta Souza Kappner, acting president of the college, and Haywood Burns, dean of the university's law school.
Dr.
Marshak died on Dec. 23 at the age of 76.


Dance in Review
Trisha Brown Dance Company  City Center
The retrospective presented by the Trisha Brown Dance Company on Wednesday was packed with revelations and reminders.
Ms.
Brown's fascination with off-stage wing space, or magical invisibility, in a performance began early in her career.
The rather dour postmodernist of legend had an eye for scenic splendor, as it turns out, as well as a wonderfully playful personality that colored her own dancing and her choreography.


Puerto Rico Fighting to Keep Its Tax Breaks for Businesses
Abolish the exemption, the government of Puerto Rico says, and the economy of this Caribbean commonwealth will be crippled for years to come.
But the Clinton Administration, intent on raising new revenue to reduce the Federal deficit, is nonetheless moving to revoke a multibillion-dollar tax break for American mainland companies operating here.
At issue is Section 936 of the Internal Revenue Code, which gives mainland United States companies an exemption from Federal taxes on income earned in Puerto Rico, whether it comes from operations or interest on local bank deposits.
Critics here and in Washington assail the exemption as nothing more than an expensive giveaway.


New Chip to Save Energy
VLSI Technology Inc., a San Jose, Calif., semiconductor maker, plans to announce a new computer chip on Monday that is designed to help reduce energy consumption in desktop personal computers.
The device, called the Ecochip System Controller, is intended to help computer makers meet the energy- saving goals of the Environmental Protection Agency's Energy Star personal computer power-reduction program.


K N Energy reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Celebrations Outshine Protests for Israel Independence Day


New York State's Insurance Referee; Showdown With Blue Cross Puts Spotlight on Top Regulator
It was a showdown of sorts between two insurance titans in New York State: Albert A. Cardone, chief executive of the ailing Empire Blue Cross and Blue Shield, and Salvatore R. Curiale, superintendent of the state Insurance Department, whose job is to regulate Empire.
Mr.
Curiale had called Mr.
Cardone into his office last fall for what was essentially a dressing-down, demanding an explanation for a lucrative computer contract that Empire had granted to a former member of the board that selects Empire's directors.
"Al, you can stand on your head and spit nickels before you can convince me that the way this contract was awarded doesn't stink!" Mr.
Curiale recalled saying.


Menley &amp; James Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Veterans and Yeltsin Foes Are Allowed to March, Peacefully
Mixing proud memories and bitter anger, some 15,000 war veterans, Communists and nationalists flowed to the center of Moscow today to mark the 48th anniversary of victory over Nazi Germany.
But with Red Square finally opened to the demonstrators, there was no repetition of the violence that erupted at May Day marches last weekend.
All last week, after a clash between police officers and militants on May 1 that left hundreds hurt and one riot policeman dead, accusations and threats flew among the hostile political camps into which Russia has fractured, and suspense mounted over the demonstration called by the hard-liners for the annual May 9 holiday.


GWC Corp. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Gay Dispute Fails to Dim Israel Parade
The debate over the exclusion of a largely gay congregation from the annual Salute to Israel parade faded into the background yesterday as an array of New York politicians, seeking to accommodate both sides, exuberantly joined in the march, then met with members of the congregation to voice their support.
The parade itself, which had been mired in controversy for more than a month, went off without incident as thousands of young people -- many bedecked in blue and white, evoking the Israeli flag -- walked, danced and roller-skated their way up Fifth Avenue to celebrate the 45th anniversary of the founding of Israel.
The police estimated that the observance drew 73,000 spectators.
There were no reports of arrests, though a scattering of demonstrators protested the exclusion of the gay marchers.
Political Overtones
While the parade's sponsor, the American Zionist Youth Foundation, billed the 29th annual event as an elaborate pageant to educate Jewish children about their heritage and history, the political overtones were everywhere.


Dance in Review
American Ballet Theater
Metropolitan Opera House
A mostly new principal cast in the American Ballet Theater production of "The Sleeping Beauty" started out strong on Thursday night but then waned in excitement.
Susan Jaffe was a radiant, lyrical Aurora.
But her first act had a physically nuanced look that was missing from the poetic vision scene, though she delivered all the requisite sparkle and grandeur in the third-act grand pas de deux.


Favor Freedom in China
If it wanted to, America could exert more leverage over Chinese human rights practices than any other country in the world.
The hard currency Beijing earns through its $18 billion trade surplus with the U.S. is a key ingredient in China's development strategy.
During the Presidential campaign, Bill Clinton justly criticized the Bush Administration for refusing to use this leverage.
In the next few weeks, the Clinton Administration must come up with its own formula for renewing China's trade privileges with this country.
By carefully linking China's privileges to achievable human rights objectives, Washington could encourage reform-minded forces in the world's biggest dictatorship.


Ian Mikardo, 84, Dies; Led British Labor Party
Ian Mikardo, a former chairman of the British Labor Party and a Member of Parliament for 37 years, died Thursday in a hospital in Stockport, near Manchester, England.
He was 84 years old and lived in Cheshire, in western England.
Mr.
Mikardo, known as Mik, was a prime mover behind a left-wing movement, led by Aneurin Bevan, that temporarily split the Labor Party in the 1950's and 60's.
He went on to become chairman of the party in 1970 and 1971, during a long career in Parliament, representing various constituencies, from 1945 to 1959 and from 1964 to 1987.


Cambior Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


METRO DIGEST
A HEMOPHILIAC BECOMES A PROTESTER
Until recently, the closest Michael J. Druck had ever come to a public protest was filing a complaint with the city about a noisy neighbor.
But two months ago the 31-year-old rare-coin dealer found himself wrestling with two New York City hotel security guards as he picketed a dinner honoring prominent hemophilia doctors.
Mr.
Druck, a hemophiliac who was infected with the AIDS virus through blood products, says the confrontation was a cry of desperation.
A1.
NEW YORK CITY  THE METROPOLIS IN THE YEAR 2000
In 1987, a stubbornly optimistic mayoral commission issued its forecast for the millennium under a title that evoked high hopes: "New York Ascendant." Less than four months later, the stock market crashed.
With the millennium now six years closer, another commission has published its own rosy vision of the future, but with a decidedly more sober name, "Shaping the City's Future." Metro Matters.
B2.


Economic Calendar
Listed below are the scheduled release dates for major economic indicators this week.
Monday  Consumer Credit . . .
April  Tuesday  None  Wednesday  Producer Prices . . .
April  None  Thursday  Weekly Jobless Claims Consumer Price Index . . .
April Retail Sales . . .
April  Friday  Industrial Production . . .
April Business Inventories . . .
March


What Are We Going To Do About Crime?
To the Editor:
Even more important than health care reform is the issue of crime in this once great country.
It is absolutely urgent that politicians face this issue immediately.
Crime is causing the financial destruction of the inner cities of the United States.


For Knicks, The Fourth Leads to The First
The fourth quarter has been the Knicks' quarter against the Charlotte Hornets.
It happened in three of their four regular-season meetings.
And it happened again yesterday in Game 1 of their four-of-seven-game Eastern Conference semifinal playoff series.


Inside the Purchasing Network at Home Shopping
Richard M. Speer, a son of the chairman and co-founder of Home Shopping Network Inc., may have secretly profited while serving as an executive of the cable television retailer, court documents and interviews suggest.
A company owned by Mr.
Speer, who was a top purchasing manager for Home Shopping at various times since 1986, received a cut of one vendor's sales to Home Shopping, according to documents that were part of a dispute between that vendor, the Technology Research Corporation, and a company owned by Mr.
Speer, W.H.S.
Sales Inc.


Healthsource Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


U.S. to Push for a U.N. Police Force of 500 for Haiti
In an attempt to guarantee a peaceful transition to democracy in Haiti, the United States and several allies will sponsor a Security Council vote this week to authorize the quick deployment of a 500-member international police force there, Administration and United Nations officials said today.
On Monday, Foreign Ministers from the Caribbean will meet here with United Nations diplomats who will brief them and seek their support.


Beverly Adler, David Brown
Beverly Adler, a vice president of Ogilvy &amp; Mather Direct in New York, was married yesterday to David Steven Brown, the director of real estate for the Roman Catholic Archdiocese of New York.
Rabbi Yisroel Finman officiated at Burden Mansion in New York.
Ms.
Adler, who is keeping her name, graduated from New York University.
She is a daughter of Mrs.
Herman Adler of Cleveland and the late Mr.
Adler.
Her father was the president of International Hardwoods, a lumber distribution company in Cleveland.


Farm Labor Unions' Gains Date to 1880's
To the Editor:
Many of us have great respect for the work done by Cesar Chavez in organizing California farm workers.
However, your obituary (April 24) errs in stating that his was the first successful union of farm workers.


The Nets Never Say Die, but They're Done
The only things missing from the Nets' playoff series with the Cleveland Cavaliers were bloody bandages, a halftime speech from John Wayne and the theme song from "Rocky" playing behind their bench.
Led by Derrick Coleman, the ailing Nets, who this season gave new meaning to the phrase injury-riddled, played truly heroic basketball for five games.
The only question people were wondering was when would New Jersey come back to earth?
It turned out that today was that day.


Barbara Smith, Stewart Scott 3d
Barbara A. Smith, the daughter of Mrs.
Thaddeus S. Obloy of Saratoga Springs, N.Y., and V. Paul Smith of Ballston Spa, N.Y., was married yesterday to Stewart M. Scott 3d, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
Scott of Asheville, N.C.
The Rev.
Paul Knapp performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at St.
Clement's Church in Saratoga Springs.
Mrs.
Scott, 28, is a caterer in New York.
She graduated from Wells College.
Her father, who retired as New York State's deputy advocate for the disabled, is a real estate agent at Blackman &amp; DeStefano Inc. in Clifton Park, N.Y.
Her mother, Carol Obloy, is the director of policy and regulations for the New York State Office of Mental Health in Albany.
The bride is the stepdaughter of Mr.
Obloy and of Maryjane Eddy-Smith.


And Batting for the Mets: Boredom, Silence and Ineptitude
Even the Marlins want to leave Shea Stadium.
It is that awful in Metsville, where the hometown team suffered another ugly loss to the expansion club from Florida yesterday, a 6-4 disaster riddled with mistakes and bad pitching and strikeouts by million-dollar men.
"I'm ready to get out of here," said Chuck Carr, the Marlins' center fielder.
"It's so dead. There's no life. It just seems like everything is dead. It's hard to get motivated."


Theater in Review
Blood Wedding  Gramercy Arts 138 East 27th Street Manhattan By Federico Garcia Lorca; original music by Nicolas Uribe; English translation by Felipe Gorostiza; director, Rene Buch; production designer, Robert Weber Federico; assistant director, Virginia Rambal; movements, Adolfo Vazquez.
Presented by Repertorio Espanol, Gilberto Zaldivar, producer; Mr.
Buch, artistic director.
WITH: Maria Jose Alvarez, Martin Balmaceda, Ricardo Barber, Patricio Calderon, Irma Bello, Mateo Gomez, Rolando Gomez, Ofelia Gonzalez, Henry Leyva, Ana Margarita Martinez-Casado, Alexia Murray, Jimmy Navarro, Marilyn Sanabria, Adriana Sananes, Rene Sanchez, Matt Schmitz, Ana Soler and Lilia Veiga.
Federico Garcia Lorca's "Bodas de Sangre" ("Blood Wedding") is inexhaustible.
The play's primal power, its tumult of ambiguities, even its melodramatic qualities, offer enormous temptations.
The response of Rene Buch, in the production he directs at Repertorio Espanol, could be seen as daring collaboration with the playwright.
Or it may be not-very-original sin.


Wisconsin Public Service Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Man Held in Killing Of 3 in Apartment
A Brooklyn man has been charged with second-degree murder, attempted second-degree murder and first-degree assault in the killing of a Queens woman and her two young daughters, the police said yesterday.
The man, Ronald Woodson, 22, of 80 Ross Street in Williamsburg, Brooklyn, was charged with the stabbing death of Stephanie Pagan, 23, her 9-month-old daughter and her 6-year-old daughter on Saturday morning.


Vital Signs Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Sir Dermot Boyle; R.A.F. Leader, 88
Sir Dermot Boyle, Marshal of the Royal Air Force who rose from pilot to chief of the British Air Staff during the Suez crisis of 1956, died Wednesday.
He was 88 and lived in the county of Hampshire in southern England.
He was born in Abbeyleix, Ireland, and attended St.
Columba's College in Dublin before becoming one of the R.A.F.'s most skillful pilots in the 1920's.


Even Freedom Needs Some Polishing


From Newsreels to Records: A New Home for Sony Music
While Sony USA has been conspicuously transforming the former A.T. &amp; T. headquarters on the East Side of Manhattan into its new home, Sony Music has been quietly transforming the former Fox Movietone studios on the West Side into a new video and audio center.
The quiet ends today.


Nature Food Centres Inc.  (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to April 4


Pilots Await Decision
On the U.S.S.
Theodore Roosevelt, in the Adriatic, American pilots say that whatever Washington's decision, they are ready to serve.
On that floating city bristling with warplanes, helicopters and munitions, what happens on the ground in Bosnia has a direct and personal meaning, because the carrier is likely to be involved.
Article, page A8.


American Home Cuts an Agency
American Home Food Products of New York said on Friday that it would consolidate its account, with billings estimated at $27 million, to two agencies from three, eliminating LCF &amp; L of New York.
Young &amp; Rubicam New York was named to handle three additional assignments: Chef Boy-ar-dee pizza mix, Chef Boy-ar-dee packaged dinners and Dennison's chili.
The agency will continue to handle American Home Food brands like Chef Boy-ar-dee canned pastas and Pam cooking spray.


Hosposable Products reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Lewis Packs a Punch, With Pictures to Prove It
Lennox Lewis wore blue-tinted designer sunglasses to his post-fight news conference -- and he was the winner.
He didn't have a discernible gash, and it wasn't as if connect-the-welts could be played on his face, so the designer frames clearly were for fashion and not for cover-up.


Augustus G. Paine 2d, A Paper Executive, 73
Augustus G. Paine 2d, a former paper-industry and Wall Street executive who had been secretary of the board of trustees of the New York Zoological Society, died yesterday at his home at Hobe Sound, Fla.
He was 73 and moved to Hobe Sound 20 years ago.
The cause of death was throat cancer, his family said.


Essay; The Rift That Never Was
The seeming irritation of Serbian headquarters in Belgrade with its Serbian troops and politicians within Bosnia is a snare; Slobodan Milosevic's announced embargo of war supplies to his ethnic cleansers is a delusion.
How gullible can we be?
Serbia's purpose is to enable its militia within Bosnia to drive out or kill the Muslim population.
To accomplish this without inviting air attacks on Belgrade power plants, Milosevic must pretend to dissociate his nation from its front-line fighters.


INSIDE
Alwin Nikolais Dies
The choreographer, designer and electronic-music composer, whose innovations in lighting and costuming made him a pioneer of multi-media dance, was 82.
Page A17.
Peacekeepers for Haiti
The United States will sponsor a Security Council vote on a 500-member police force to assure a peaceful transition to democracy in Haiti.
Page A3.
Newark Schools Assailed
A state report on Newark's schools portrays a system plagued by mismanagement, officials said.
Page B1.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
The Clinton Administration has altered its proposed energy tax in response to political pressures and is now struggling to rescue the tax from the lobbyists straining to pick it apart.  [ Page A1. ]
The Administration is moving to revoke a multibillion-dollar tax break for mainland U.S. companies operating in Puerto Rico.
The commonwealth's government says that such a change will cripple the economy for years.  [ A1. ]


Nu Horizons Electronics Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28


CHRONICLE
JOHN CARDINAL O'CONNOR, who underwent surgery last week to relieve an enlarged prostate, joked during Sunday Mass yesterday that well-wishers helped shorten his stay at the hospital.
His room was so filled with flowers that it resembled a funeral parlor, he said, and he knew it was time to go.
Before delivering a Mother's Day sermon, the Cardinal also thanked people at St.
Patrick's Cathedral for their other gifts of cards and fruit baskets while he was hospitalized.


Bridge
The Cavendish Invitational Pairs, including many of America's best players, began Saturday at Loew's Hotel, Lexington Avenue and 51st Street in Manhattan, and continued yesterday .
At the midpoint the leaders were: in first place, Bill Eisenberg of Boca Raton, Fla., and Martin Scheinberg of Manhattan, plus 953 imps; in second, Ron Gerard of White Plains and Mike Kamil of Teaneck, N.J., plus 933; in third, Fred Stewart of Accord, N.Y., and Steve Weinstein of Upper Montclair, N.J., plus 840.
In the most interesting deal of the first day's play, Gerard as South landed in five clubs doubled on the diagramed deal.
He ruffed the opening heart lead, cashed the club ace and gave up a club to West.
Another heart lead was ruffed, and he finessed the spade queen successfully.
Dummy's last heart was ruffed and three more trump leads left this ending: [ Diagram ] .
When the last trump was led, West was forced to part with the diamond three.
Gerard now threw the spade nine from the dummy and led the diamond ten.
West took the ace, but South took the last two tricks with the spade ace and the diamond king.
The victims of Gerard's fine play were Piotr Gawrys and Krysztof Lasocki, the Polish partnership that almost won the event a year ago.


Classical Music in Review
Alvin Curran
Roulette
Alvin Curran combined antiquity and high technology on the evening of May 2, when he presented his recent works for shofar (the ram's horn used at certain Jewish holiday services) and computer.


Review/Music; Works From Different Eras, but All Rife With Conflicts
The program that the New York New Music Ensemble played last Monday evening at Merkin Concert Hall included two pieces from the 1950's and the New York premieres of three works composed since 1990.
But although there were stylistic gulfs between these works, there was a curious undercurrent common to them all.
Each work seemed to be propelled by a set of inner conflicts, by competing impulses pulling against each other.
In the case of Donald Martino's Set for Clarinet (1954), those impulses were the desire to draw on popular forms -- jazz and blues -- but to do so within a language of rigorous atonality, and to shine a spotlight on a clarinetist's virtuosity without losing sight of the work's compositional ingenuity.
The thematic and harmonic simplicity of John Cage's Six Melodies for Violin and Piano (1950) disguises subtle complexities and elaboration.
Elizabeth Brown's "Memory Palace" (1990), for flute, cello and piano, uses a tonally freewheeling language (neither strictly rooted nor fully atonal) and an abstract structure to paint a distinct, if fanciful, picture in which thematic relationships come increasingly into focus as the piece unfolds.


10 Children's Choruses In Annual Festival
The Kodaly Organization of New York is to present the Third Annual Children's Choral Festival on May 14 at Congregation Rodelph Sholom, 7 West 83d Street, Manhattan.
Ten choruses totaling more than 300 children are to participate.
The choirs are to sing in two sessions, from 9:30 to 11:30 A.M. and 1 to 3 P.M.
Between noon and 1 P.M., all participants are to join in a festival concert conducted by Joan Gregoryk, whose 90-voice chorus from Chevy Chase (Md.) Elementary School is participating.
Information: (718) 522-3066.


Books of The Times; Dear Baseball, I Love You (But I Hate the Dodgers)
My Life as a Fan
By Wilfrid Sheed
221 pages. Simon &amp; Schuster. $20.
It has often been observed that the secret to American culture lies in understanding baseball.
The writer Wilfrid Sheed seems to have understood this instinctively when he first came to this country, in the autumn of 1940, as a 9-year-old English refugee fleeing German bombs.


Pillowtex Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Guatemalan Foes End Talks on Ending Civil War
Negotiations on ending Guatemala's 32-year-old civil war appear close to breaking down after an abrupt decision by the Government and rebel representatives to abandon the latest round without setting a date for new discussions.
The talks, which broke off here Saturday afternoon, were the third consecutive round to end in stalemate.
But in contrast to the vows of good faith with which earlier meetings ended, the negotiators accused one another this time of setting the stage for fiercer fighting in a war that is thought to have claimed at least 100,000 lives.


Philadelphia Suburban Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Moments and Mothers on Their Day in May


Westbridge Capital Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Spring Training for the Canape Crowd
At every other Northern latitude, it may still be spring.
But in this privileged corner of the hemisphere, where warm weather is greeted as much by raw vegetables on a serving tray as by new vegetation in the earth, summer arrived Friday at precisely 4:30 P.M.
It happened, as it does every year, on the backyard lawn of Elaine Benson's art gallery.
There, amid the abstract sculptures and the shade trees, were the familiar fixtures of the season: Bottles of chardonnay.
Wedges of brie.
Piped-in music.
Groups of painters and poets and playwrights, the famous and obscure, trading stories and making connections.


RESULTS PLUS
GOLF  Three Birdies Carry Henke to Victory  Nolan Henke birdied three of the last eight holes yesterday for a five-under-par 67 to capture the Atlanta Classic over the fading third-round leader, Nick Price.
Henke broke out of a tie with Price on the 15th hole when the P.G.A. champion took the first of two consecutive bogeys.
Henke finished with a 72-hole total of 17-under-par on the hilly Atlanta Country Club course to post a two-shot victory over Price, Mark Calcavecchia and Tom Sieckmann.
Price, who began the day with a one-shot lead over Calcavecchia, missed three consecutive greens beginning at No. 15, managing to salvage par only on the No. 17 when he made an 8-footer.
After falling into a tie for third place, Price moved back to share second when he birdied the final hole.
Calcavecchia, who has missed eight cuts so far this year, closed with a 72 and Sieckmann had a 69.
Henke earned a first prize of $216,000. (AP) Mallon Captures Sudden-Death Playoff: Meg Mallon made a 20-foot birdie putt on the third playoff hole to beat Tina Tombs and win the Sara Lee Classic in Nashville.
It was her second victory this year.
Tombs, who had 10 birdies and two bogeys en route to a 64, missed a 20-foot putt inches to the left on No. 9 that would have sent the playoff to a fourth hole.
Mallon, who won in Tucson, Ariz., in March, had her chance to win the tournament on the final hole of regulation play.
Her 15-foot putt was wide left and gave her a two-under-par 70 for the day, a 54-hole total of 205 and a tie with Tombs.
Mallon earned $78,750 for the victory. (AP)


West Fraser Timber. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


An American Carrier Crew Watches and Waits, and Prepares
When Lieut.
Comdr.
Eli E. Hertz flies his F-18 "Hornet" over Bosnia to enforce the no-flight zone, he can see the artillery flashes and fires from the fighting below.
"It's frustrating from our perspective," said the Syracuse, N.Y., native.
"I'd like to see the fighting stopped."


The Papp and Festival Archives Go to New York Public Library
The archives of the New York Shakespeare Festival and the personal papers of its founder, Joseph Papp, believed to be the largest and most complete collection ever assembled of a postwar American theater organization, have been donated to the New York Public Library for the Performing Arts, the library has announced.
The collection, which preserves materials from Mr.
Papp's first free Shakespeare productions in 1954 through the 1991-92 season, the last with which Mr.
Papp was personally involved, will become part of the Billy Rose Theater Collection at Lincoln Center.
It will be known as the Joseph Papp New York Shakespeare Festival Collection.
Mr.
Papp died on Oct. 31, 1991.


Alwin Nikolais, Versatile Pioneer Of Modern Dance, Is Dead at 82
Alwin Nikolais, a choreographer, designer, composer of electronic music and pioneer of multi-media dance, died on Saturday at Cabrini Medical Center in Manhattan.
He was 82 and lived in Manhattan.
The cause was cancer, said the choreographer Murray Louis, Mr.
Nikolais's companion of more than 40 years.


In Bridgehampton It's Let the Parties Begin


Hallmark Healthcare reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Credit Markets; Treasury's Debt Shift Unlikely to Meet Goal
No matter who eventually wins the debate over the wisdom of the Treasury Department's decision last week to make a major shift in its debt- management policy, it does not appear that the savings will tote up to the $16 billion goal the Administration set, regardless of how interest rates move in the future.
The review of the Treasury borrowing practices, for better or worse, was driven by the Administration's promise of a budget savings of $16 billion over the five fiscal years 1994 through 1998.
The Senate Budget Committee, in preparing its own budget plan earlier this year, came up with a proposal to meet the Administration's savings goal by shifting some longer-term borrowing with higher interest rates to shorter-term borrowing with lower interest rates.


Lauren Adwar, Keith Breslauer
Lauren Dawn Adwar, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Samuel Adwar of Merrick, L.I., was married yesterday to Keith M. Breslauer, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Joel C. Breslauer of Jersey City.
Rabbi Israel Grama performed the ceremony at the Woodbury (L.I.) Jewish Center.


Domestic Violence
To the Editor:
In a May 4 letter criticizing your April 23 editorial on domestic violence, Laurence Jarvik writes that the claim that a woman is beaten every 15 seconds by a husband or boyfriend means that 21 million women are beaten each year by a boyfriend or spouse, a number that he argues is much too high.


Pairings Set For Lacrosse
As expected, North Carolina, Princeton, Syracuse and Johns Hopkins were seeded No. 1 through No. 4, respectively, yesterday by the National Collegiate Athletic Association for its annual lacrosse tournament, which begins Saturday with games at four sites.
The top four teams received byes and will not play until May 22.
The opening-round games will be Notre Dame (No. 12) at Virginia (No. 5); Massachusetts (No. 11) at Hofstra (No. 6); Loyola (No. 10) at Navy (No. 7) and Maryland (No. 9) at Army (No. 8).


Dividend Meetings
Following is a partial list of dividend meetings this week: MONDAY  Crane Co FPL Group Inc Gabelli Equity Tr Inc Homestake Mng Co Source Cap Inc TUESDAY  Amax Gold Inc Medusa Corp Minnesota Mng &amp; Mfg United Indl Corp Vintage Pete Inc WEDNESDAY  American Intl Group Inc CBS Inc Current Income Shs Inc Deluxe Corp Household Intl Inc Kollmorgen Corp Learonal Inc Leggett &amp; Platt Inc Nacco Inds Inc Sysco Corp USLife Income Fd Inc Wynns Intl Inc THURSDAY
Albany Intl Corp Asa Ltd Dow Chem Co Intl Flavors&amp;Fragrances Lincoln Natl Corp Ind L E Myers Group Pacific Amern Income Shs Inc Plains Pete Co Service Corp Intl FRIDAY  Ecolab Inc First Chicago Corp Horace Mann Educators Corp Safety-Kleen Corp Washington Wtr Pwr Co


Better to Prevent Teen-Age Pregnancy
To the Editor:
An April 28 news article reported the success of an Ohio study by the Manpower Demonstration Research Corporation in keeping teen-age mothers in school by using an increased welfare payment as an incentive for continued attendance.


Why Are Petrovic and Robinson Packing Bags?
Drazen Petrovic and Rumeal Robinson both dropped bombshells on the Nets today.
The two players, saying they did not want to return to the team, officially began what is going to be a tumultuous off season for the franchise.
Petrovic and Robinson are restricted free agents, which means they can field offers from other teams after July 1.
But the Nets have the right to match any offer from another National Basketball Association team.


Editorial Notebook; A Long Lunch With Irving Howe
"How would you like to go to lunch with Irving Howe?" a Stanford University dean asked me when I was an 18-year-old antiwar activist during the late 1960's.
"Irving who?" I asked without embarrassment.
The startled dean described Mr.
Howe as a visiting Faulkner scholar and editor of Dissent, which even I knew to be a leading socialist journal.
As I soon found out, that's like describing Willie Mays as a jock who hangs around center field chasing fly balls.


Patents; Straight from a Federal penitentiary: a design for an automated cashier that is tamper resistant.
GERARD LATCHINIAN says he is an innocent engineer who dreams only of building a chain of giant egg-shaped restaurants that will serve omelets, abetted by a revolutionary automated cashier machine.
The United States Government believes Mr.
Latchinian is an arms dealer and drug smuggler who plotted in the 1980's to assassinate the President of Honduras.
Two facts are indisputable: Mr.
Latchinian has won a patent for a computerized cashier system, and he did it while serving a 30-year prison term for racketeering.


Canadian Tire reports earnings for Qtr to April 3


Congressmen Urge Action if Iraq Hatched Plot to Assassinate Bush
Senior Democrats and Republicans in Congress urged the Clinton Administration today to take military action against Iraq if it is shown that its Government plotted to assassinate former President George Bush in Kuwait last month.
"We should retaliate," Representative Lee H. Hamilton, the Indiana Democrat who heads the Foreign Affairs Committee, said on the NBC News program "Meet the Press." He added: "We cannot tolerate that kind of an action against a former President of the United States. It's just outrageous."


Grant E. Curtis, 72, Tufts Official Who Widened Scholarship System
Grant E. Curtis, who helped expand scholarship programs to needy students across the nation after working his way through college as a waiter, died Thursday at his home in Winchester, Mass.
He was 72.
The cause was leukemia, said officials at Tufts University, where he was the emeritus dean of financial aid.


Graham-Field Health Products Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


DISPUTE IMPERILING COALITION IN ISRAEL
Israel's governing coalition came unglued today when its only religious party said it would withdraw.
But it was not clear if the Government turmoil was a full-blown crisis or merely a prelude to a reassignment of Cabinet posts.
Many political experts leaned toward the second theory, predicting that when the dust settles in a few days, Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin will still be in office but with a different Cabinet lineup.


Dance in Review
Verlezza Dance  St. Mark's Danspace
One of the pleasures of attending the program called Verlezza Dance on the night of May 2 was seeing Sabatino Verlezza's vigorous choreography.


Clifford's Presence Felt at Altman Trial
He has not yet appeared in court, and has been deemed too unwell to stand trial, but Clark M. Clifford, a Washington lawyer and power broker, has nonetheless emerged as a real presence in the first few weeks of the trial of Robert A. Altman, his former law partner.
Mr.
Clifford was indicted along with Mr.
Altman last July by the Manhattan District Attorney's office on charges that they participated in a scheme to prevent regulators from learning that the Bank of Credit and Commerce International, not four Middle Eastern investors, was the true owner of First American Bankshares Inc., a Washington-based bank.
The indictment says Mr.
Altman and Mr.
Clifford received bribes from B.C.C.I. in the form of special stock deals and fees.


Rebuilding Lags in Los Angeles a Year After Riots
More than a year after the violent disorders that left much of central Los Angeles in ruins, fewer than half the buildings that suffered major damage have been restored.
Most of the rest are either shells of crumbling walls or rubble-strewn lots.
Many conflicting forces have combined to slow the rebuilding: lack of money, problems collecting insurance and getting loans, heavy winter rains, bureaucratic delays with permits, compliance with modern seismic and disability codes, opposition to liquor stores, a depressed local economy and, for many owners, sheer fear and weariness.


The Changing Definition of Health Insurers
Even without Federal health-care reform, the nation's $300 billion health insurance industry is on the verge of a transformation.
Many of the nation's 500 or more health insurers are expected to be driven out of the field in the next few years as the industry shifts its business away from traditional insurance and toward the delivery and management of health care.


Span-America Medical Systems Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Suns End a Series of Living Dangerously
The Phoenix Suns no longer primp in front of their mirrors.
Horrified for five playoff games by the upstart Los Angeles Lakers, the Suns have had their blemishes exposed for all to see and consider themselves fortunate not to be turning in their uniforms today.
If not for Dan Majerle playing this afternoon with a sniffle and a sore throat, if not for Oliver Miller's perfect overtime period, if not for Charles Barkley's passionate 31 points and 14 rebounds, the Lakers would be practicing for the San Antonio Spurs.
Instead, it was the Suns who advanced to the second round today with a 112-104 overtime victory and became the first team in National Basketball Association history to botch the first two playoff games at home and win a three-of-five-game series.


Wickman Provides Rest For Tiger-Weary Bullpen
Tiger Stadium is a place where even Spike Owen is a home-run threat, where six-run leads are scoffed at and where bullpens burn out faster than firecrackers.
Leave your seat, and you hazard missing some action.
Stay in your seat, and you hazard getting clipped by another homer.
With keen knowledge of this daunting ball park and the brutish hitters the Tigers parade to the plate, Bob Wickman strode to the mound and tried to insure that the elements and the booming bats would not undo him.
The Yankees had a weary bullpen after two straight extra-inning games and they needed innings from Wickman.
Lots of innings.


Transit System Overhaul May See Drastic Cutbacks
A $9.6 billion plan to overhaul New York's bus, subway and commuter rail system over the next five years, approved in Albany last month, may have to shrink by $500 million because New York City is contributing less to the plan than the Metropolitan Transportation Authority originally expected, M.T.A. officials say.
If cuts have to be made, the officials warn, plans to rebuild or renovate several dozen subway stations -- including installation of new, non-garbled public-address systems -- may be abandoned.
Accusing the city of failing to provide its fair share of the cost to improve conditions in subways and buses, the M.T.A. officials say a series of meetings with city officials in recent weeks have failed to yield any progress in resolving the increasingly bitter dispute.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-10  NO RUSH TO ACT IN BOSNIA  Whether prudent or fainthearted, there is no disposition on the American side to rush into military action in Bosnia.
And in Europe, few believe allied arms can make a decisive difference.
News Analysis.
A1  U.N.
TEAM REACHES ENCLAVE  United Nations military observers reached the Bosnian enclave of Zepa and found most of the inhabitants have fled.
A Bosnian Serb-Muslim cease-fire held, but Muslims and Croats fought in Mostar.
A8


U.S. Intervention in Bosnia Has Only Negatives; Moral Leadership Calls
To the Editor:
My former professor Zbigniew Brzezinski speaks eloquently to what millions of my generation must be thinking (" 'Never Again' -- Except for Bosnia," Op-Ed, April 22).
Those of us born after World War II grew up in a near-barrage of accounts of the horrors of Hitler's Nazis and the Holocaust.
Reminders were deemed necessary if the world was to insure such horrors never occurred again.


Plan to Get National Advertisers Into Papers
What do Cadillacs, Budweisers and Wheaties have in common?
The companies that make them spend a lot of money on advertising to tempt drivers, drinkers and eaters.
But they, and national marketers like them, spend precious little of it for ads in the pages of the country's newspapers.
National advertisers spent $76.3 billion last year.
Of that amount, only $3.8 billion went to newspapers.


Sports of The Times; There's a Not-So-Secret Word at Shea These Days: Boo!
In the rottenest of times, when it appeared that the sky over Queens was falling, when his batters couldn't bat, his pitchers couldn't hurl, his players were casually making idiots of themselves on and off the field, and the Shea Stadium fans were like a surly mob, Frank Cashen, then the general manager of the Mets, had a saying: "Just another day in Paradise."
Return with us now to Paradise: The Mets sank three fathoms deeper into last place below the Marlins yesterday as the fresh fish from Miami -- the expansion franchise that is all of one month old -- ate up the Mets again, for the second straight day in their three meetings, this time by a score of 6-4.


American Restaurant Partners reports earnings for Qtr to March 30


Gilbert Z. Africa, Theresa Carlos
Maria Theresa Carlos, a daughter of Erlinda Carlos of New York and the late Celestino P. Carlos, was married yesterday to Gilbert Zenon Africa, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Gonzalo Africa of Manila.
Msgr.
William Devine performed the ceremony at St.
Rose of Lima Roman Catholic Church in Short Hills, N.J.
Mrs.
Africa, 28, is known as Theresa.
She is a telecommunications support consultant at MCI Communications in New York.
Her mother is a personnel officer for the United Nations Population Fund in New York.
Her father was a professor of English literature at the University of the East in Manila.


Howe's Ankle Is as Swollen As His Earned Run Average
Steve Howe thought it was strange that a clubhouse worker had hosed down the staircase leading to the visiting dugout runway before Saturday night's game.
He even thought someone might trip on the steep and soggy flight of stairs.
He was right.
"When I went down," Howe said, "it felt like someone shot me in the back."


Florida East Coast Industries reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


School Libraries Struggle to Survive in California
In the cafeteria at Del Paso Heights Elementary School, the noise rises in a crescendo as students finish their lunches and get ready for recess.
Ask them the way to the library and they will point to a locked storage room at the back of the cafeteria that seems better suited to hold surplus peanut butter than books.
While that cramped and little-used space is what now serves as a library, at the other end of the school the room that had been the library now houses a third-grade class.
A piece of cardboard blocks the old book drop in the door.


Sabotage Disrupts Paraguay's First Free Presidential Election
Several acts of sabotage undermined the opposition in Paraguay's presidential election today.
In the morning, a fusillade of rifle fire damaged the transmitting capabilities of the nation's only opposition television channel.
In the afternoon, minutes after the polls closed, the pro-Government channel declared the ruling party candidate, Juan Carlos Wasmosy, president-elect.


Ben &amp; Jerry's Homemade Inc.  (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 27


David Wachtel, Jennifer Goldstein
Jennifer Susan Goldstein, an appellate lawyer at the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission, was married yesterday to David Martin Wachtel, a public interest environmental lawyer, both in Washington.
Rabbi Robert Orkand performed the ceremony at Temple Shaaray Tefila in Bedford, N.Y.
Ms.
Goldstein, 29, is keeping her name.
She graduated cum laude from Bryn Mawr College and received a law degree from the University of Chicago.
She is a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
William B. Goldstein of Wilton, Conn.
Her father is the chairman of the department of radiology at Danbury (Conn.) Hospital.
Her mother, Dr.
Madeline Klein, retired as a pediatric gastroenterologist in Danbury.


At This Gathering, Court Jesters Reign
This is exactly what Bjorn Borg was looking for: high-quality tennis without the tunnel-vison competitiveness.
From the beginning of the doubles match featuring Borg-Ilie Nastase against Bob Hewitt-Frew McMillan, it was obvious this would not be an intense, heated match.
It was, instead, a comedy routine.


Accounts
*
Beatrice Cheese Inc., Waukesha, Wis., to Cramer-Krasselt, Milwaukee, to handle brands like County Line cheese, Cracker Backer cheeses and Reddi-wip whipped topping, previously handled by William Eisner &amp; Associates, Hales Corners, Wis.
Billings were estimated at $11 million. *
Huffy Bicycles, Dayton, Ohio, said it had narrowed the review on its estimated $5 million to $10 million account to four finalists: the incumbent, Lois U.S.A., Chicago; Bayer Bess Vanderwarker, Chicago; Tatham Euro RSCG, Chicago, and J. Walter Thompson Detroit.
A final decision is expected in mid-June.


Abroad at Home; How Not to Choose
In the weeks since Justice Byron White's decision to retire from the Supreme Court, the press has run various stories about whom President Clinton may appoint in his place.
The speculation has proved little about the choice, but it has done one depressing thing: shown how narrowly politicized some people want the process of selection to be.
A story mentions a possible nominee and then says that some interest group is likely to object to him or her.
Why?
Because the person has strayed, however slightly, from the party line of that group.


Capital Re Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Market Place; Home Depot's success has begun to attract naysayers.
TOUTED as the stock of the 1990's, Home Depot has rapidly climbed, but some professional investors now wonder if the stock has gotten ahead of itself.
The recent souring of retail stocks has had an impact on Home Depot, as investors tend to herd all retailers together when one falls out of favor. (In this case, that one is Wal-Mart.) But are there soft spots in this retail knight's armor?


Mental Health Professionals Worry Over Coming Change in Health Care
Conversations with mental health professionals across the country reveal deep fears about the limits that a new national health plan may put on payments for psychotherapy.
Psychiatrists, clinical psychologists and other psychotherapists say some limits being discussed would be calamitous for many patients and for the profession itself.
And those who know what is going on in the secret proceedings of the mental health task force, part of the Task Force on National Health Care Reform, say that therapists -- and those who need therapy -- may have good reason to worry.


Hemophiliacs Demand Answers as AIDS Toll Rises
Until recently, the closest Michael J. Druck had ever come to a public protest was filing a complaint with New York City about a noisy neighbor.
But two months ago the 31-year-old rare-coin dealer found himself wrestling with two hotel security guards in Manhattan as he picketed a dinner honoring prominent hemophilia doctors.
Mr.
Druck, a hemophiliac who was infected with the AIDS virus through blood products, says the confrontation was a cry of desperation.
He has already watched an uncle and a cousin die of AIDS, and he says he wants to know before he dies himself whether his infection with H.I.V. was preventable and, if it was, who is at fault.


LSI Industries (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Republicans Keep Quiet About Bond Issue Inquiry
Ordinarily the hint of political scandal in a gubernatorial election year would be a godsend for any candidate trying to unseat the incumbent.
But the Republicans who are vying to challenge Gov.
Jim Florio this fall have been strangely reserved over a developing Federal investigation into the sale of state bonds that has reached into the Governor's inner office.
The investigation into the possible illegal steering of a $2.9 billion New Jersey Turnpike Authority bond issue has centered on a bond brokerage company, Armacon Securities Ltd., that is owned by two of Mr.
Florio's closest political allies, Nicholas H. Rudi and Joseph C. Salema, the Governor's chief of staff.
Mr.
Salema has said he placed his half of Armacon in a blind trust in 1990, and through his attorneys, he has denied any wrongdoing.


Russians Commemorate Victory Over Nazi Germany


Marietta Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Magazine Notes; This Marriage Can Be Saved . . . And Sold in Syndication
Can this marriage be saved?
You bet it can.
Not only saved, but rewritten, recycled, syndicated and -- if things work out -- even featured on cable television.
"Can This Marriage Be Saved?" is The Ladies' Home Journal's true-life monthly column that has hooked millions of Journal readers for 40 years.
Based on intimate details from the files of marriage counselors throughout the country, the column's most remarkable feature is that every marriage it writes about is saved.


Honors
*
Kerry E. Smith, the editor and publisher of Promo magazine, Wilton, Conn., was named Sales Promotion Man of the Year by the Council of Sales Promotion Agencies. *
Girgenti, Hughes, Butler &amp; McDowell, New York, was named the agency of the year by Med Ad News magazine.


Theater in Review
Aunt Mary  Village Theater Company 133 West 22d Street Chelsea Through May 22 By Pam Gems; directed by Gigi Rivkin; set by Michael Blau; costumes by Marj Feenan; lighting by Susan M. Kelleher; sound by Jim Harrington; assistant director, Kate Bushmann; stage manager, Lisa Jean Lewis; technical director, Zeke Zaccaro; wigs by Christopher Clark.
Presented by the Village Theater Company.
WITH: Allyn Burrows, Bill Christ, Michael Curran, Scott Facher, David McConnell, Julia McLaughlin, and Kimberly Schultheiss.
The title character of Pam Gems's play "Aunt Mary" is a cigar-smoking, bisexual drag queen doyen (or doyenne, take your pick) of a small circle of transvestites who operate a gas station-cum-theater-cum-cafe outside Birmingham, England, and pretend it's a literary salon.
It sounds a lot funnier than it is.


Chrysler, in a major consolidation, picks BBDO North America to handle media services.
THE CHRYSLER CORPORATION, in one of the largest consolidations ever of the media functions on an advertising account, has selected BBDO North America to coordinate media services for all its national brand and corporate campaigns.
Chrysler ended its lengthy, closely watched review on Friday when it awarded BBDO North America the responsibilities for planning, buying and placing an estimated $320 million to $400 million worth of advertising time and space annually.
The agency, which is based in Southfield, Mich., and handles the account for Chrysler's Dodge cars and trucks, said it would form a stand-alone shop to handle only those media functions.
Chrysler said the new shop would be named something like Pentastar Communications, after the five-sided star the company uses as its corporate logo.


World Economies


Theater in Review
A Doll House
Playhouse 46  St.
Clement's Church  423 West 46th Street  Clinton Written by Henrik Ibsen; adapted and directed by John R. Briggs; based on a concept by Tisa Chang; sets by Robert Klingelhoefer; costumes by Juliet Ouyoung; lighting by William Simmons; sound by Jim Van Bergen; production stage manager, Lisa Ledwich.
Presented by the Pan Asian Repertory Theater.
With: Mel Duane Gionson, Daniel Dae Kim, Karen Tsen Lee, Lou Ann Lucas and Ron Nakahara
Because a woman is judged by "masculine law," she "cannot be herself in modern society." That was Ibsen's belief as he began writing "A Doll's House," and the words resonate through the play whenever and wherever it is performed.
"A Doll's House" is of course a cry for freedom as well as for feminism.
The continuing relevance of the play begins with the author's humane awareness of Nora's entrapment.


Shareholder Advocate's New Target
One of the founding fathers of the shareholder rights movement has found a new target: shareholders, or at least the class of big holders known as institutional investors.
Ira M. Millstein, founder of the Institutional Investor Project at Columbia University and a New York attorney, said his project, which helped begin the shareholder rights movement that has shaken up Corporate America, would now examine the ethics and policies of major institutional shareholders -- corporate and public pension funds, bank trust departments, insurance companies and mutual funds.
Growing Power
Collectively, this group owns about $3 trillion worth of American stocks, or more than 50 percent of all the shares of the nation's publicly held corporations.
Institutional investors' financial power has been steadily growing as stock holdings by individual investors continue to decline and pension funds have replaced individuals as the biggest buyers of corporate stocks.


This Team Has Leaders And Burden
The team kept the first three places in the overall standing.
It kept Raul Alcala of Mexico, the race favorite, healthy and out of trouble.
But in the subtle world of bicycle racing, the favored WordPerfect team was not so perfect today in the 11-day Tour DuPont, America's premier race.
In a mostly flat, 110.8-mile stage from Pen Mar in northern Maryland past Three Mile Island and into this chocolate capital, WordPerfect placed no one higher than Alcala's 34th place in the field of 116 professionals and amateurs.
That did not hurt it.
But on a sunny day when temperatures reached 85 degrees, the race was uncomfortably fast because riders kept breaking away, getting caught and breaking away again.
The riders averaged 25.8 miles an hour reaching town, then faster on the two concluding three-mile loops.


In Managed Competition, Insurance Agents at Risk
One part of the health insurance industry that could receive a body blow under managed competition is the nation's 250,000 agents and brokers.
Today, they act as intermediaries between the employers and individuals who buy health insurance and the companies that sell it.
But if the new health alliances can bargain on behalf of most consumers and gather information from insurers, consumers should be able to make choices on their own, theorists of managed competition say.


Tickets for City Center Gala
Remaining tickets will be sold today for $10 each at the box office for City Center's 50th-anniversary gala benefit tonight at 7 P.M. at City Center, 131 West 55th Street, Manhattan.
Hosts for the benefit are Joanne Woodward and Edward Villella.
Among the dancers, musicians and actors participating are Kevin Kline, Irene Worth, Barbara Cook, Bobby Short, Kitty Carlisle Hart and the Paul Taylor Dance Company.
Information: (212) 581-7907.


Irving P. Kartell, 86, New York State Justice
Irving P. Kartell, who as a Justice of the State Supreme Court in Brooklyn ruled in favor of women bus drivers in a 1981 discrimination case, died on Saturday at Mary Immaculate Nursing Home in Lawrence, Mass.
He was 86 and moved to Lawrence from Brooklyn three years ago.
The cause was prostate cancer, said Harvey Goldman of the Goldman Fisher Funeral Chapel in Malden, Mass.


Respironics Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Review/Music; Like Old Times on Irving Pl.
Between 1860 and 1888, the Irving Theater stood at Irving Place and was the home of both popular entertainments and high-toned chamber music evenings.
Now there is an apartment tower there, but on its ground floor is the new Vineyard Theater, which has a resident early music-ensemble, Vineyard Musicke.
The ensemble's musicians have lately been looking into the history of Union Square, and on the afternoon of May 2 the ensemble re-created the kind of concert that the Irving Theater used to present.
The atmosphere was that of a variety show, beginning and ending with piano pieces by Louis Moreau Gottschalk (who played at the Irving) and with songs and instrumental works by other composers in between.
For the occasion, the group borrowed a period instrument from the Museum of the American Piano.


No Room for Sentiment on Immigration
To the Editor:
Re your inclusion of Emma Lazarus's "New Colossus" in "Pleas for Asylum Inundate System for Immigration" (front page, April 25), to whose sentiments some Americans might still adhere: the bitter reality is that we are not the same country we were in 1883.


Penn Virginia Corp. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


A Back Seat Driver With No Say in the Matter


Plains Resources Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Higher Salaries for Teachers?
Encouraged by state fact-finders who recommended that the New York City teachers' union get slightly higher salary increases than most other city unions, the teachers want more than slightly more.
Sandra Feldman, president of the United Federation of Teachers, points to ambiguous language in the fact-finders' report that suggests her union should get an 8.5 percent increase over 39 months -- instead of the 8.25 percent other unions got -- plus "an appropriate payment of additional money as may be made available" by the state.
The 8.5 percent is defensible; the city has traditionally paid teachers a bit more than other municipal workers in recognition of their role in educating the next generation.
But the city's finances aren't strong enough to justify an even larger increase just now.


Cherry Corp. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28


Congress Ponders Bill to Protect Some Religious Practices
Congress is moving toward overturning a Supreme Court ruling that made it easier to restrict religious practices that violate state or Federal laws.
The House is expected to act Tuesday on a bill that would require a "compelling governmental interest" to justify restrictions like prohibiting the use of illegal drugs as part of a religious ceremony.
The Government would also have to show that the means it chose was the "least restrictive" way to achieve its objective.


Clintons Visit Church and Art Museum on Mother's Day


Eldec Corp. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 28


Inquiry on Sailor's Killing Tests Navy in Dealing With Gay Issues
When Allen R. Schindler was beaten to death in a public restroom in Japan last October, the Navy told his mother that he had fallen on his head in a fight.
Only after friends of the dead sailor wrote to a military newspaper did the Navy acknowledge that a shipmate might have killed Mr.
Schindler because he was gay.
The inquiry into the fatal beating of Mr.
Schindler, a 22-year-old radioman on the amphibious ship Belleau Wood, illustrates the difficulties the Navy has had in dealing with the issue of allowing homosexuals in the military.
Both sides have seized on the case as evidence for their arguments.


1 Man Killed, 2 Wounded
One man was shot to death and two were wounded in the Washington Heights area of Manhattan yesterday, the police said.
Sgt.
John McCluskey, a police spokesman, said the victims were standing at 158th Street and St.
Nicholas Avenue about 5:30 P.M. when two men got out of a car and began shooting.
The gunmen fled in the car.
The dead man was not identified last night.
The wounded men, identified as Carlos Hosking, 19, and Pijuan Nivardo, 31, did not require hospitalization, the police said.
Sergeant McCluskey said there were no arrests and no weapons were recovered.


Arnold Industries (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Kori Robin Lynne, William Meyers
Kori Robin Lynne, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Howard Lynne of Poughkeepsie, N.Y., was married yesterday to William Mark Meyers, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Leon Meyers of New Rochelle, N.Y.
Rabbi Reuven Fink performed the ceremony at Temple Beth-El in Stamford, Conn.
Mrs.
Meyers, 24, is a research assistant in the Psychiatry Service at Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center in New York and is studying for a master's degree in psychology at the New School for Social Research.
She plans to begin a doctoral program in counseling psychology at Fordham University in the fall.
She graduated from Brandeis University, as did her husband.


PRO BASKETBALL: Sports of The Times; For Coleman's Nets, the Eyes Have It
IN case there were any remaining doubts about Derrick Coleman's importance to the New Jersey Nets, the evidence to be found yesterday in the eyes of his teammates said more than any highlight video or sheet of statistics.
The Nets had somehow shrunk a five-game playoff series against Cleveland to 6 minutes 31 seconds.
They were within 8 points of a Cavalier team that should have long ago disposed of this perceived irritant and moved ahead to their obsession with the Chicago Bulls.
But Coleman was keeping the Nets close.
The hard way.


Dance in Review
New York City Ballet 'Balanchine Celebration'
New York State Theater
George Balanchine may have been as wedded to abstraction as he was said to be.
But "La Sonnambula," presented by the New York City Ballet on Friday night as part of the ongoing "Balanchine Celebration," is vibrant proof that he also knew how to tell a story.
Called "Night Shadow" at its premiere in 1960, the ballet is set to a score by Vittorio Rieti that makes a dark-glinting whole of several sumptuously melodic Bellini themes.


Revisionism at the Holocaust's Source
To the Editor:
I read "When History Is a Casualty" (Weekend, April 30), about Holocaust revisionism, hours after returning from Prague and Berlin, follow ing the path of Holocaust history.
What I saw is no less than Holocaust revisionism at its very source.


Laura Epstein, Lawrence Rosen
Laura Epstein, the daughter of Ellen and Leonard Epstein of South Orange, N.J., was married yesterday to Lawrence David Rosen, a son of Barbara and Martin Rosen of Wayne, N.J.
Rabbi Avi Magid performed the ceremony at Tappan Hill in Tarrytown, N.Y.
Mrs.
Epstein Rosen, 26, graduated from Haverford College, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa.
She is a doctoral candidate in clinical psychology at New York University.
Her father is a partner in the law office of Joseph E. Bachelder in New York.
Her mother is an English teacher at John P. Stevens High School in Edison, N.J.


Martinez Knows She'll Always Have Rome
Conchita Martinez and a searing Roman sun teamed up today to deny Gabriela Sabatini in her bid to win a third consecutive Italian Open title.
Playing in her first final here, Martinez endured a grueling first set, then cruised through the second for a 7-5, 6-1 victory at the Foro Italico.
"This is my most important tournament victory," the 21-year-old Spaniard said after gaining her 17th career tournament victory.
"I'm in the best shape I've ever been in, which means I can run and fight more than I used to."


U.S. Intervention in Bosnia Has Only Negatives; Leave It to Europe
To the Editor:
Your discussion of United States military intervention in Bosnia (The Week in Review, May 2) omits the strongest reason not to become involved: lack of any clear, overriding U.S. interest in backing either side.


Why Wall Street Goofed on Cable's New Rules
"Oops." That was the collective cry of Wall Street analysts last week, after they realized they had missed significant details in the 450-page stack of cable television rate formulas published by the Federal Communications Commission.
At first glance, the charts and tables the commission released late last Monday looked much more modest than everyone had expected, nowhere near the $1 billion rollback that commission officials had estimated when they adopted the rules on April 1.
On Tuesday, stocks of leading cable companies like Tele-Communications Inc., Time Warner Inc. and the Comcast Corporation jumped by an average of 10 percent in active trading.


Coach Takes His Shots After the Final Buzzer
Allan Bristow, Charlotte's head coach, livened up the post-game news conference yesterday by refusing to give the Knicks' defense credit for the Hornets' 15-point fourth quarter.
Asked if he thought the Knicks had worn down Charlotte, Bristow said: "Worn down, are you kidding me? They were playing our game. Ask them if they got worn down. They're the ones who aren't used to this pace. I thought the Knicks played as well as they can against that kind of pressure defense. They did some positive things out there and got the breaks late."


Review/Theater; A Classic From Ireland Moved to Trinidad
With a little rewriting and a lot of clowning, it may be possible to turn any classic play into a television sitcom.
The Beatrice-and-Benedick sniping of "Much Ado About Nothing" alone is a prime-time perennial, whether under the title "Moonlighting" or "Love and War." While such low intentions are hardly the point of "Playboy of the West Indies," Mustapha Matura's adaptation of "The Playboy of the Western World," the results sometimes do cry out for a laugh track.
Mr.
Matura has moved J. M. Synge's "extravagant comedy," originally set in the County Mayo of 1907, to Mayaro, Trinidad, in 1950.
As boisterously animated at the Mitzi E. Newhouse Theater at Lincoln Center, this tropical community is a little too close for comfort to Gilligan's Island.
Even so, the script, which has been widely produced since its premiere in 1984, is clever and sometimes legitimately amusing.
Mr.
Matura is an elegant writer whose other plays can recall the novels of his fellow Trinidadian V. S. Naipaul in their ironic political undertow.
Here he so faithfully and musically translates the rich Irish language of the original text into a lilting Caribbean patois that his verbal ingenuity recalls Richard Wilbur's stunning English translations of Moliere.
For all the alterations, which include the transformation of a pub into a rum shop and of the Widow Quin into a superstitious folk priestess (Michele Shay), "Playboy" still tells of a young stranger, now called Ken (Victor Love) instead of Christy, who briefly earns the adoration of an impoverished town by confessing to having committed parricide.


Some See Half-Empty Glasses in U.S.-China Pacts
To hearty congratulations, the United States and China have reached a series of agreements in the last few years aimed at resolving disagreements in areas ranging from trade to human rights.
Now those agreements are generating their own disputes about whether China is abiding by its promises.
The latest commotion came late last week with the disclosure of growing evidence that China might have shipped medium-range M-11 missiles to Pakistan.
Such shipments would violate China's promise, first made to Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d in 1991, not to sell such missiles.


No Headline
"It's like watching a prize fight, but you only see one guy on the screen. War is hell, and there are atrocities on all sides. This has been reduced to a good-guy, bad-guy scenario. They have chosen to make the Serbs the black hats." -- NICHOLAS TRKLA, a Serbian-American businessman, complaining about news coverage.  [ A12:5. ]


Review/Dance; American Ballet Theater Revives A Difficult Classic From Denmark
The reported demise of ballet superstars can only appear premature when Julio Bocca is onstage.
The young Argentine virtuoso pulled out all the stops with an extra dose of bravura when American Ballet Theater revived Harald Lander's "Etudes" on Friday night at the Metropolitan Opera House.
There was sheer dance power all around in this celebrated Danish classroom ballet.
Cynthia Harvey's projection was colored with exceptional musicality, and Jeremy Collins, flanking her along with Mr.
Bocca, danced with grand flourish.


CHRONICLE
He has been a state legislator, a judge, a representative, a senator, Governor of Connecticut and Secretary of Health, Education and Welfare, and this evening ABRAHAM A. RIBICOFF will receive a record of all that, in his own words.
Friends and colleagues will gather at the Columbia University Faculty House to present him with a bound transcript of the 19 hours of interviews he gave to the Columbia University Oral History Research Office.


Stanford Telecommunications (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


TV in Spain Is Cutting Back on Prime-Time Sex and Violence
Bending to strong Government pressure, Spain's state-owned and private television companies have agreed not to broadcast programs with gratuitous violence, explicit sex or improper language during hours when children or adolescents are likely to be watching.
The accord forms part of a new ethics code negotiated by the Education Ministry and television companies with the specific aim of protecting minors.
Adherence to the code is voluntary.


Ziegler Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Dceusha Journal; Misfits of Peace: Is This the End of the Bushmen?
In his first life, David Sheukuni was a Bushman.
His tribe taught him to track giraffe and forage for wild lemon here in the hot savanna of what the maps call northeastern Namibia.
That life ended when the white army came.
In his second life, the white men taught him to be a soldier, tracking and killing black insurgents for the South African Defense Force.
He learned about money and store-bought shoes and liquor.
That life ended when the white men surrendered Namibia to its independence in 1990 and left.


Pratt &amp; Lambert Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Serb-Americans Feel Distant War
Until a few years ago, this country's Serbs were an obscure ethnic group little known to most Americans, about 116,000 people concentrated in Midwestern rust belt cities, according to the United States Census, their ethnicity often confused with Syrians or Siberians.
Now everyone knows of the Serbs.
And as war rages in the former Yugoslavia with reports of ethnic cleansing, death camps and rapes of Muslim women at the hands of Serbian soldiers, Serbian-Americans have been forced to account for atrocities an ocean away in a land many have never seen.


Pacer Technology (NSC) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Review/Opera; From a Fastidious Man, A Less Fastidious Work
"Mazeppa" is perhaps the most uncivilized of Tchaikovsky's operas, which makes it in many ways the most interesting.
Finished in 1883 -- midway between the composition of "Eugene Onegin" and "The Queen of Spades" -- this merger of historical cataclysm, Verdian love conflicts and Donizettian mad scenes largely abjures the smooth beauties of its two more famous companions.
In "Mazeppa" -- which the Opera Orchestra of New York offered in concert at Carnegie Hall the night of May 2 -- the usually fastidious Tchaikovsky gets his hands dirty.
It is not the constant presence of Russian and Ukrainian country tunes that is so striking; it is the directness of their presentation: their feeling of sweat and simple labor.
Absent is the well-groomed folkloric charm that in "Onegin" becomes a kind of prop.


The 'Me' of 'Roger and Me' Is Trying Network TV
There's something about being in front of a camera that makes Americans say the most astonishingly self-revelatory things.
But even after years of trying, Michael Moore hasn't figured out exactly what that is.
"I'm still amazed," he says, contemplating the mysteries of the video age with a mischievous smile.


As Ratings Stall, Clinton Tries Tune-Up
In many of the ways that count, the spirit of the 1992 Clinton campaign is dead.
That spirit, represented by the "War Room" in the Little Rock, Ark., campaign headquarters, was supposed to live on in a World War I-era situation room in the Old Executive Office Building.
But the young aides who staffed it -- trained in the art of quick response, coordinated message-making and effective communication that rooted out many a land mine during the campaign -- lack experience with the perils that lurk in real-life threats like a Republican filibuster, debates over aid to Russia or war in the Balkans.


Software Spectrum (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Relentless, Relentless. Islanders, Islanders.
All cogs and no big wheels have made the Islanders one bona-fide contender in their battle with the two-time defending Stanley Cup champion Pittsburgh Penguins for bragging rights to this year's Patrick Division title.
Deprived of the services of their damaged centerpiece, Pierre Turgeon, whose separated shoulder isn't due to mend until it's time for the conference final, the consummate underdogs are merrily muddling along without him.


Troubled New York City And a Note of Optimism
IN 1987, a stubbornly optimistic mayoral commission issued its forecast for the millennium under a title that evoked high hopes: "New York Ascendant." Less than four months later, the stock market crashed.
With the millennium now six years closer, another city commission has just published its own generally rosy vision of the future, but with a decidedly more sober name.
"Shaping the City's Future" is the less judgmental title of the New York City Planning Commission's first strategic agenda, as required by the revised City Charter.
The commission's report on planning and zoning doubles as a broadly delineated gauge against which the courage and the imagination of municipal candidates can be measured.


Survey Details Job Gender Gap
In a survey of 2,000 women and men in the advertising and media industries nationwide, 65 percent of the women said an old-boy network and a sexist cultural climate were inhibiting their chances to succeed.
The survey, which was conducted recently by the Advertising Women of New York and released on Friday, said the median incomes of men in those communications industries continue to be higher than those of women -- roughly $7,000 more at the beginning of their careers and an average of $32,000 more after 20 years.


Theater in Review
On the Way Home  American Place Theater 111 West 46th Street Manhattan Written and collected by Stephen Wade; directed by Milton Kramer; sets and lighting by Mr.
Kramer; production stage manager, Michael Robin.
A Merrywang Inc. production presented by the American Place Theater, Wynn Handman, director; Dara Hershman, general manager.
WITH: Stephen Wade.
For Stephen Wade, a gentle, frizzy-haired storyteller who accompanies himself on the banjo, his chosen instrument is the musical embodiment of Americana.
Or as he puts it in "On the Way Home," his one-man show of stories and songs at the American Place Theater, the banjo is "a Model T Ford with syncopated rhythm."


THE WHITE HOUSE STRUGGLES TO SAVE ENERGY TAX PLAN
The Clinton Administration has altered major facets of its proposed energy tax in response to political pressures and is now struggling to rescue the tax against a horde of lobbyists straining to pick it apart.
Some of Washington's most potent industry groups -- the National Association of Manufacturers, the American Petroleum Institute and the American Farm Bureau -- have vowed to kill the tax altogether, while dozens of other lobbies are mounting a major effort to amend the Administration's proposals.


CAMBODIA FACTIONS USE TERROR TACTICS IN CRUCIAL ELECTION
After 14 years of savagery in a civil war that has taken tens of thousands of lives, the Cambodian Government and the rebels of the Khmer Rouge have settled on a common strategy, if not a common goal.
Both are using terror to try to prevent a free and fair election this month in their shattered homeland.
The Khmer Rouge do not want an election at all, and the Maoist-inspired guerrillas have stepped up a terror campaign intended to sabotage the vote, scheduled for May 23 to May 28.


Maui Land &amp; Pineapple Co. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Trying to Spin the Star Dust of Athletes Into Gold
Brandon Steiner is a fast-talking, faster-thinking New York businessman who can simultaneously conduct two conversations, scan a business proposal and point out lightning-quick nuances in a Knicks game.
His interest in the Knicks' playoff success, to be sure, dwarfs that of the fellow with an interesting side bet or two.
He has assiduously cultivated the teams' players as friends, meanwhile establishing the groundwork for a number of lucrative deals if the local tall people go all the way.


People
*
Joyce Castleberry was named to the new position of fashion retail advertising director at Mirabella magazine, New York.
She was previously an account manager at Vanity Fair magazine, New York.
Also, Amy Harris, the beauty advertising director at Mirabella, was promoted to the new position of beauty/sales development director.


U.S. Intervention in Bosnia Has Only Negatives
To the Editor:
Misha Glenny's assessment coincides with my opinion that we need patient diplomacy, not military action of any sort in the former Yugoslavia ("Bomb the Serbs? A Wider War Would Follow," Op-Ed, April 29).
His assertion that many others will use American intervention as an excuse for even more vicious fighting is logical.
We have nothing at all to gain -- not even the "cathartic sense of righteousness" he suggests.


A Busy Week of Auctions
The Treasury's schedule of financings this week will center on the quarterly refunding by the Government, along with the regular weekly auction today of three- and six-month bills.
Tomorrow the Treasury will auction a 3-year note, followed on Wednesday by a 10-year note.
The final leg of the refunding will be on Thursday, with the auction of a 30-year bond.
The Government also said it planned to auction a 129-day cash management bill on Thursday.


Bosnia Move? Not Just Now; Few Expect a Decision On Use of Force Soon
Why is it taking so long? Are they just stalling, or what?
The carnage in Bosnia has been horrifying the rest of the world for a year now.
Troops from Britain, France and other countries have been there for months under the auspices of the United Nations, doing what little they could to alleviate the suffering.
President Clinton has been talking for weeks about new, tougher actions.


Kerr Group reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Equity Issues This Week
The following equity and convertible debt offerings are expected this week:
Agco Corp., 2.6 million shares of $25 cumulative convertible, exchangeable depositary preferred.
Dillon, Read &amp; Co.


Complete! Lofton Signs With Raiders
JAMES LOFTON, the top reception-yardage producer in N.F.L. history, signed with the Los Angeles Raiders yesterday, three days after saying he had agreed to a two-year, $1.8 million free agent contract with the team.


Patterns
Prefabricated Spreads
Anyone observing the shrinking staffs and budgets of fashion magazines won't be surprised by Benetton's new Paris division, Inedito.
Its purpose: to produce fashion spreads for magazines, featuring 40 percent Benetton apparel along with internationally distributed labels like Jean-Paul Gaultier, Kenzo and Esprit.
The 10-page spreads are being provided free to magazines until August, when Benetton will charge enough to cover its costs.
Catherine Alain-Bernard, the editor of the fashion-forward magazine Depeche Mode and a former editor of French Elle, is a consultant for the project, and spreads have been placed in one of the international Marie-Claire magazines and Cosmopolitan Italy.


Duramed Pharmaceuticals Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Female Condom Approved For Market
In spite of questions about its effectiveness in preventing pregnancy and protecting against sexually transmitted diseases, the first female condom was approved today for marketing by the Food and Drug Administration.
The decision was announced by the manufacturer, Wisconsin Pharmacal of Jackson, Wis., and confirmed by the drug agency.
The company said it would begin shipping the device within 8 to 10 weeks to clinics, centers treating sexual diseases and doctors.
It said it hoped to have the female condom, called Reality, commercially available nationwide by the end of the year.


China Now the Big Spender on Gold
China has become the largest buyer of gold, ending the United States' 25-year reign and giving gold's price a buoyancy it has not had in a decade.
Last year, the Chinese bought more than 350 metric tons of gold, much of it in the form of chuk kam, or pure gold jewelry, according to the annual report on the gold market by Gold Fields Mineral Services of London.
Its figures are the most closely watched in the market, and this year provided some of the first concrete data on Chinese gold purchases.


Landmarks Panel Parodies Its Reason for Being; No Trees for Soho
To the Editor:
I was pleased to see that the New York City Landmarks Preservation Commission has taken a stand against the introduction of street trees in the SoHo Preservation District (news article, April 28).
As accurately identified by the commission, the district, with its industrial heritage, had no street trees historically.
If street trees were added, along with their associated gratings and other contemporary embellishments, it would not only alter the district's unique character, but it would also substantially alter the visual and spatial relationships one has when viewing up or down any of its bustling streets today.


Foote, Cone &amp; Belding Communications Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Empire Blue Cross Says Reserves Rose
Empire Blue Cross and Blue Shield reported yesterday that its reserves had risen to $205.6 million at the end of the first quarter of 1993 from $39.7 million at the end of 1992.
Smaller-than-expected increases in the cost of the average hospital stay contributed significantly to the improvement in reserves, the company said.


Particle Theory Backed
AFTER working on the problem for more than a year, a supercomputer has concluded that a major theory describing fundamental particles is probably correct.
For two decades physicists have accepted the Theory of Quantum Chromodynamics because it explains experimental measurements, even though the theory has not been rigorously proved.
The theory accounts for the relationships between fundamental particles called hadrons -- nuclear particles like protons and neutrons that are influenced by the "strong" nuclear force.


Emory Graduates Addressed By Retired Head of Coca-Cola
Donald R. Keough, who recently retired as president and chief operating officer of the Coca-Cola Company, urged graduates of Emory University yesterday to approach life with passion and a spirit of constant renewal.
Speaking at the 148th commencement at the Atlanta university, Mr.
Keough stressed the importance of having both the courage to dream and the zeal and the moral conviction to realize that dream.


Frontier Insurance Group Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Algernon Black, Leader of Society For Ethical Culture, Is Dead at 92
Algernon D. Black, a teacher and the leader emeritus of the New York Society for Ethical Culture, died on Sunday at a nursing home in Rye, N.Y.
A resident of Manhattan, he was 92.
He died after a long illness, his family said.


New TV Deal a Slight to Fans and Players Alike
In concocting an unprecedented television deal with two networks, major league club owners have sent messages to their fans and their players.
They have told their fans that not all their post-season games are worth watching, and they have told the players that the partnership they have proposed isn't worth the paper it would be written on.
To the fans, the owners have said, look, we have had a maximum of 21 post-season games and you have been able to watch, if you have so desired, all 21 of them.
Now we want to increase the maximum number of post-season games to 41, but we want to decrease the number you can watch to 19.


Fallon Sets Sights On Creative Director
Fallon McElligott in Minneapolis said it expected to hear by the end of this week whether Bill Westbrook, vice chairman and creative services director at a Fallon sibling shop, the Martin Agency in Richmond, would join Fallon as creative director.
Fallon has been searching since March for a replacement for Pat Burnham, who unexpectedly left the agency to explore becoming a commercial director.


MAY DEPARTMENT STORES CO. (N)
Although spenders turned into savers in February and March, the May Department Stores Company managed to turn in a first-quarter performance that once again proved cost control is a powerful tool in a slow economy.
Revenue increased at a moderate pace, but earnings were more than three times sales in the quarter, which covers the 13 weeks that ended on May 1.


Yanks See First Place But Can't Bring It Home
First place was so close tonight, as tantalizingly close as a single in the seventh or eighth inning.
One skimpy single from any of six different batters and the Yankees would probably have gleefully left Tiger Stadium on top in the American League East.
They could not get it.
When they failed to break a 1-1 tie for Melido Perez and then turned the game over to an erratic bullpen in the bottom of the ninth, their fate was predictable.


Olsten in Deal for Lifetime; Will Be Giant in Home Care
The Olsten Corporation, a rapidly growing supplier of temporary office help and home health care, said yesterday that it had agreed to acquire the Lifetime Corporation, a home health-care provider, in a stock transaction valued at $600 million.
The deal will make Olsten, which had been viewed primarily as an "office temp" company, the nation's largest provider of home health care.


Knicks Able to Show More Power in Reserve
When analyzing the matchup, most people concluded that the Knicks' bench was stronger than the Charlotte Hornets'.
Game 1 supported that conclusion.
New York's bench trio of Anthony Mason, Greg Anthony, and Rolando Blackman played a major role in the 111-95 victory Sunday that gave the Knicks a 1-0 edge in the four-of-seven-game series.
For Anthony (14 points, 6 assists) and Blackman (14 points), the performances were their strongest of the playoffs.
For Mason (11 points, 11 rebounds, 5 assists, 2 steals), his effort was another example of why he is one of the league's most valuable sixth men.
In all, New York's bench outscored Charlotte's reserves, 39-23.


Abrupt Departure at Vanity Fair
In yet another shake-up at Conde Nast, the company announced yesterday that Kathy Leventhal would become publisher of Vanity Fair, replacing Ronald Galotti, who had been publisher since 1990.
Ms.
Leventhal has been the publisher of Conde Nast's two-year-old beauty magazine, Allure.


RESULTS PLUS
TENNIS  Sampras Is Happy With Two-Set Victory  Top-ranked Pete Sampras tuned up his game on clay yesterday, beating Renzo Furlan of Italy, 6-1, 7-6 (7-3), in the first round of the Italian Open in Rome.
Sampras is playing in his second tournament on clay this season and his first on the slower, red surface in Europe.
He was generally satisfied with his game in the 1-hour-39-minute match, especially for having staved off a third set on a hot, sunny day at the Foro Italico.
Sampras saved a set point when the 50th-ranked Furlan returned a deep service into the net, and the American later ended the match with an ace in the tie breaker.
Fourth-seeded Goran Ivanisevic, who is also more accustomed to faster surfaces, defeated Jaime Oncins, 6-3, 6-7 (5-7), 6-3, and then called the victory his best match of his injury-plagued season.
Jan Siemerink beat No. 12-seeded MaliVai Washington, 6-4, 7-6 (7-5), to score the first upset in the $1.75 million tournament.
Scheduled to play their opening matches today are second-seeded Jim Courier, the defending champion at the Italian Open, and third-seeded Boris Becker, who has won only two matches in four clay-court tournaments this spring.
Meanwhile, the ATP Tour announced it was conducting anti-doping tests during the Italian Open, the first time since implementing stricter penalties in March. (AP) 10th-Seeded German Advances: Sabine Hack, a German seeded 10th and ranked No. 19, advanced to the second round of the German Open in Berlin, beating Patricia Hy of Canada, 6-2, 6-0.
The top-seeded players, including Steffi Graf, Gabriela Sabatini and Jennifer Capriati, play their first matches today or tomorrow.
The only seeded player to lose was No. 15 Julie Halard of France, who was beaten by Miriam Oremans of the Netherlands, 6-2, 6-2.
Judith Wiesner of Austria, seeded 13th, beat Petra Thoren of Finland, 6-2, 6-1, and 12th-seeded Natalya Zvereva of Belarus defeated Andrea Strnadova of the Czech Republic, 6-4, 6-3. (AP)


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
6.50
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
3.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.00
2.83
3.81
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
2.89
2.86
3.62
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
2.99
2.95
3.72
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
5.52
5.54
7.03
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
6.81
6.84
7.88
TELEPHONE BONDS
7.77
7.80
8.80
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
5.85
5.85
6.66
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Corrections
A picture caption on Saturday about a memorial service for the violinist Nathan Milstein misidentified the woman at the center.
She was Ruth R. Goddard.


Gillette is reinforcing its commitment to brands despite Wall Street.
"BRAND" may still be considered the equivalent of a four-letter word on Wall Street, but the Gillette Company is proceeding with bold plans for a corporate identity program that reinforces its fierce commitment to name-brand products.
The program is intended to underscore the devotion of the giant marketer to its premium-priced products like Sensor, Braun, Oral-B, Trac II, Waterman and Liquid Paper, by appending the word to its corporate logo, declaring Gillette as a purveyor of "world-class brands."


Titan Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


K-Tel International reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


RehabClinics Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Europeans Reject U.S. Plan To Aid Bosnia and Halt Serbs
Western European governments today rejected President Clinton's proposal to arm Bosnia's Muslim-dominated Government and his threat to mount air strikes on Bosnian Serb targets.
The rejection, made at a meeting of European Community foreign ministers, underscored the sharp differences that exist between the United States and Europe on policy in the Balkans, and suggested the Europeans' new assertiveness in the face of what they perceive as American uncertainty.


Rexworks Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Seven Indicted In 1992 Slaying Of a Journalist
Angered by his articles about the multibillion-dollar drug trade, leaders of a Colombian cocaine cartel ordered the murder of a crusading Spanish-language journalist who was slain in a Queens restaurant 14 months ago, Federal authorities said yesterday.
The Colombian traffickers paid $20,000 for the killing, the authorities said, but most of the money went to other conspirators, leaving only a "a very small portion" for a 16-year-old gunman who calmly walked up behind the journalist, Manuel de Dios Unanue, and fired two shots into his brain as he finished a beer.


Inmate Faces Death With New Evidence Unheard
A death row inmate whose case led to a major Supreme Court decision in January on the rights of condemned prisoners is scheduled to die by lethal injection before dawn on Wednesday, with his new evidence of innocence unheard by the courts.
The inmate, Leonel Herrera, was convicted of killing a South Texas police officer in 1981.
His lawyers say they have new evidence that Mr.
Herrera's brother Raul, who died in 1984, was the trigger man.
But because of the Court's ruling in this case, the State Board of Pardons and Paroles and Gov.
Ann W. Richards may have to decide Mr.
Herrera's fate without a court ever hearing the new evidence.


G.O.P. Hopes Are as Big as Texas in Senate Race
When Lloyd Bentsen announced late last year that he would quit the Senate to become Treasury Secretary, Texas Democrats spent a few convulsive weeks sorting out whom Gov.
Ann W. Richards should name to replace him.
Still, at least one thing seemed likely: whoever was chosen would spend a long time in the seat, which has been held by Democrats since Reconstruction.
But then came the special election for the seat on May 1 when the State Treasurer, Kay Bailey Hutchison, a Republican, stunned nearly everyone by placing first in an open field of 24.
That left Governor Richards's choice, Bob Krueger, who placed second, as the clear underdog in the June runoff.


Sir Dermot Boyle; R.A.F. Leader, 88
Sir Dermot Boyle, Marshal of the Royal Air Force who rose from pilot to chief of the British Air Staff during the Suez crisis of 1956, died Wednesday.
He was 88 and lived in the county of Hampshire in southern England.
He was born in Abbeyleix, Ireland, and attended St.
Columba's College in Dublin before becoming one of the R.A.F.'s most skillful pilots in the 1920's.


Corrections
The Your Home column in the Real Estate section on Sunday, about reverse mortgages, misstated the telephone number for the Home Equity Information Center of the American Association of Retired Persons.
The number is (202) 434-6066.


Drug Maker Makes Push Into Generics
Amid growing price competition in pharmaceuticals, the American Home Products Corporation said yesterday that it would expand its generic drug business.
It intends to make lower-cost copies of drugs whose patents have expired in an appeal to large purchasers for managed care organizations.
The New York-based company, one of the country's largest makers of health-care products, joined a growing list of mainstream pharmaceutical companies that have made a significant commitment to generic drugs.
The pharmaceutical companies have come under increasing criticism for high prices and are facing growing competition.


U.S. Media Exaggerate Unrest in Egypt
To the Editor:
I am an American citizen living with my family in Egypt.
I am the managing director of Giza National Dehydration, part of McCormick &amp; Company, the spice and herb manufacturers and retailers.
I have been working here since Dec. 1991.
I have been appalled by your coverage of the "terrorist activities" here in Egypt.
If I believed everything that I heard or read in the international media, I would be afraid to go out at night.
However, the truth is that my family and I feel safer here than we did in our small town in California.


Jerome Blum Is Dead; Ex-Historian Was 80
Professor Jerome Blum, a former historian at Princeton University, died on Friday at the University of Maryland Hospital Medical Center in Baltimore.
A Baltimore native and resident, he was 80.
The cause was cancer, his family said.


Mercer International (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Review/Theater; Self-Purification for the Sweet, Lovable Wild Man
George Wendt, Norm at the bar on "Cheers," would make Iron John wince.
In "Wild Men!" (at the Westside Theater), he is a portrait of sybaritic self-indulgence.
Overweight, he proudly embraces excess.
He has come to the wilderness for a weekend of escapism and he enters carrying the remains of a six-pack of beer.
In other words, in this attenuated comedy sketch by a group of Chicagoans, Mr.
Wendt is a Norm of the north woods.
To his dismay, he has unwittingly signed up for an adventure in male bonding and mind-and-body purification.
In raw, primitive fashion, he is supposed to discover his natural masculinity as well as "the woman within." "Wild Men!" begins on a farcical note with Mr.
Wendt trying to adjust himself to the horrors of his healthy surroundings.
His fellow bonders express varying degrees of dweebishness.
Led by Rob Riley, the weekend's guide, this band is about to be tested for its power of survival.
Although Mr.
Wendt is amazed at what is expected of him, he soon wipes the chagrin off his face, joins the others in the sweat lodge and gets down to bonding business.


Victory for Saberhagen, With a Save by Walker
The ball arched high over Chico Walker's head late last night at Shea Stadium, and on the pitcher's mound, Bret Saberhagen could feel his stomach drop.
Saberhagen's lead was small, his offense was stagnant and his luck hadn't been great.
He could see the whole night fall apart in an instant.
He could see the ball fall.
He could see a run score.
He could see the Mets move into extra innings against the Marlins, a team that had given them such trouble over the weekend.


Damon Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Observer; Strange Idlers
Here from American Demographics magazine is a day-by-day study of how Americans use their leisure.
If, like me, you yearn to be a 100 percent typical American it is unsettling to discover that hobbies occupy far more of the typical American's leisure than wine.
Just look at these statistics: On Monday 1 percent of the average American's leisure is devoted to hobbies.
On Tuesday it shoots up to 2.3 percent and on Wednesday to 2.4 percent before falling back to 2 percent on Thursday, 1.1 percent on Friday, and a mere 1 percent on Saturday.


Files Say U.S. Had Informer In Bomb Case
Court papers filed in connection with the World Trade Center bombing say for the first time that a confidential informer provided information to investigators about the activities of Mohammed A. Salameh, the first suspect arrested in the Feb. 26 explosion.
The papers, filed by Mr.
Salameh's lawyer, reveal that an affidavit in support of a government search warrant contended that the informer accompanied Mr.
Salameh to a New Jersey apartment where wiring and electronic components used for making detonators were later seized.
The informer was said to have helped Mr.
Salameh learn to drive a van approximately two days before the World Trade Center explosion.


As Someone Lends a Hand, Spring Begins to Blossom Into Summer


Review/Dance; Reviving Two All-but-Forgotten Balanchine Works
Ten years after George Balanchine's death, the New York City Ballet's "Balanchine Celebration" obviously cannot include new works by the master.
Yet this extraordinary two-month survey of Balanchine's choreography does include revivals of ballets that have been out of the company's repertory for so long that they come across as premieres to a new audience.
Two of the season's most eagerly awaited rarities -- "Haieff Divertimento" and "Symphonie Concertante" -- were performed for the first time at the New York State Theater on Saturday night.
Along with the familiar "Theme and Variations" and "Symphony in C," they were grouped under the umbrella title of "1947 Premieres" in one of the festival's special "theme" programs.


Corvel Corp. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Dame Freya Stark, Travel Writer, Is Dead at 100
Dame Freya Stark, a resourceful and scholarly travel writer who was the first Westerner to journey through many regions of the Middle East, died on Sunday at her home in Asolo in northeast Italy.
She was 100..
Dame Freya, who was born in Paris and grew up in several homes in England and Italy, wrote 24 travel books and autobiographies and eight volumes of letters from the 1930's to the 1980's.
Many of the books have been reprinted several times, recently by Transatlantic Arts and Overlook Press, among other houses, and were based on often hazardous journeys by vehicle, camel and donkey.


HEALTH AIDES PLAN TO PLACE MEDICARE UNDER NEW SYSTEM
President Clinton's health-policy advisers have been developing plans to incorporate Medicare into a new health-care system, even as they have assured elderly people that no major changes in Medicare were imminent.
Although they know they risk provoking an outcry from elderly people who fear major changes in a crucial safety net, Administration officials say it will be difficult to control health costs if people 65 and older remain outside the new system.


2 Musicals Each Win 11 Tony Nominations; 'Angels' Sets a Record
The musicals "Kiss of the Spider Woman" and "Tommy" each received 11 Tony Award nominations yesterday, and "Angels in America: Millennium Approaches," received nine, the most for any play since the Tonys began in 1947.
Each of the three most-nominated productions has opened in the last three weeks, continuing a pattern that has become more established on Broadway in the last few years.
With an eye toward the box-office bonanza that a Tony Award, or a nomination, can bring, producers are increasingly waiting until later in the season to open their shows.
Last year, both "Guys and Dolls" and "Crazy for You," which won a total of seven Tonys (and 17 nominations), opened in the second half of the season.


Manufactured Home Communities Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt  *
Shearson Lehman Inc., a unit of American Express, is offering $150 million of subordinated broker-dealer notes due in 1996 at a price of 100 through Lehman Brothers.
The notes are priced to yield 62.5 basis points more than the three-month London interbank offered rate, with the interest rate adjusted and payable quarterly.
The issue is rated A-3 by Moody's and A by Standard &amp; Poor's. *
Tampa Electric Co., a unit of Teco Energy Co., is offering $75 million of 6 1/8 percent first-mortgage bonds due in 2003 at 99.094 to yield 6.248, and $80 million of 5 3/4 percent first-mortgage bonds due in 2000 at 99.527 to yield 5.833 percent.
Chase Securities Inc. is the underwriter for both maturities.
All the bonds are noncallable and rated Aa-1 by Moody's and AA by S.&amp; P. and Duff &amp; Phelps.


Better Checkup
American Dental Laser specializes in low-powered lasers for dentists.
It has recently traded far below its peak of $12.875, reached in December when the Government cleared for sale a product to prepare teeth for filling.
American Dental closed up $1.125 yesterday at $6.125.
On Friday, it reported a narrower quarterly loss.


Corrections
An article yesterday about the exclusion of a predominantly gay synagogue from the Salute to Israel parade in Manhattan misstated the location of the congregation's separate tribute to Israeli independence.
It was at the Central Synagogue community house, 123 East 55th Street.


New Apple Chip in Challenge to Intel
Sounding a direct challenge to the Intel Corporation's chips, Apple Computer's chairman, John Sculley, predicted today that in 1994 Apple would sell more than a million of a new generation of personal computers based on a chip Apple has developed in an alliance with I.B.M. and Motorola.
Mr.
Sculley said the company was on schedule with development of a new generation of personal computer, to be introduced next year and based on the Power PC chip.
The technology is derived from the microprocessor used in the International Business Machines Corporation's powerful RS/6000 work stations.


Memories Linger For Jets' Mersereau
Scott Mersereau knew it could have happened today, even in a Jet mini-camp, even on a sunny day on a grassy field playing ball with his teammates.
Ever since that moment last November, he has known that any day could be his last as a football player.
Mersereau was the other player in the remarkable Dennis Byrd saga.


Life Re Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Erving's Latest Leap Is Into Hall
So, what was Dr. J's secret as he soared high above the court on his way to the basket?
"I never had any trouble jumping," Julius Erving said here today at the Basketball Hall of Fame's induction ceremonies.
"The key to jumping is knowing how to land.


Fishermen Have an Excuse: Fewer Shad in the Hudson
Swimming upstream with the tides, shad are returning from the Atlantic Ocean to the Hudson River later than usual and in smaller numbers.
"It's not been a very good season," said Thomas R. Lake, a part-time fisherman who made two trips out into the river today from the Chelsea town boat launch ramp here in Dutchess County, coming back with a catch of 34 shad.


From Stepchild to Favorite Son
THE I.B.M.
Personal Computer Company, apparently rejoicing in its new freedom from bureaucratic meddling, has revamped its entire line of PS/1 computers for home and small-business users.
All of the new models introduced last week are based on Intel i486 microprocessors and include features that previously were available only on more expensive machines.
Suggested prices for the new desktop and "mini-tower" systems range from $1,199 to $2,999 and include an assortment of software.


CHRONICLE
JOHN and JANET WALLACH, authors of "The New Palestinians: The Emerging Generation of Leaders," recently published by Prima Publishing, received a fan letter recently, and Mr.
Wallach said he found in it the seeds of hope for peace in the Middle East.
The letter came from SHIMON PERES, the Foreign Minister of Israel, and it said: "Indeed, there is a new generation of Palestinian leaders whose political lives were shaped in the territories. Most are highly educated and politically sophisticated individuals with a genuine dedication and commitment to their people and peace. Having negotiated with these leaders, we have learned to know and appreciate them."


Clinton, Short of Support at Home and Abroad, Sidetracks Bosnia
The Clinton Administration -- unsure of the American public's support for military action in Bosnia, wanting to refocus attention on its economic programs at home and opposed by its European allies -- announced today that it was putting its Bosnia policy on hold for a while.
The decision capped a dizzying week in which the Administration sent a series of contradictory signals on what it intended to do in Bosnia, how far it was ready to go and how much support it thought it had from the allies.


UnionFed Financial reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


BUSINESS DIGEST
International
Under intense pressure from the White House, some leading Congressional critics of the North American Free Trade Agreement are toning down their oratory.
A few are even saying they might support the pact after all.  [ Page D1. ]
China has become the largest buyer of gold, ending the United States' 25-year reign and giving gold's price a new buoyancy.
Much of last year's purchase was in the form of gold jewelry.  [ D1. ]


PennCorp Financial Group Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Surgery for Sid Fernandez
The Mets, their season already imperiled by a catastrophic first five weeks, were hit with another frightening development last night when club doctors declared that Sid Fernandez would require arthroscopic surgery to repair his damaged right knee.
Fernandez, who was placed on the disabled list late last week because of a slight cartilage tear in his knee, will miss from four to six weeks.
The loss of the left-hander, the club's most consistent pitching performer last season, will only increase the demands on a staff that has to date been a serious disappointment.
And it comes at a time when the Mets, in last place in the National League East, are under intense pressure.


COMPANY BRIEFS
BEI HOLDINGS LTD., Atlanta, has reached an agreement to sell its wholly owned financial consulting division, BEI Golembe, to Electronic Data Systems Corp. of Dallas for $22 million in cash.
KIWI INTERNATIONAL AIR LINES, Newark, said it would begin daily nonstop flights next month to Tampa, Fla., from Newark and Midway Airport in Chicago.


Car Bomb Found Near Bush Said to Suggest Hand of Iraq
The car bomb found by the Kuwaiti authorities in a suspected assassination plot against former President George Bush bears a striking resemblance to the sophisticated explosive devices used by Iraqi agents in attempted terrorist attacks during the Persian Gulf war, American officials said today.
They said an examination of the weapon by Federal investigators and American intelligence experts has found its detonating mechanism and other crucial components to be almost exactly the same as those in weapons assembled by the Iraqis in several earlier thwarted attempts.


In New Spielberg Film, a Dim View of Science
IN a few weeks, its promoters hope, crowds of dinosaur fans will pack theaters to watch "Jurassic Park," Steven Spielberg's $56 million dinosaur movie, the most ambitious Mesozoic-monster film ever made.
Based partly on recent advances in microbiology, the movie's visual thrills and state-of-the-art animation may leave audiences gasping.
Scientists seem as eager as anyone else to see the highly publicized film, which incorporates some of the latest discoveries about the preservation of the DNA of extinct animals.
But many microbiologists are critical of the movie's speculative premise that dinosaurs might one day be resurrected from the dead.
Some scientists are also uneasy about what they perceive as an anti-science bias in the plot, a charge that the author himself acknowledges.


Jackson Heights Streets Familiar to Drug Cartels
Colombia is a continent away from Queens, but Carlos Zamora felt no surprise yesterday when he heard that leaders of the Cali cocaine cartel had been accused of killing his friend, Manuel de Dios Unanue.
Seated three barstools from where Mr. de Dios was shot to death, Mr.
Zamora sadly stated the obvious: the cartel is a strong and brutal presence in Jackson Heights.
"These people got no brains," said Mr.
Zamora, a 50-year-old insurance agent, as he sipped white wine in the Meson Asturias restaurant where Mr. de Dios died with two bullets to his head in March 1992.
"They just kill whoever they think they've got to kill."


Landmarks Panel Parodies Its Reason for Being; Penn Station Dream
To the Editor:
The architectural drawing of Amtrak's proposed plan to build a new Pennsylvania Station for New York within the interior of the General Post Office brought a smile to my face (news article, May 2).
Looking at the rendering of the steel and glass concourse that would serve Amtrak's long-distance passengers, I could only think of the affection the demolished station still has for those who would put it all back, if they only knew the right genie.
When I wrote the history of Pennsylvania Station, it amazed and delighted me to see young people, too young to have walked through the station, feel such an emotional connection to it.
I still get calls from one young man who refuses to accept that the station, which has been gone for three decades, cannot be reconstructed.
I end up rummaging through my memory and conjuring it up for him, blunting his frustration with a story that will never be his.


Schultz Says He Isn't Worrying
On the eve of the National Collegiate Athletic Association's determination of his future with the organization, DICK SCHULTZ yesterday maintained an upbeat attitude.
"I think everything is going to work out best for Dick Schultz and for the association," Schultz, the executive director of the N.C.A.A., said from his office in Overland Park, Kan.
"I believe I've been treated very fairly."


By Design; Sweaters of Summer
There is no such thing as a sweater season.
Winter cashmere gives way to spring's silk and rayon weaves, and then come summer's linens and cottons.
There is always a sweater out there to match the temperature.
This summer, there is something more.
Every classification of sweater now comes in a porous pattern.
Some of the open work is as fine as a mesh screen.
Other sweaters are as haphazardly holey as hippie macrame.


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY  7 INDICTED IN KILLING OF A JOURNALIST
Angered by articles about the multibillion-dollar drug trade, leaders of a Colombian cocaine cartel ordered the murder of a crusading Spanish-language journalist, Manuel de Dios Unanue, who was slain in a Queens restaurant 14 months ago, Federal authorities said.
The authorities announced that two suspects had been indicted in the murder, and law-enforcement officials said that five others had been arrested in the conspiracy but that the indictments against them had been sealed.
A1.
The Cali cocaine cartel is a strong and brutal presence in Jackson Heights.
B2. 17 MONTHS LATER, ANOTHER SON IS KILLED
A Marine Corps recruiting sergeant home on leave for Mother's Day was shot and killed as he sat on a Bronx park bench a few feet from the spot where his only brother was shot and killed 17 months ago.
B3.
CHOICE BETWEEN RIVALS TROUBLES DINKINS
An effort to forge a black-Hispanic coalition to bolster Mayor Dinkins's re-election campaign has led to a standoff between a black and a Hispanic candidate for the city's No. 2 office and put the Mayor in a delicate bind between political calculation and old loyalties.
B3.
A majority of the New York City Board of Education lined up to elect Carol A. Gresser, a longtime parent association leader in Queens, as the next board president, but Mayor Dinkins made a last-minute plea to delay the vote.
B3.
REGION  RAIL NETWORK IS EXPLORED
With faith that three-hour train trips from New York to Boston will be commonplace in a few years, about 100 rail experts gathered in Warwick, R.I., to sketch out the next step: an advanced rail network that would extend over much of eastern North America.
B4.
DUN &amp; BRADSTREET TO MOVE STAFF
In what Connecticut officials hailed as a victory for their economic-development campaign, Dun &amp; Bradstreet, the financial information company, said that it had accepted a $7.2 million grant from Hartford and would move its headquarters staff of 300 people from midtown Manhattan to Wilton, Conn.
B5.
SCHOOL OFFICIALS OPPOSE STATE TAKEOVER
Undaunted by a scathingly critical state report on Newark's schools, the school district's officials acknowledged problems but said they remained unalterably opposed to a state takeover of the system.
B5.
FEWER SHAD IN THE HUDSON
Swimming upstream with the tides, shad are returning from the Atlantic Ocean to the Hudson River later than usual and in smaller numbers.
Commercial fishermen in the river attributed the late season to a cold March.
B5.
BUNGEE JUMPING FROM CRANES IS BANNED
New Jersey banned bungee jumping from cranes, but said the sport could continue where permanent platforms are built.
B4.
A woman who authorities say is suffering from depression was arraigned in Nassau County on charges of trying to kill her daughter.
B4.
Chronicle B4  Our Towns by George Judson B5


Avondale Industries (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Coming Next: New ABC Prime Time
ABC, the only network that improved its ratings this last television season, will add 11 new series to its prime-time schedule in September, an unusually high number.
With the new shows, ABC will substantially revamp its lineup, and perhaps most boldly, has risked the wrath of its biggest star, Roseanne Arnold, by canceling her husband Tom's comedy, "The Jackie Thomas Show."


Cheesecake Factory Inc.  (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to April 4


Botanists Contrive Comebacks For Threatened Plants
OF the United States' 20,000 native plants, about 4,200 are threatened with extinction, perhaps 750 of them within a decade.
In the hope rescuing as many as possible, conservationists -- the Johnny Appleseeds of the 1990's -- are sowing the American landscape with rare and endangered flowers and shrubs.
But these introductions are proving surprisingly controversial.
Many fail.
That can mean disaster if, as sometimes happens, the transplantation is done to compensate for a developer's destruction of the plant's existing habitat.
The price of success could be almost as high in some cases: ecologists fear that other native plants could be crowded out if an endangered species is introduced outside its natural range or if an ecosystem is manipulated to favor it over other species.


Corrections
A front-page chart on Sunday with an article about business executives' confidence in President Clinton omitted an explanation for the index of business confidence.
The index measured the executives' views of where the economy was heading, not their views of the President.


On My Mind; A Place Among Nations
Judging by journalistic and diplomatic attention to their views, nearly half the Jews of Israel have vanished, snap.
They are the voters who refused to support Labor and other parties in the coalition that now runs the country with a thin parliamentary majority.


Ipsco Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


An East Coast Express? Maybe, in New Rail Plan
With faith that three-hour train trips from New York to Boston will be commonplace in a few years, about 100 rail experts gathered here to sketch out the next step: an advanced rail network that would extend over much of eastern North America.
Amtrak hopes to begin work next spring on electrifying the railroad north of New Haven to South Station in Boston, continuing a project that stopped 80 years ago.


For the Writer of 'Dave,' Cynicism and Politics Don't Mix on Screen
The long-running attraction between Washington and Hollywood has often proved fatal when Hollywood struggles to make movies about Washington.
"The trouble is Hollywood often treats Washington cynically," said Gary Ross, the screenwriter of "Dave," a decidedly uncynical movie that opened over the weekend to some of the best reviews in years for a comedy.
"Dave" opened relatively strongly, coming in second at the box office after another new film, "Dragon: The Bruce Lee Story."


Landmarks Panel Parodies Its Reason for Being
To the Editor:
After proving its total failure in preserving undesignated but certainly not undeserving landmarks, the New York City commission that was created to protect them caricatures its reason for being and its legal directive by inflicting window and tree "police" on city citizens sympathetic to its cause ("Landmarks Panel Mired in Detail, Critics Say," news article, April 28)!
Two years before Pennsylvania Station was demolished in 1963 and four years before the Landmarks Preservation Commission was established in 1965, influential architects and New York historians importuned Mayor Robert F. Wagner to create a commission whose express purpose would be to protect New York's architectural ecology, specifically Penn Station.


Though Still in Effect, Arabs' Economic Boycott of Israel Weakens
Step by step, Government officials and business leaders here say, the decades-old Arab economic boycott of Israel has weakened to a point that many international companies now believe they can safely ignore it.
But the officials caution that while down, the boycott is far from out, and that it continues to scare away foreign businesses skittish about offending Arab countries, especially the oil-producing nations of the Persian Gulf.


Market Place; At Harley-Davidson, albatrosses look like recreational vehicles.
HARLEY-DAVIDSON, the nation's only maker of big motorcycles, is roaring along.
In the most recent quarter, operating earnings were up 67 percent, to $15.1 million, or 40 cents a share.
Harley's motorcycles, known to many devoted buyers as "hogs," are selling as fast as the company can make them, and overseas demand is going unsatisfied as domestic dealers howl for more vehicles.
"If you walk into a Harley dealer and try to place an order, you will be told there is a waiting list of at least three months even if you don't care about the color," said Ronald Glantz, who follows the company for Dean Witter.
"Harley is sold out for years."


Coincidence or Link Between Cancer and Hereditary Diseases?
BIOLOGISTS are agog at a remarkable connection between hereditary diseases and cancer that came to light last week.
The connection is that cancer, like some hereditary diseases, can be caused by a strange stuttering in the individual's DNA, the effect of which is that small segments of the hereditary material are copied many times over.
The multiple copying, first discovered about two years ago, startled geneticists because it was a novel form of mutation.
Three-unit segments of DNA were present in as many as 200 copies, strung together as if the cell's copying mechanism had jammed at that point and turned out the same triplet of bases over and over instead of continuing up the DNA strand.
These cascades of multiple triplets lengthened with each generation, and the longer they were, the more severe the disease.


WCT Communications Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Corrections
A report in the Political Notes column on Sunday about a tribute to former Gov.
Malcolm Wilson of New York misstated the reason for Nelson A. Rockefeller's resignation as Governor in December 1973. (A similar error appeared on June 3, 1990.) Mr.
Rockefeller said he intended to devote his attention to national affairs as head of the National Commission on Critical Choices and the Commission on Water Quality.
He was chosen for Vice President in August 1974.


K&amp;F Industries reports earnings for Year to March 31


Clinton, in Midwest, Defends His Economic Plan
President Clinton took to the road today to sell his budget plan, lambasting lobbyists, deriding his opponents as "preachers of pessimism" and restating his campaign claim to be the champion of change.
Mr.
Clinton, who has been virtually chained to the White House because of domestic battles and foreign policy crises, appeared to relish his chance to leave Washington and its criticisms.
In speeches to a noontime crowd at a downtown shopping mall here and later at a business club luncheon, he doggedly stuck to his plan to talk only about the economy and his budget plan, which he said was under fire from special interests.


Motorman Impostor Takes the A Train, Literally
A man posing as a subway motorman took an A train carrying hundreds of passengers on a 47-mile trip through the city Saturday, until he finally tripped an emergency brake because he was speeding, transit officials said yesterday.
Then, taken to Transit Authority headquarters by a transit inspector, the man bolted and escaped into the Borough Hall station in downtown Brooklyn, officials said.
Later discovered to be an impostor, he was still at large yesterday.


Hearing Set in Nutri-System Buyout
Rarely has a legal ruling carried so much weight.
Franchise operators of Nutri-System Inc. diet centers were scheduled to appear in a Philadelphia bankruptcy court tomorrow to ask a judge to rescind his order of last week appointing a trustee to oversee management of the troubled company.


Andros Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to April 25


Republicans Talk, but Split Remains
Two Republican world views collided loudly here today, suggesting that the search for common ground on social issues like abortion may be a long one for the Republican Party.
At a forum sponsored by a group of centrist Republicans, conservatives asserted that it was mythology to suggest that President George Bush lost the 1992 election because of his opposition to legalized abortion, or because of the perception that the Republican Party had moved too far to the right.


A War on Global Corruption
Alarmed by a sharp increase in bribery over the last decade, a group of senior government, business and development-agency officials met here recently to establish a coalition against corruption in global business transactions.
The coalition, called Transparency International, is being modeled on Amnesty International, the human rights advocacy group.
It will concentrate on battling what officials termed "grand corruption" in development programs and trade.


Prices of Treasury Securities Rise
Prices of Treasury bonds and notes rose yesterday as traders and investors awaited the beginning today of quarterly auctions of $35 billion in 3- and 10-year notes and 30-year bonds.
The three days of auctions start with $16 billion of three-year notes this afternoon.
The auctions and new reports on inflation in April will help to determine the direction of the bond market.


In New Yorker Libel Trial, The Analyst Is Examined
Jeffrey M. Masson said today that his interest in psychoanalysis was born when he turned to therapy as a young man because he had regarded his "promiscuity as an illness" that he wanted to cure.
This admission came in Mr.
Masson's first few minutes as a witness on the opening day of testimony in his $10 million libel suit against Janet Malcolm and The New Yorker, which in 1983 published two articles by her about his iconoclastic scholarship and unruly personal life.


No Headline
"You just have to imagine what it is like to say to a 16-year-old boy or girl that the two people they have called Mommy and Daddy all their lives are not really Mommy and Daddy -- that they in fact killed Mommy and Daddy." -- JUAN CARLOS VOLNOVICH, an Argentine psychologist.  [ A4:1. ]


Penelope Gilliatt, 61, Film Critic And Writer for The New Yorker
Penelope Gilliatt, a writer of fiction, journalism and screenplays, and a longtime film critic for The New Yorker, died on Sunday at her home in London.
She was 61.
She had been in poor health for some time.


Joule Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31





Smith Barney Picks Chief For Research
A former director of research at Shearson Lehman Brothers when that department grew rapidly to become the largest on Wall Street has agreed to join Smith Barney, Harris Upham &amp; Company, it was announced yesterday.
The executive, Jack L. Rivkin, will oversee the growth of Smith Barney's research staff as it is merged with Shearson's later this year.


Weiss Is Out as Coach of the Hawks
The Atlanta Hawks fired Coach BOB WEISS yesterday, ending a three-season tenure in which the team made the playoffs twice but never got past the first round.
General Manager PETE BABCOCK said he was not renewing Weiss's contract because he was dissatisfied with the Hawks' 43-39 record this season.
He said he hoped to have a replacement by early June, but that he had no specific timetable.


Q&amp;A
Shrinking Clothes
Q.  Why do clothes shrink?
A.
The answer has to do with the chemical and physical properties of fibers from natural sources, especially cotton, wool and linen, said Dr.
Ann Lemley, associate professor in the department of textiles and apparel at Cornell University in Ithaca, N.Y.
The individual fibers in yarns are made of long polymer chains, or strands of giant molecules, according to Dr.
Lemley, who is a chemist.
In their natural state, the chains are scrolled up or crinkled.
In preparing them for spinning and weaving, the first step is usually a straightening of the fibers by processes like carding wool.


Barnwell Industries reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Vintage Petroleum reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Officer Shot in Station House Is Released From Hospital


When One Teacher's Advance Was Spurned
To the Editor:
I am appalled at the cavalier attitude conveyed by Barbara S. Karni (letter, April 30) concerning your article on the ban on faculty-student romances.
I was a victim in 1963 of such an advance when I was a freshman in college.
This man -- this teacher -- gave me a D in an art course, a subject that had previously earned me only A's, because I would not go out with him.


Review/Television; Believing in the Same Thing, but Showing It Differently
Like a missionary to the secular humanists, Randall Balmer delivers the good news right off: televangelists do not represent America's evangelicals.
Professor Balmer, who teaches American religious history at Columbia University, is the major on-screen and behind-screen presence of "Mine Eyes Have Seen the Glory," an illuminating three-part documentary on the evangelical movement based on his book of that title.
In tonight's opening segment, evangelical diversity is evidenced by visits to four born-again congregations, which despite their agreement on the literal truth of the Bible and the imminent Second Coming of Christ seem to belong to different cultures.
Although Mr.
Balmer may not fit comfortably into any of them, he is appreciative of all; unlike some reporters on evangelicals, he comes not to mock but to explore.


Neuberger Pressing Vote
Plans by Neuberger &amp; Berman, a New York investment advisory firm, to expand its mutual fund business have hit a snag as shareholders in its Manhattan Fund have been slow to grant the necessary two-thirds approval.
The prospectus sent to the 50,000 shareholders of the $415 million mutual fund said that expenses paid by shareholders could decline if the changes were approved and the fund grew.
The changes would not result in any increased fees or charges to shareholders, Neuberger &amp; Berman said, but are needed to issue different classes of fund shares to different kinds of investors.


JAPAN PRESSES U.N. ON CAMBODIA PERIL
A Japanese Government minister asked today that all United Nations peacekeepers in Cambodia, including the more than 700 Japanese serving with the United Nations force, be pulled out of dangerous areas of that war-shattered nation.
But the official, Home Affairs Minister Keijiro Murata, made it clear that this was a request from his Government, not a demand, and he said Japanese peacekeepers would remain in Cambodia at least through the United Nations-sponsored elections scheduled for this month.


Shape Up, Navy
Why can't the United States Navy, a service of proud tradition, conduct credible inquiries when things go wrong in the ranks?
That question is raised anew by the latest botched investigation -- into the murder of a gay sailor by a shipmate near a base in Japan.
At one level, the latest case suggests that the Navy is unwilling or unable to deal forthrightly with an issue of homosexuality in the service.
But the problem is more pervasive; the Navy has also bungled investigations in recent years of sexual harassment of women in the Tailhook scandal, of the gunpowder explosion that killed 47 sailors on the battleship Iowa, and of possible security breaches at the American Embassy in Moscow.


The Real Lemieux Stands Up. Islanders Sit Down.
The Islanders have had a marvelous run in the Stanley Cup playoffs.
It has lasted almost a month, well into the warm weather.
They have upset the Washington Capitals, worried the Pittsburgh Penguins and earned respect throughout the league in this season of their renaissance.
It all could end, however, after 60 more minutes of play.
After losing to the Pittsburgh Penguins, 6-3, tonight before a capacity crowd at Civic Arena, they are one game away from elimination in the second round, the Patrick Division final.


Buying Time by Buying Space on Mount Garbage; Engineers at the Fresh Kills Landfill Work to Squeeze in Every Last Inch of City Trash
For decades telescopic sights, triangulation and trigonometry tables were good enough for laying out roads and figuring out town boundaries.
But Adolph N. Sokolyansky deals with a problem that demands higher precision: garbage.
Out for another day of work at the Fresh Kills Landfill on Staten Island, already the nation's largest landfill and still growing, Mr.
Sokolyansky sets up his surveyor's tripod, sends out a beam of infrared light and makes calculations, using the speed of light as a yardstick.
His aim: to make sure that every cubic inch of space is used.


Chief Financial Officer to Be Named for Resolution Trust
As part of its overhaul of the savings and loan cleanup, the Clinton Administration plans to name a University of Maryland official as chief financial officer of the Resolution Trust Corporation.
Deputy Treasury Secretary Roger C. Altman is scheduled to announce the appointment of the official, Donna H. Cunninghame, on Tuesday.
He said in an interview that the choice of an accountant who is vice chancellor for finance at the university reflected his determination to revamp the agency's management and the way it disposes of roughly $100 billion in assets of bankrupt savings and loans.


2 BUSINESS GROUPS ATTACK TAX PLAN
Two major business lobbying groups attacked important aspects of President Clinton's tax proposals today, arguing that the plan would weaken the economy and make the tax code less fair.
One group, the United States Chamber of Commerce, lined up against a Clinton plan to tax energy and to increase the corporate income-tax rate to 36 percent from 34 percent.
The White House has said the measures would raise $100 billion in the next five to six years.


Ian Mikardo, 84, Dies; Led British Labor Party
Ian Mikardo, a former chairman of the British Labor Party and a Member of Parliament for 37 years, died Thursday in a hospital in Stockport, near Manchester, England.
He was 84 and lived in Cheshire, in western England.
Mr.
Mikardo, known as Mik, was a prime mover behind a left-wing movement, led by Aneurin Bevan, that temporarily split the Labor Party in the 1950's and 60's.
He went on to become chairman of the party in 1970 and 1971, during a long career in Parliament, representing various constituencies, from 1945 to 1959 and from 1964 to 1987.


Corrections
An article yesterday about mental health professionals' concern over limits that President Clinton's health plan may put on psychotherapists misidentified the spokesman for the President's Task Force on National Health Care Reform.
He is Robert O. Boorstin.


Microsoft Up On Report Of I.B.M. Tie
Shares of the Microsoft Corporation rose yesterday on a report suggesting that the big software producer and I.B.M. may cooperate more closely and a "strong buy" recommendation on Microsoft from a Wall Street analyst.
The Wall Street Journal reported yesterday that William Gates, the chairman of Microsoft, had said he would meet this month with Louis V. Gerstner Jr., the new chief executive of the International Business Machines Corporation.


Stolen Childhoods: A special report.; Argentines Contend for War Orphans' Hearts
As 17-year-old Daniela Furci sat crying in the chambers of a judge last June, he took her green identification card, ripped it up and ordered her to get a new one with her real name, Mariana Zaffaroni.
He warned her never to use the name Furci again.
Two days earlier, a blood test proved that she was not the child of the Argentine couple who had raised her but the daughter of slain Uruguayan leftists.
The man she had assumed was her father, a former secret police agent named Miguel Angel Furci, had played a part in kidnapping her mother and father when she was 18 months old.


Presidential Life (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Gay Shipmates? Senators Listen As Sailors Talk
Petty Officer 3d Class Paul Gilberry glanced up from his makeshift bunk in the torpedo room on the attack submarine Montpelier and said that as long as his shipmates did their jobs well, he didn't care if they were homosexual or heterosexual.
"I rely on my shipmates to be professionals," said Petty Officer Gilberry, 22, of Fort Lauderdale, Fla.
"I can trust a homosexual as well as anyone else to bring me a fire extinguisher in a casualty situation."


East Europe's Low Wages Luring Manufacturers From West Europe
Needing a factory to build a new generation of engines, Audi, the German car maker, spent years considering sites in Spain, France, Austria and eastern Germany, among others.
It finally made a choice that is becoming increasingly common among Western manufacturers: Eastern Europe.
In particular, Audi and many other manufacturers have picked this Hungarian region 30 miles from the Austrian border to take advantage of sharply lower labor costs and access to Western markets.


Muslim-Croat Battle Ignites Policy Issues
Bitter Croat-Muslim battles in Mostar, sandwiched between cease-fire agreements, will only complicate the already tangled attempts to patch together a peace in the Balkans, Western diplomats in Croatia say.
The new fighting also underlines the fact that the Serbs are not the only aggressors in Bosnia, the diplomats said.
This bolsters those opposed to Western military involvement on the ground that Bosnia and Herzegovina is a quagmire of feuding groups from which a foreign power would never extricate itself.


Tremont Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Teva Pharmaceutical Indus.  (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Koll Management Services Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Hornets Keep Focus On Business Matters
Losing Game 1 to the Knicks did not make much of an impression on the Charlotte Hornets.
During a conference call with reporters yesterday, Charlotte Coach Allan Bristow wasn't about to praise the Knicks for their 111-95 victory.


Acxiom Corp. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


A Memorial Service for an Oscar-Winning Film Maker


Trade-Pact Opposition Eases a Bit
After intense pressure from the White House, some leading Congressional critics of the North American Free Trade Agreement are toning down their oratory.
A few of them are even saying they might support the pact after all.
Representative Richard A. Gephardt, the House majority leader, said in an interview late today that he was urging Democrats to avoid taking positions now on the pact, which would eliminate trade barriers among Canada, Mexico and the United States.
He said lawmakers should give the Clinton Administration time to complete its negotiations with Canada and Mexico on three side agreements.


Can Nice Guys Finish First Again?
If you thought 85-year-old Paul Mellon and 71-year-old MacKenzie Miller were a pair of grand old guys who "deserved" to win the Kentucky Derby, wait till you meet Jerry Bailey.
He's the jockey who rode Sea Hero through the herd of horses jamming the track at Churchill Downs and who will try for an encore this Saturday at the Preakness Stakes.
And if Eddie Arcaro and Angel Cordero in their time were stereotypes of the swashbuckler in the saddle, Bailey is the Eagle Scout in the saddle.


Parents Find Solace In Donating Organs
SIX days after a November 1989 tornado toppled a wall at the East Coldenham Elementary School in Orange County, N.Y., onto a cafeteria filled with children, JeanneMarie and Timothy Flanagan and doctors at the Westchester County Medical Center in Valhalla entered the delicate dance of organ donation.
The Flanagans' 7-year-old son, Mark, had suffered a severe head injury in the collapse, which ultimately claimed nine young lives.
At first it seemed that he might survive.
But after five days filled with ventilators, scans and intravenous lines, tests showed that while Mark's heart and kidneys were doing fine, his brain was no longer functioning.
The boy was brain dead.
Legally dead.
And a perfect organ donor.


Pioneer Financial Services Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Choice Between Black and Hispanic Rivals for Advocate Troubling Dinkins
An effort to forge a black-Hispanic coalition to bolster Mayor David N. Dinkins's re-election campaign has led to a standoff between a black and a Hispanic candidate for the city's No. 2 office, Public Advocate, and put the Mayor in a delicate bind between political calculation and old loyalties.
The Mayor faces a decision on whether to endorse Assemblyman Roberto Ramirez of the Bronx, a little-known legislator being advanced by several black and Hispanic politicians as a candidate for Public Advocate who might draw badly needed Hispanic voters to the top of the Democratic ticket next fall.
If Mr.
Dinkins does so, he will stymie the hopes of State Senator David A. Paterson of Harlem, one of the city's rising black officeholders and the son of Basil A. Paterson, a former secretary of state and deputy mayor who is one of Mr.
Dinkins's oldest friends.


Last of the Manongs: Aging Voices of a Farm-Labor Fight Find an Audience
On the edge of the dusty grape field here where Cesar Chavez led the farm worker movement to national prominence, two frail men in a retirement home have become unlikely embodiments of a distinguished, though mostly forgotten, chapter of labor history that is now being resurrected.
They are among the last of the "manongs," the approximately 100,000 Filipino men who flocked to America in the years before the Depression seeking education and wealth, but finding instead impoverished lives of stoop labor and racial codes that forbade them to own land or marry.


Smith Barney Picks Chief For Research
A former director of research at Shearson Lehman Brothers when that department grew rapidly to become the largest on Wall Street has agreed to join Smith Barney, Harris Upham &amp; Company, it was announced yesterday.
The executive, Jack L. Rivkin, will oversee the growth of Smith Barney's research staff as it is merged with Shearson's later this year.


Automobile Mechanics With No Sweat or Tears
AUTO INSIGHT lets you get under the hood without getting grease on your hands.
The program, for car lovers at all levels of knowledge and experience, covers the main mechanisms of an automobile in text and graphics, with history, trivia and emergency and maintenance hints thrown in.
Items covered are the cooling, electrical, engine, air-conditioning and heating, exhaust, fuel, drive train, braking and suspension systems, as well as the body.
There are graphic representations, diagrams and even a few animated sequences.
Here is an example of where pursuing one of these threads may lead:


Old Republic International Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


FoxMeyer Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Ad Council Sets Spanish Campaign
The Advertising Council said yesterday that it would introduce its first public service campaign in Spanish, with the subject of fighting crime.
A multimedia campaign, created by Vidal, Reynardus &amp; Moya Advertising in New York, features nine Spanish-speaking celebrities including the actors Ricardo Montalban and Edward James Olmos and Daisy Fuentes, the host of "MTV International."


Cougars Enlisted in Effort to Save the Florida Panther
EIGHT Texas cougars wearing radio collars are roaming across two million acres of piney woods and cypress swamp straddling the Florida-Georgia border as part of an effort to save the critically endangered Florida panther.
Ten cougars, some fresh from the wilds of Texas, some bred in captivity, were released in late February.
One has disappeared, and one was removed from the wild after a property owner near Fargo, Ga., complained that it was preying on deer attracted to his feeding station.
If the cougars flourish in a wilderness flush with white-tailed deer and wild hogs, a new population of captive-bred Florida panthers may someday take their places.


Goodnight, Moon
For nearly 50 years, parents familiar with one of the loveliest of all children's books have carried their insomniac youngsters outdoors to chant "Goodnight, moon . . . goodnight, stars." But soon, too soon, little kids may be lulling themselves to sleep with "Goodnight, I.B.M. . . . goodnight, General Foods." Because up there in the empyrean, where Diana reigns and Orion hunts, a mile-wide satellite may be outshining the moon -- and displaying commercial messages visible on earth.
One fine thing about those commercial messages, the satellite's developers say -- apart from the pleasure they'll bring those who'd rather look at a detergent ad than the Pleiades -- is that they'll pay for the craft's scientific mission of studying the earth's atmosphere.
But Dr.
Derek McNally, a British astronomer, has a different take on this new Heaven for advertisers.
"Such a misuse of space involving the launch of solar reflectors," he warns, ". . . will virtually wipe out deep-sky astronomy."


Mogilny Undergoes Surgery on Ankle
Buffalo Sabres star ALEKSANDR MOGILNY successfully underwent ankle surgery yesterday, said GERRY MEEHAN, the team's vice president and general manager.
Mogilny broke his right fibula last Thursday in Game 3 of Buffalo's playoff series against the Montreal Canadiens.
The team feared that Mogilny, who scored 76 goals during the regular season and shared the National Hockey League goal-scoring title with Winnipeg's TEEMU SALANNE, had sustained ligament damage near his ankle.
The Sabres were still waiting for a full report on Mogilny's condition, Meehan said.


TVX Gold Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Clashes Cloud U.S. Policy on Bosnia
A resurgence of fighting between Croats and Muslims in the southern Bosnian city of Mostar will make it harder for the United States and its European allies to agree on a common approach to ending the civil war in Bosnia and Herzegovina, Western diplomats here say.
They said European governments are likely to argue that the heavy fighting reported in Mostar on Sunday and earlier today makes it even more unwise to lift the arms embargo on the Muslims, as the Clinton Administration has suggested, because this would only risk provoking new conflicts between Muslims and Croats as well as between Muslims and Serbs.


Tucson Electric Power reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Echo Bay Mines Ltd.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Chess
When it comes to simplicity in chess, things are often not what they seem.
When a genius like Jose Raoul Capablanca 70 years ago or Bobby Fischer 20 years ago or Anatoly Karpov in the current epoch reduces the complexities of a position to a clearcut strategic theme and then wins the game as a result, it all looks so simple.
There are lesser players who believe they can do the same, if only they spot the essential thought.


17 Months Later, Another Son Is Killed
A Marine Corps recruiting sergeant home on leave for Mother's Day was shot and killed Sunday night as he sat on a Bronx park bench a few feet from the spot where his only brother was shot and killed 17 months ago.
The gunman in the latest killing fired without warning or apparent provocation and escaped.
The police, who never solved the earlier murder, had no suspects in either case and said the motive for both killings remained a mystery.
Investigators said they were trying to determine if the slayings were somehow linked or only a bizarre and tragic coincidence.


A Rape Victim Victimized by Activists
To the Editor:
Rape has become an increasingly prevalent issue in our society.
As a result, rape survivors have been barraged with a new "proper rape recovery procedure." They are expected to be angry and vindictive.
They are expected to become virtual activists against crimes aimed at women.
But what about those of us who have no desire to avenge this crime?
I am a 20-year-old college student who was raped 16 months ago.
As I attempt to recover, I have been approached by women's groups both on and off campus who expect me to become their "poster child." My right to privacy has been repeatedly violated by these groups, which are attempting to "educate" other women by using my relatively public case as an example.
They claim that I am now part of their "sisterhood."


Southern Indiana Gas &amp; Electric Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


INSIDE
Dun &amp; Bradstreet to Move
Dun &amp; Bradstreet said it had accepted a $7.2 million grant from Hartford and would move its headquarters staff of 300 people from midtown Manhattan to Wilton, Conn.
Page B5.
Bomb in Kuwait Yields a Clue
The most compelling evidence yet that Iraq was plotting to kill former President Bush in Kuwait is the 'signature' found on a bomb.
Page A3.
Taking the A Train, Literally
A man posing as a subway motorman took over an A train and ran it illegally, but successfully, with hundreds of passengers for 47 miles.
Page B1.
After a Death, a Family's Gift
Families who donate their children's organs for transplant find the decision often has a surprisingly healing effect.
Science Times, page C1.
Last Are First on Tonys List
"Kiss of the Spider Woman," "Tommy" and "Angels in America" dominate this year's nominations, and all recently opened.
Page C13.


Primark Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Environmental Group Aims at Mitsubishi
An environmental group called yesterday for a worldwide boycott of the Mitsubishi International Corporation in protest of the Japanese company's logging practices.
The Rainforest Action Network, based in San Francisco, placed a full-page advertisement in yesterday's editions of The New York Times circulated in the Northeast urging the boycott of Mitsubishi products.


End to Sanctions Sought
The President of the Yugoslav federation, Dobrica Cosic, will soon ask the United Nations to ease economic sanctions against his country in response to its recent decision to halt most supplies to the Serbian nationalist forces in Bosnia and Herzegovina, a senior Yugoslav official said today.
The aide, Dragoslav Rancic, also said that Yugoslavia would accept the deployment of foreign observers along its border with Bosnia to verify that supply lines have been cut.
But he said such observers should also be deployed along Bosnia's border with Croatia, across which military aid for Croatian and Muslim forces now flows freely.


Mother Charged With Trying to Kill Her 6-Year-Old Daughter
A woman who authorities say is suffering from depression was arraigned today on charges of trying to kill her 6-year-old daughter.
The arraignment took place in the Nassau County Medical Center, where the woman, Barbara Van Florcke-Testa, 38, of North Merrick, was undergoing psychiatric tests.
She pleaded not guilty to charges of second-degree attempted murder, and a court date is set for June 10.


Officials Say Clinton Will Lift 1981 Ban On Air Controllers
The Clinton Administration has decided to invite air traffic controllers dismissed in their 1981 strike to reapply for their former jobs, Administration and Congressional officials said today.
The controllers, barred from re-employment by President Ronald Reagan, would be allowed to seek reinstatement after the Administration decided how many were needed, what criteria to use in their rehiring and what retraining they would require.


G.A.O. Sees Softening of Bank Rules
Congressional auditors chastised Federal bank regulators today for preparing standards that they called "a serious weakening" of the rules Congress intended to prevent management abuses from leading to bank failures.
The banking act Congress passed in 1991 "needs to be fully implemented by meaningful regulations to avoid the costly mistakes of the past," Charles A. Bowsher, the head of the General Accounting Office, said in a letter to the board of the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation.


Panel Considers Bid to Oust Packwood
In the first public hearing involving accusations that Senator Bob Packwood engaged in sexual misconduct, the Senate Rules Committee began considering today whether the Oregon Republican should be unseated on ground that he lied about the accusations to win re-election.
It was the first time in history that the Senate had been petitioned by the voters of a state to nullify an election and remove their Senator because of assertions that he defrauded them by lying in a campaign.
But in a city where shadings of the truth, known to political insiders as "spin," are as common as the bumper sticker, the chances that politicians might disqualify one of their own for misstatements appeared remote.


Wuhan Journal; Layoffs in China: A Dirty Word, but All Too Real
A shy 30-year-old woman with pigtails, Ms.
Zhang figured that socialism might not make her rich but that it would at least guarantee her an "iron rice bowl," a job that would feed her for life.
Now she is wiser -- and unemployed.


Ted Williams Offers Collectors' Items
He is a baseball icon from another era, 33 years removed from his last game when he hit a home run in his final at-bat.
Now, at age 74, Ted Williams, the last man to hit .400 in a whole season, who spends much of his time shunning the limelight and fishing in remote places like the Yucatan and Belize, is marketing a line of a baseball cards.
"This is a concept that's been in our minds for a couple of years," Mr.
Williams said in a telephone interview yesterday.


A Useless Filibuster
Sixty votes.
That's what it takes to break a Senate filibuster and speed a measure to a floor vote, where only a majority is required for passage.
Sixty is the magic number this week as the Senate majority leader, George Mitchell, tries yet again to win passage of the "motor-voter" bill -- an overdue political reform designed to make it easier for Americans to vote.
The measure, vetoed by President Bush, would require states to let people register to vote when they obtain or renew a driver's license.
It would also require states to permit registration by mail.


Transactions
Baseball  Midwest League
ROCKFORD ROYALS -- Placed Jeff Haas, pitcher, and Steve Murphy, outfielder, on the disabled list.
Activated Aaron Dorlarque, pitcher, from the disabled list.
Basketball


Merisel Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Ex-Employee Is Convicted
A former employee of a Gap clothing store was convicted yesterday of murdering the store's assistant manager during a robbery.
The defendant, Anwar Abdul, 20 years old, of Brooklyn, faces 25 years to life in prison when he is sentenced on June 16 for the stabbing death of Lisa Steinberg, 22, of Chappaqua, in the office of the Gap store at West 57th Street and Broadway in Manhattan on Jan. 25, 1992.


Alcohol a Fitness Potion? Don't Believe It
To the Editor:
As a physician specializing in addiction medicine, I wish to comment on the May 3 news article "Study Finds 2 Drinks a Day Keep Heart Fit," describing a study by Dr.
J.
Michael Gizano.
It is dangerous in the extreme to promulgate the notion that alcohol consumption is a healthy practice.
Particularly perilous is the equation of more alcohol with less risk, especially since we know from the work of Dr.
Charles Lieber that an intake of two drinks a day or more on a regular basis can subject one to a fatty liver, which can lead in its turn to cirrhosis, with all its complications.


Critic's Notebook; Good Guys Are Suddenly Bad Guys
Police forces across the country are having enough image problems in real life these days with headlines about excessive force, evidence-tampering, drug involvements and careless killings.
But now prime-time television, long fond of good-guys-versus-bad-guys plots, seems more willing than ever to portray police officers as almost hissable villains.
In a rapidly changing world, cops as the inflexible heavies are becoming commonplace.
This is not just a matter of a rotten apple or two threatening to disgrace an entire department.
That was a standard story line in every series from "Police Story" to "Hill Street Blues." Today's transgressions, usually rooted in social and cultural upheavals, are much more pervasive and likely to ensnare not just the street cop, but also everyone right up to the precinct captain.
Their traditionally enclosed and tightly bound world is increasingly being challenged by, among others, feminists and homosexuals.
Resentments, or worse, proliferate.


Big Board Stocks Finish 6.09 Points Higher
The stock market staked out higher ground throughout most of the session yesterday, but fell back in the last half-hour, closing up only modestly.
The Dow Jones industrial average climbed by as much high as 31 points before closing up 6.09 points at 3,443.28.
All other major indexes were up, also modestly, in moderate trading.


The Cellar: The Home of Fine Wines and Rotten Teams
The Mets are 5-15 against non-expansion teasm.
Before last night's game against the visiting Florida Marlins, the club was 1-6 in one-run games, without a victory in extra innings and 3-10 in its last 13 games at Shea Stadium.
The Mets average stood at .230 and the bullpen was 0-7.
So the Mets aren't in last place because of unrealized potential, but because of fully realized shortcomings.
Any notion that the Mets can be rehabilitated in 1993 requires a great leap of faith, and the Mets Aren't too good at any kind of leaping these days.
MANAGER WATCH
The mananger won't be fired any time soon, or so ownership has said.
Jeff Torborg, above, whose relaxed approach has come perilously close to becoming a detached approach, has done nothing to shake up his club.
There has been talk of togetherness, of effort.
It is only talk, and when it comes from Torborg, the players seem to ignore it.
DUGOUT DECOMPRESSION
Bobby Bonilla, right, the Met's first baseman of the future, might benefit from some time on the bench.
His strikeout total is escalating disturbingly.
The umpires don't have a good word to say about him; Shea fans say mostly boo, and maybe Bonilla and Mike Cubbage need to spend some quality time in the dugout talking over the game's finer points.
HEY, BOBBY, SAY HI TO VINCE
Speed.
Speed.
Speed.
Manufactured runs.
Menace on the basepaths.
New York has heard enough about Vince Coleman's potential threat and seen not nearly enough.
The leadoff man had a .285 on-base percentage before last night.
Why not sit Coleman, get Joe Orsulak in a more comfortable spot in left, get center fielder Dave Gallagher's bat (.391) in the lineup for a couple of weeks and make the Mets a decent defensive team.
TRADE EMBARGO
The Mets say trading any significant player right now is impractical.
Howard Johnson, right, has too much to prove at the moment to command from other clubs the value the Mets would want in return.
Trading Sid Fernandez, even after his surgery, might net a useful player, but would leave a gaping hole in the No. 3 spot in the rotation.
"The best we could probably do would be one of those change-of-scenery types of deals where both clubs would be taking huge gambles," said one official. 30 DAYS OF GOOD BEHAVIOR
The Mets are one month of bad baseball away from 1993 irrelevance.
They play the Cardinals and Expos this week and the Pirates and Phillies before the end of May.
If they are 12 or more games out by then, the Mets are over and out.
ONE MORE STOP BEFORE COOPERSTOWN
The Mets, if they fail to mount an assault on repectability this month, could make the trading of Eddie Murray their first order of bargain-basement business.
The first baseman's numbers are still high enough to give him marketplace value.
Would the Braves, who need offense and who have a ton of prospects, be interested?
AN UNEVEN ODD YEAR
Bret Saberhagen, who began the year with a 74-30 career record in odd-numbered years, has only three victories this season, all against expansion teams.
The right-hander has struggled to find his blowaway fastball and has had an occasionally cranky right shoulder.
"I've been pitching stupid and I'm sick and tired of it," Saberhagen said last week.
"My 7-year-old son has a better idea of how to pitch than I've had the last month." FOR PETE'S SAKE
Perhaps Pete Schourek, the left-hander with the 1-3 record, would profit from a stint in the bullpen, or the minors.
Let Eric Hillman start a couple of games, fool some teams, maybe and meanwhile reignite Schourek's focus and talent.
And why not promote Kevin Baez and reassign backup infielder Tim Bogar?
CHAPTER 11, FILING AT DEADLINE
The Mets, if they are in the middle of nowhere in mid-summer, might declare their season bankrupt and stage a liquidation sale at the trading deadline.
Johnson and Fernandez might garner a fair ransom of young talent.


An Angioplasty for Auerbach
The Boston Celtics' president, RED AUERBACH, underwent a medical procedure yesterday to clear a blocked artery.
Massachusetts General Hospital in Boston issued a statement saying that Auerbach underwent a successful angioplasty on two areas of one artery.
An angioplasty uses an inflatable balloon to compress fatty substances blocking the artery.


Books of The Times; Witness to a Brief and Brutish War
Martyrs' Day  Chronicle of a Small War  By Michael Kelly  354 pages. Random House. $23.
Few Americans, civilian or military, have experienced war first-hand.
During the Vietnam War, television claimed to have brought the war into America's living rooms.
But a postwar analysis of that coverage indicated that only about 2 percent of the film broadcast showed any combat action whatsoever.
Even in our technological age, the best way to learn about war, next to being there, is to learn from books like Michael Herr's "Dispatches."


Brown (Tom) Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


For Evening, Think Slim, Black
The traditional evening dress is changing its look after a reign of centuries.
For one thing, it is long and slithery instead of bouffant.
For another, it is in black instead of pastel colors or prints.
And the standard plunging neckline has been filled in -- or the cutouts have shifted to the back.
"People are dressing down," said Arnold Scaasi, whose ball gowns were once doorway-wide and whose flower prints are legendary.


Capitol American Financial Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Valhi Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


ECOLOGIST NAMED FOR A U.N. AGENCY
In a move seen as likely to rankle many third-world governments, President Clinton has nominated a specialist on the environment as the new administrator of the United Nations Development Program.
The nominee, James Gustave Speth, is president of the World Resources Institute, an environmental research center in Washington.
Clinton Administration officials confirmed today that he had been nominated to succeed William H. Draper 3d, who said last week that he would step down on July 15.
Mr.
Draper has been administrator since 1986, and his second four-year term was scheduled to end next year.


Newark School Officials Remain Opposed to State Takeover
Undaunted by a scathing report that describes Newark's schools as chronically mismanaged and educationally bankrupt, the school district's officials today acknowledged problems but said they remained unalterably opposed to a state takeover of the system.
"I do not see anything in the report as yet that would alarm me or anyone else in this district," said Carole Graves, the head of the Newark Teachers Union, which represents the system's 4,200 teachers.


CHRONICLE
Millie redux?
Checkers revisited?
Another Fala?
With canines outnumbering felines as the animal in residence at the White House over the years, or at least getting more attention, the arrival of Socks seemed to many, like much else about the Clinton Administration, a breath of fresh air.
Now comes word that the first family may be acquiring a first dog.
PRESIDENT CLINTON got into a bidding contest over a golden retriever puppy sold Saturday at an auction to benefit the Sidwell Friends School, where his daughter, Chelsea, 13, is enrolled.
He dropped out at $3,500; the dog fetched $3,700, according to an Associated Press report.


Governing Party Wins Paraguay Presidential Vote
After voting marked by fraud and sabotage, Paraguayan politicians closed ranks today and recognized Juan Carlos Wasmosy as the winner of the first democratic presidential election in this South American nation's 182-year history.
Independent analysts said fraud in Sunday's voting had not been enough to have changed the outcome, which gave Mr.
Wasmosy of the governing Colorado Party a seven percentage point lead over his closest rival, Domingo Laino of the Liberal Party.


Bridge
The 19th annual Cavendish Invitational Pairs ended Sunday night at Loews Summit Hotel in Manhattan, with victory going to Fred Stewart of Accord, N.Y., and Steve Weinstein of Upper Montclair, N.J.
They are a stepfather-stepson combination who have been winning steadily on the tournament circuit since 1981, when they collected the Life Master pair title and Weinstein was a 17-year-old phenomenon.
Their Cavendish victory was by one of the largest margins in the history of the event.
These were the final standings:


Ingles Markets (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 27


Childhood Amnesia
To the Editor:
I agree with Dr.
Paul W. Mosher (letter, April 20) that "Studying the Secrets of Childhood Memory" (Science Times, April 6) does not contradict Freud's theory of infantile amnesia.
However, infantile amnesia extends to experiences before the second year of life to include not only the traumatic birth experience, but also experiences of prenatal intrauterine life.
Freud truly disturbs the world's sleep.
The amount of energy we devote to denying such experiences is considerable.
EMIL POGGI  Woodside, Queens, April 29, 1993


Mets Are Striking Out on Network TV, Too
How bad are the New York Mets?
Bad enough to be shunned by CBS Sports, which has ignominously removed Mets games from its Saturday afternoon schedule for the next two weekends.
Even the fifth-place Dodgers are deemed a greater attraction by the network.


Where Tuberculosis Breeds
Last year an outbreak of drug-resistant tuberculosis killed 18 people in New York State prisons and New York City jails.
A state review board found that the inmates had contracted the disease at hospitals outside the prison.
That conclusion seemed dubious at the time.
A new study in The Journal of the American Medical Association has left it more doubtful still.
New York's jails are a potent breeding ground for tuberculosis.
Health and correction officials need to redouble their efforts to contain it.


Fate Trips Up Dykes One More Time
New England Patriots wide receiver HART LEE DYKES, who has been sidelined for the past two years with a fractured right kneecap, will miss the 1993 National Football League season because of a problem with his left knee.
Dykes injured the knee late last week while working out at the Patriots' complex.
Coach BILL PARCELLS said Dykes would undergo surgery in about two weeks and be sidelined for the season.


Score One for the Doctors
See him, feel him, touch him, heal him.
That's sort of what Mario Lemieux's doctors did with traction treatment on his sore back.
Lemieux responded by scoring two goals, adding one assist and even mixing in some rough stuff as he led the Pittsburgh Penguins to a 6-3 victory over the Islanders tonight.
Lemieux, limited in the first four games by back pain, sent a surge of excitement through the Civic Arena crowd when he appeared before the opening face-off, evoking a roar from the fans as he sprinted on to the ice.


French Leader Proposes Tax Rises and Stimulus
With its eyes already set on the presidential elections of 1995, France's new conservative Government today announced an austerity budget comprising stiff new taxes to cut a huge budget deficit and measures intended to stimulate economic growth.
Announcing the measures, Prime Minister Edouard Balladur described the state of employment and public finances in France today as of "exceptional gravity."


Nets Face a Threat: A Fast Breakout by the Players
The Nets' season is over, but their off season is already in full blast.
And for a team that showed so much promise and heart, the next several months could prove to be the most important in the history of the franchise.
The first order of business will be determining whose bank accounts will be full come the beginning of next year, and who will be signing the checks.
Will Nets guard Drazen Petrovic be depositing his checks in a European bank account?
Will backup center Chris Dudley get direct deposit from the Phoenix Suns?
These are key personnel questions the Nets will be facing.


A Cleaner Conscience, A Trash-Free Basement
THE line of cars began near a tent set up in a parking lot at one end of Scalzi Park.
It ran past the tennis courts and the playing fields, past the lawns of daffodils and dandelions, past the boccie courts and out onto Bridge Street, where the police had to come and direct traffic.
Some of the drivers looked perfectly normal sitting there, scanning the newspaper or doing a crossword puzzle.
Dogs were more common companions than children, and the people with dogs seemed more relaxed.


2d Officer in Station-House Shooting Leaves the Hospital
A police officer shot in the head three weeks ago in a Brooklyn station house, who made what doctors called a remarkable recovery, left the hospital yesterday, saying she would not remain on the force.
"I got shot and I'm scared," Officer Mary Clare Capotosto said in a soft but firm voice, telling reporters as she left Kings County Hospital Center that she could not face the dangers of police work again.
"Seven years -- I've done my time above and beyond the call of duty," she added, although she stressed that she did not regret those seven years.


Account in Review At Comedy Central
The Comedy Central cable television network in New York said yesterday that it had placed its account in review, after a year and a half at Schnurr &amp; Jackson in Troy, N.Y.
Billings were estimated at $3 million.
Tony Fox, a Comedy Central spokesman, confirmed a report of the review this week in Adweek.
"We are evaluating our entire advertising and creative approach to help us best position comedy," he added.


Review/Music; Antiquing An Opera: New? Old? Neither?
Nowhere are questions of copy and original, of imitation and innovation, more strenuously argued than in "The Rake's Progress." Is Stravinsky's only full-length opera a music drama for our time rising out of the ashes of 18th-century style?
Or is it a master composer's conscious, all too conscious, attempt to take his place beside Mozart and Pergolesi in a land of long ago and far away?
For all its clever pacing, its literate libretto and its surprising lyricism, "The Rake" seems deep in private conversation with its models.
We are struck by the theatrical aptness of Stravinsky's arias, scenas, ensembles and continuo writing, yet never for a moment do listeners cease to think thoughts like, "Anne Truelove, you are singing as Mozart would want you to," or, "How cleverly this 20th-century composer dresses recitativo secco in his own clothes."


Tom Prideaux; Editor and Author, 85
Tom Prideaux, a former senior editor of Life magazine and author of several books on theater, died on Saturday at New York Hospital.
He was 85 and lived in Manhattan.
The cause was heart failure, said Joseph Kastner, a colleague.


Harlyn Products Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Roy Richard Grinker, 92, Educator in Psychiatry
Dr.
Roy Richard Grinker, an educator in psychiatry and psychoanalysis for nearly six decades, died Sunday at his home in Chicago.
He was 92.
The cause was a stroke, said his grandson, Dr. Roy R. Grinker 3d.


Childhood Amnesia
To the Editor:
I agree with Dr.
Paul W. Mosher (letter, April 20) that "Studying the Secrets of Childhood Memory" (Science Times, April 6) does not contradict Freud's theory of infantile amnesia.
However, infantile amnesia extends to experiences before the second year of life to include not only the traumatic birth experience, but also experiences of prenatal intrauterine life.
Freud truly disturbs the world's sleep.
The amount of energy we devote to denying such experiences is considerable.
EMIL POGGI  Woodside, Queens, April 29, 1993


Judith Rothschild Is Remembered at a Memorial Service


Dinkins Tries to Delay Vote On New School Board Chief
A majority of the New York City Board of Education lined up yesterday to elect Carol A. Gresser, a longtime parent association leader in Queens, as the next board president while Mayor David N. Dinkins made a last-minute plea to delay the vote.
School officials said Mrs.
Gresser was assured of the four votes she needed to be elected president at a meeting scheduled for 9:30 A.M. tomorrow.
Her election would represent the first time in seven years that the board president was not a board member appointed by the mayor.


Sports of The Times; Behind The Garden Knockout
ON a 1967 trip to Rome to lure Nino Benvenuti into challenging Emile Griffith for the world middleweight title, Harry Markson, then the managing director of Madison Square Garden's boxing department, was granted an audience with Pope Paul VI.
"Ah," the Pope said, putting up in his hands in a boxer's pose after their introduction, "Madison Square Garden."


Castro Sofa Concern Sold By Family
The Castro Convertibles Corporation of New Hyde Park, L.I., a family-owned company started in 1931 by Bernard and Teresa Castro, has been bought by Krause's Sofa Factory of Brea, Calif.
Terms were not disclosed.
Michael W. Gibbons, the president and chief executive of Krause's, a unit of the Worth Corporation, said yesterday that his company had bought Castro's Long Island manufacturing plant, 18 Castro showrooms throughout the East Coast and the Castro corporate name and patents.
The New Hyde Park plant, which employs more than 50 people, will close by summer, according to Krause's officials.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-11  AN 'INVITATION' FROM EUROPE  Insisting that arming Bosnian Muslims would make a "level killing field," not a "level playing field," European leaders distanced themselves further from President Clinton's policies and invited American forces to join European peacekeepers on the ground.
A1  WASHINGTON IN HOLDING PATTERN  Facing reluctance from Europe and at home, the Clinton Administration is delaying a decision on military action in Bosnia and turning instead to domestic economic issues.
A9


Executive Changes
ARIS ISOTONER, New York, a unit of Sara Lee Corp., named David W. Bryan president.
CONTINENTAL AIRLINES, Houston, appointed Daniel P. Garton senior vice president and chief financial officer.
In addition, John E. Luth was named senior vice president of restructuring.


TSI Corp. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 28


There's No Surpassing This Contented Legend
In an age when the idea of a professional golfer winning five tournaments in a single year is considered transcendent, Byron Nelson's 1945 record feat of 18 victories -- including 11 in a row, also a record -- has become unfathomable.
As the PGA Tour prepares for its annual stop this week at the GTE Byron Nelson Classic in Irving, Tex., both records continue to stand as perhaps the most break-resistant in all of sports.
Very likely, they will remain the permanent standard against which great years in the future will be measured.


First Brands Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Santa Cruz Journal; White Flight in Brazil? Secessionist Caldron Boils
Wielding a black felt pen on a road map, Irton Marx traced the outline of what he envisions as Latin America's newest, and fourth most populous, nation: the Republic of the Pampas.
By lopping the three southernmost states off Brazil, Mr.
Marx would create an instant nation: 22 million people living in a fertile farming area the size of France.


New Allure Publisher Is Named
Conde Nast Publications named Alexandra Golinkin as publisher of Allure magazine yesterday.
Ms.
Golinkin, vice president and publisher of Travel &amp; Leisure, an American Express Publishing magazine, replaces Kathy Niesloss Leventhal, who was appointed publisher of Vanity Fair on Monday in a Conde Nast shuffle.


Airwaves Auction Bill Advances
The House Energy and Commerce Committee overwhelmingly approved a bill today that would for the first time allow the Government to auction radio frequencies.
The frequencies will be used for advanced wireless telephones and other new technologies.
The bill, which has heavy support from the White House and is given strong chances of becoming law within the next few months, would bring about a significant change in how the Government manages the airwaves.


Merrill Reduces Role in Buyout Fund
In another sign that the fizz is gone from the business of financing corporate takeovers and reorganizations, Merrill Lynch &amp; Company has told its partners in a five-year-old leveraged buyout fund that it will greatly reduce its participation in new loans and investments.
As the general partner for the Capital Appreciation Fund II, Merrill Lynch was committed to providing 25 percent of the money for the fund's deals.
But after the end of this year, when the fund's investment period expires, Merrill Lynch has decided to withdraw as general partner, and reduce its share to a much lower, but undisclosed, level.


Out of Prison and Now Armed With a Rare Second Chance
There is always, in conversation with Bernard Hopkins, his recollections of fighting on the streets of Philadelphia, of how "I used my boxing skills to beat up people as an enforcer." And there is also his willingness to talk of more than four years in prison for a chain-snatching.
But while the 27-year-old Hopkins has gone beyond feeling sorry for himself -- he even goes back to the state prison at Graterford outside Philadelphia three times a year to talk to the inmates -- he knows that his International Boxing Federation middleweight title fight against Roy Jones Jr. on May 22 is being billed as the good guy versus the criminal.


Oakley Doesn't Mind Being Left in the Open
Charles Oakley turned the ignition key of his car, then jumped out to let the car idle.
Not that it needed to warm up, as Oakley had uncomfortably discovered.
"How hot is it?" he asked in the steamy parking lot outside the Knicks' practice gym this afternoon.


Ericsson (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


The Pop Life
Why? Why Not?
When word got around that Sting would be opening for the Grateful Dead on tour beginning on Friday in Las Vegas, eyebrows and the question "why?" were raised more than a few times.
"Why not?" said Miles Copeland, Sting's manager.
A spokesman for Sting said he would not be available to comment.


Edward G. Greer, 73; Was Theater Director
Edward G. Greer, a retired theater director and drama professor, died on Friday at Mount Sinai Medical Center in Manhattan.
He was 73.
The cause was congestive heart failure, his family said.


Curbing Drivers Who Kill
Eight-year-old Jonathan Medina, killed by a hit-and-run driver whose license had been suspended 41 times . . . 2-year-old Federico Santos, killed by a driver with two dozen violations and no valid driver's license . . . 4-year-old Dejon Barra, killed by a driver with 63 suspensions . . . nearly a dozen pedestrians also injured in these incidents.
The heart cries out at the waste of human life.
Yet it's some consolation that police and the New York State Legislature have roused themselves to confront the problem of drivers who remain behind the wheel even after scores of violations.


Lannet Data Communications Ltd. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


AT DINNER WITH: Chuck Norris; When That 97-Pound Weakling Grows Up
ALL right, if Chuck Norris is such a tough guy, I decided, let's see how he handles Lutece.
Mr.
Norris, the great martial-arts, action-adventure, karate-wheeling movie star, was in town recently promoting his new film, "Sidekicks." The title refers to the asthmatic teen-age boy Mr.
Norris befriends and inspires in the movie and to his own swift foot-in-the-belly predilections.


Marvin M. Schwan, 64, Builder Of a Billion-Dollar Food Empire
Marvin M. Schwan, who transformed his father's local door-to-door dairy company into a billion-dollar food empire covering 49 states, died on Sunday at a hospital in San Diego.
He was 64 and lived in Sioux Falls, S.D.
The cause of death was a heart attack, a company spokesman said.


Bronx Girl, 7, Shot in Dispute Over a Bottle
A 7-year-old Bronx girl was critically injured last night when she got in the way of two men arguing about cleaning up a broken beer bottle.
One of the men, an assistant building superintendent, shot at the other, a tenant, grazing his elbow but striking the child in the abdomen.
The girl, Nickey Commrie, who lives where the superintendent works at 1125 Sheridan Avenue, was in critical but stable condition at Bronx-Lebanon Hospital and was expected to survive, said Officer Andrew McInnis, a police department spokesman.


Review/Jazz; A Drummer's Drama
Billy Higgins is one of the few jazz drummers who can create drama without the rhetorical huffing and puffing of high-volume pounding.
With the silvery sheen of his ride cymbal and the sure and quiet snaps of his snare drum, Mr.
Higgins conveys a conversational intelligence, and does it with a deep swing.
Ever since Mr.
Higgins made his first major jazz appearance, as Ornette Coleman's drummer, it's been obvious that his art was the art of control, of the deft touch.
Mr.
Higgins was featured at the Walter Reade Theater on Thursday night as part of Lincoln Center's jazz program, and he brought along a series of longtime friends and associates, including Cedar Walton and Chris Anderson on piano, Ron Carter and David Williams on bass and George Coleman on saxophone.
For Mr.
Higgins, these are familiar faces -- he recently finished a week at Bradley's with Mr.
Anderson -- and it could have been just another set of standards, performed beautifully.
But Mr.
Higgins and his friends rehearsed some, and the rehearsals brought out the best in everyone.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A2-11  BOSNIAN SERBS REBUFF BELGRADE  Leading Serbian politicians demanded that Bosnian Serbs forsake a peace plan referendum and instead join representatives of ethnic Serbs of all former Yugoslav territories in a vote, but Bosnian Serbs rebuffed the proposal, which would almost certainly endorse the plan.
A1  CHRISTOPHER'S COURSE  The Secretary of State's mission to Europe to discuss the war in Bosnia may have been doomed by strong opposition and a lack of room to maneuver.
A1


Burrell Wins Prudential Business
Two agencies that specialize in advertising and marketing programs aimed at minority consumers received new assignments yesterday.
The Prudential Insurance Company of America said it had selected the Burrell Communications Group in Chicago to handle three accounts previously handled by Caroline Jones Advertising Inc. in New York: the Prudential Foundation, the Prudential Community Initiatives program and minority recruitment.
Billings were not disclosed.


Market Place; Focusing on the fine print in the Summit and Visx pact.
WALL STREET is chock full of mathematicians who use complex formulas run through high-powered computers to analyze stock valuations and corporate earnings down to the smallest decimal point.
So why do these whizzes have so much trouble with simple arithmetic?


Perot Warns Clinton on Health Plan Problems


Russia Dusts Off a Long-Unused Security Council Tactic: The Veto
Russia used its Security Council veto for the first time in nine years today to kill a plan to change the financing of the United Nations peacekeeping force in Cyprus.
The resolution would have apportioned the costs for the Cyprus force among all the United Nations members instead of relying on voluntary contributions.
The vote was 14 in favor with Russia voting against.
There were no abstentions.


Denied Election, Algeria's Muslims Counterattack
Fifteen months after the Algerian military seized power and canceled elections to prevent a victory by Islamic militants, the outlawed religious party has transformed into a guerrilla army with an increasingly unified command.
Denied a chance at the polls and driven underground with many of their number imprisoned, the country's religious militants have re-emerged with a dedicated base of support and new tactics that have thrown the state off balance.
The fighting, once limited to hit-and-run attacks in retaliation for police raids, has escalated into gun battles lasting up to two days.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
6.50
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
3.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
2.94
2.99
3.68
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
2.87
2.89
3.60
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
2.98
2.99
3.72
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
5.49
5.52
7.01
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
6.81
6.81
7.86
TELEPHONE BONDS
7.75
7.77
8.78
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
5.84
5.85
6.64
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


It Didn't Feel Like May; Quest for Cool on Record-Setting Day
The last time it was a near scorcher on May 11, a broken engagement was front-page news.
The former fiance had been arrested for stealing $200 from the woman who still loved him.
This time, the front-page news is a 16-year-old who took the A train on a joy ride.
But a hot day is still a hot day.
Which is why the next time the thermometers hit 92 on May 11, people will remember yesterday, the day that displaced May 11, 1896, in the record books.


Dinkins Passes the Hat Among Supporters at Ellis I.
Trying to cash in on a strong showing against his Democratic challengers in several recent polls, Mayor David N. Dinkins was joined by 750 supporters on Ellis Island last night for an elegant salute to his mayoralty and a passing-of-the-hat that his campaign hoped would net $1 million.
The Mayor chose the unusual site for the fund-raiser to emphasize a theme that no doubt will figure prominently in his re-election campaign: inclusion.
Both the location and the evening's program were intended to reinforce Mr.
Dinkins's image as a healer, a political leader capable of bringing together New Yorkers of diverse ethnic, racial and religious backgrounds.


Metropolitan Diary
DEAR DIARY:
I always make an effort to engage directory assistance operators -- typically the sternest people with whom I have daily contact -- in some sort of pleasant conversation.
Knowing that the operators are often being monitored and timed for efficiency (and therefore want to get me off the phone as quickly as possible), I usually start by using their names whenever they are offered.
My personal approach has sometimes won me a "Have a nice day," or the supreme surprise: having the number I've requested read to me by the operator rather than the corn-belt-accented computer simulation.
But one recent conversation surpassed my greatest expectations.
Operator: Directory assistance. Joyce speaking.
Me: Hey, Joyce. I need the number for Chelsea Place. It's a bar on Eighth Avenue.
Joyce: And what if I don't want to give it to you?
Me (thinking quickly): Well, I'll just have to call your supervisor, won't I?
Joyce (playing along): Oh, you will, will you?
Me: Whoa! Someone's not being monitored today!
Joyce (laughing): Oh, who cares about that anymore.
Anyway, I don't see a listing for Chelsea Place.
Although I never got my number, my day was made.
I love operators with attitude!
GERSH KUNTZMAN
. . .
Announcement of a coming sermon, posted on the bulletin board, and spotted by Avi Liveson of Chatham, N.J., outside the Third Church of Christ Scientist on East 64th Street in Manhattan:
EVERLASTING PUNISHMENT
All Are Welcome
. . .
NUTS  Squirrels, it seems, lead lovely lives.
On Sunday mornings they probably  play hide and seek between wild  flowers instead of sneaking cigarettes or  pushing power mowers over jungled lawns.
Squirrels, most certainly, have hearts  and hopes and tree-trunk homes  but if they could they probably would  laugh out loud at mortgage payments and  flat out scoff at overdrawn bank accounts.
Squirrels, no doubt, would surely ignore  early-hour alarm clocks and late-night  messages on fancy phone machines.
Instead  newborn acorns and spring rains flower  their fantasies and seed their dreams.
ROGER GRANET
. . .
Dear Diary:
I was on a crowded elevator at the 92d Street Y when the doors opened and she stepped on.
Blond, lovely, her face somehow familiar.
But where, exactly, had I seen her?
A magazine cover?
A TV commercial?
Her eyes met mine.
"Hello," she said.
My heart stopped.
"Hi," I responded a little too loudly.
Everyone in the elevator was listening.
My mind was racing.
That face!
That face!
She spoke again: "Have you seen my father? I've been in the garden." It all washed over me.
A studio in Carnegie Hall some 15 years ago.
A Phillip Barry play.
That was my scene partner standing there in front of me.
"Sarah?" I said tentatively.
What a compliment: she had recognized me.
And she had not only remembered the face, she remembered the lines.
I felt aglow, picked out of the anonymity of the crowd by someone so lovely.
It was then that she said it: "I'm sorry, but I can't remember your name."
"Gerry," I offered.
"Oh." The elevator door slid open and we stepped off together.
"So long," she said softly.
"Goodbye," I called after her.
Then she walked off in one direction and I walked off in the other. GERALD FIERST
. . .
Dear Diary:
I was standing in front of Lord &amp; Taylor waiting for the Fifth Avenue bus when I noticed that the woman next to me sported a wonderful blue linen hat adorned with a perky red flower and a jaunty brim.
I complimented her on the hat; she said she had just been to the debut of her designs at a fashion show.
She also makes hats to order.
Would I like her card?
As we exchanged business cards she examined mine carefully.
Reading that I was a psychotherapist she nodded approval.
"How nice!" she said.
"We're both in the head business." SUSAN OBRECHT
. . .
Dear Diary:
Perusing the spring brochure for adult education classes at the Ohab Zedek Synagogue on West 95th Street, I noticed that a handy list of useful telephone numbers was arranged around the edge of the flier.
There were numbers for the Spanish and Portuguese Synagogue, the United Jewish Appeal, a kashrut help line for kosher homes and the local mohel -- a person qualified to perform circumcisions.
That number is -- what else? -- 1-800-BABY BOY.
CHARLES POTTER


"ANN TAYLOR STORES CORP. (N)"
The Ann Taylor Stores Corporation, in reporting smartly higher first-quarter earnings, gave Wall Street the first inkling that prospects were brightening for the specialty store chain that caters to working women.
Under Sally Frame Kasaks, who was brought in to stage a turnaround at the company in February 1992, Ann Taylor has worked to improve the quality of its merchandise and give it a greater fashion content.
Shoe departments that used to be leased to the Joan &amp; David shoe company are now stocked with private-label shoes, giving the company better profits.
Larger stores are going up, giving Ann Taylor a chance to better show its customers how they can satisfy most of their apparel needs there.
And a new, more sophisticated logo was recently introduced.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Business Technology
I.B.M. and Blockbuster, in a vision of the future of entertainment retailing, will develop technology for electronic distribution of musical recordings or movies to blank compact disks or videocassettes in stores nationwide.  [ Page A1. ]
The Government will be allowed to auction radio frequencies for the first time under a bill approved by a House committee that calls for the sale of frequencies for wireless telephones.  [ D1. ]


Leslie Duly, 57, Dies; Led Bemidji University
Dr.
Leslie C. Duly, an educator and president of Bemidji State University in Minnesota, died Saturday in his home in Bemidji.
He was 57.
He apparently had a heart attack, said Jack Rhodes, spokesman for Minnesota's state universities.


Million-Dollar Bidding Is Back As a Cezanne Sets a Record
Cezanne's "Still Life With Apples" set a staggering record last night when it sold for $28.6 million at Sotheby's auction of Impressionist paintings, drawings and sculptures.
The price was $11.5 million more than any Cezanne has brought before.
Much to the shock of spectators, dealers and auction-house experts, the sale had moments when it seemed as if the clock had turned back to the boom of the late 1980's, the days of bidding wars and record highs.
In contrast, Sotheby's entire evening sale of Impressionist works two years ago totaled only $18 million.


The Economics of Wait and See
As economic growth has slowed in the last few months, business executives have exhibited signs of nervousness.
Many have scaled back expansion plans, put hiring on the back burner and held down capital spending.
The uncertainty in Washington is clearly one reason for the hesitation.
But even as executives keep one eye on Congress and another on the White House, many say their caution comes as much from their own modest order books and economic forecasts as from the political outlook.
This wariness comes at a stage in the business cycle when attitudes normally turn more ebullient and is likely to help turn predictions for only moderate growth into reality.


Factory Raid Nets 45 Arrests and a Million T-Shirts
As part of a drive against illegal street vending, the Dinkins administration announced yesterday that the police had arrested 45 people and seized more than a million imitation designer T-shirts from manufacturing operations housed in a Manhattan building.
Police officials said they believed it was the largest such T-shirt counterfeiting operation in the city.


Study Points the Way To Lower Cholesterol
To the Editor:
Re "Study Casts Doubt on Ability of Diet to Lower Cholesterol." (news article, April 29): The study in today's New England Journal of Medicine shows only that moderate fat restriction does not lower cholesterol.


Nordstrom Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Tarkanian's Reaction: Sorry to See Schultz Go
Throughout the bitter legal battles he has waged against the National Collegiate Athletic Association, Jerry Tarkanian and his lawyers have sent many emotional letters to the organization's office outside Kansas City.
But not one quite like the one he sent Monday.
Tarkanian, the former basketball coach at the University of Nevada-Las Vegas, wrote a letter to Dick Schultz in support of the executive director who announced his resignation yesterday.
Thinking that Schultz had received the endorsement of the executive committee, which he did, and would remain in his position, which he did not, Tarkanian offered encouragement.


Mercantile Stores Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to May 1


Don't Call Somalia Intervention a Success
To the Editor:
Your May 2 Week in Review article on the lessons of the United States military deployment to Somalia is timely and useful, but incomplete.


RESULTS PLUS
TENNIS  This Time, McEnroe Defeats Connors  Patrick McEnroe was a 7-5, 7-5 winner over Jimmy Connors last night in the first round of the America's Red Clay Championship in Coral Springs, Fla.
This was the first time the two played since their stirring opening-round match at the 1991 United States Open.
At that time, Connors rebounded from a two-set, 0-3 deficit to win in five sets and make a theatrical march to the semifinals.
But the 40-year-old Connors is now concentrating on business ventures and the start of his 35-and-older tour.
He has played in only five tournaments this year, losing in the first round four times, and is ranked 172d in the world.
Last night, he was betrayed by an erratic serve.
In the 11th game of the first set, he served three of his six double faults, virtually handing the set to the McEnroe, who is ranked 88th. (AP) Lendl Is Upset at Italian Open: Fifth-seeded Ivan Lendl was eliminated in the opening round of the Italian Open in Rome, losing to Marcelo Filippini of Uruguay, 6-2, 6-1.
Second-seeded Jim Courier, the defending champion, rolled past Horacio de la Pena, 6-2, 6-1, and No. 3 Boris Becker beat Andrei Cherkasov, 6-4, 6-3.
Sixth-seeded Michael Chang defeated Jordi Arrese, 6-2, 6-3. (AP)


Food Notes
New Zagat Guide
This week, Zagat Survey is introducing an expanded version of its restaurant guide previously called "Suburban New York City." It has been renamed "Zagat Tri-State Restaurant Survey" and covers Long Island, Connecticut, Northern New Jersey and New York State from the New York City line through the Hudson Valley and the Catskills.
There are twice as many restaurants as in the last suburban guide, published two years ago, and maps have been added.
The guide is $9.95 in bookstores and can be ordered by calling (800) 333-3421.
Cones for Connoisseurs
Ice cream has some new accessories to dress it up this year.
Nabisco Foods has introduced cones made of Oreo cookies and graham crackers.
The cones are sold in supermarkets, 12 for $2.


The Quest and the Questions
What's the running joke in Atlanta, which fought diligently to be the host for Super Bowl XXVIII on Jan. 30, 1994?
The word is that if the Buffalo Bills are in the game, Atlanta wants to toss it right back to the National Football League.
Ouch!
The Bills' first-round pick in the recent draft, Thomas Smith, a University of North Carolina cornerback from Gates, N.C., made his first trip to Buffalo last week for the Bills' mini-camp.
"Buffalo looked pretty neat from the window of the plane," Smith said, smiling.
A closer look and Smith found Bills fans still counting all of those Dallas Cowboys points in Super Bowl XXVII on Jan. 31.


Corrections
An article in Business Day on Friday, about the appointment of Arthur Andersen &amp; Company as the auditor of the Leslie Fay Companies, misattributed the disclosure of accounting irregularities at the company.
They were first disclosed by Leslie Fay's controller, not its previous auditor.
The article also referred incorrectly to the status of John S. Dubel, Leslie Fay's chief financial officer.
A former Arthur Andersen partner, Mr.
Dubel is not a member of Leslie Fay's audit committee.


PNC Bank Buying Sears Loan Unit
Sears, Roebuck &amp; Company said yesterday that it would sell its large mortgage banking company for $329 million in cash to the PNC Bank Corporation, which is as eager to diversify as Sears is to return to its core retail business.
Like Sears before it, PNC sees the mortgage operation as a way to add new sources of revenue.
Many commercial banks, including PNC, are looking to expand income from fees, like servicing home loans, to compensate for slow loan growth.


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY  JEFFRIES'S RIGHTS VIOLATED, JURY SAYS
A Federal jury decided that the City University of New York had violated Professor Leonard Jeffries's right to free speech when it removed him as chairman of the City College black studies department last year after he delivered a racially charged speech.
Judge Kenneth Conboy of District Court in Manhattan is to decide whether Dr.
Jeffries should be reinstated.
A1.
LOVING TRAINS BEYOND REASON
The 16-year-old who took an A train from its terminus in Inwood Saturday afternoon was obsessed with trains and owned a well-thumbed copy of the Transit Authority's book of rules and regulations.
A1.


Corrections
An article on Friday about a panel set up to increase productivity of the New York City work force referred incorrectly to the research director of the Citizens Budget Commission, as did an article on May 4 about criticism of Mayor David N. Dinkins's spending plan for the next fiscal year.
The research director is Charles Brecher.


COMPANY NEWS: A Cube to Carry; Pepsi Looks to Reshape Packaging for Soda Cans
Another summer is on the way, and Pepsico Inc. thinks shoppers will be more willing to cart home 24 cans of soda if they were not so heavy and cumbersome.
Research indicated that a growing number of consumers would prefer to buy more cans at once in grocery stores and supermarkets.
But 24 cans weigh as much as 24 cans, no matter how they are arranged.
So with a new packaging idea, the makers of Pepsi and other soft drinks have found a way to ease the schlep.
It's called The Cube.


Maxwell Agrees to Sell Its Airline Guides Unit
The joint administrators of the bankrupt Maxwell Communication Corporation said yesterday that they had signed a letter of intent with Reed Elsevier P.L.C. that would allow Reed to acquire Official Airline Guides Inc. for $425 million in cash.
The agreement between Maxwell and the joint venture of Reed International P.L.C. and Dutch Elsevier N.V. is nonbinding and nonexclusive, which means that other bids could be entertained, the companies said.


Bulls Take 1-0 Lead As Jordan Scores 43
Bulls 91, Cavaliers 84
The Cleveland Cavaliers insisted all along they would have to stop Michael Jordan.
And, as has happened many times before, they failed miserably.


U.S. SET TO CHANGE ABORTION POLICIES
Declaring that it wanted to help lead a new global effort to address the issue of overpopulation, the Clinton Administration said today that efforts to stabilize world population growth must concentrate on providing more opportunities and rights for women, including abortions.
In a speech to a United Nations committee that is planning a major conference on population in Cairo next year, Timothy E. Wirth, the State Department Counselor, said the Administration intended to reverse policies on population growth that had been adopted under Presidents Reagan and Bush.


High Levels of Lead Found In Water Serving 30 Million
In its broadest survey of lead contamination in drinking water, the Environmental Protection Agency said yesterday that 819 systems serving 30 million people had excessive levels, and it ordered officials to take steps to reduce lead levels and to notify customers.
The main source of lead is home plumbing, so not all buildings in those systems have high levels, according to the agency.
Some systems listed in an earlier survey as having high lead levels, including New York City's, showed improvement by changing the chemistry of the water or adding chemicals that coat the insides of pipes.


Clinton Promotes Loan Program as He Speaks to Illinois Students


Continental Jet Deal Seen With Boeing
Continental Airlines is expected to announce today that it has ordered more than 75 Boeing 737 and 757 jets worth several billion dollars, people familiar with the deal said yesterday.
The order was not entirely unexpected because Continental placed a similar order before it filed for bankruptcy protection more than two years ago.
That order was erased by the bankruptcy proceedings.


A Return to Profits for Equitable
The Equitable reported yesterday its first profitable quarter since 1989 -- the latest chapter in the turnaround story of an insurance giant that faced insolvency as recently as two years ago.
After-tax earnings for the first quarter of this year totaled $31.8 million, the company said, compared with a loss of $18.6 million for the corresponding period in 1992.


Business Schools Hit Hard Times Amid Doubt Over Value of M.B.A.
After two decades of growth so robust that they could just sit back and welcome waves of students year after year, the nation's business schools have hit hard times as more students wonder whether an M.B.A. is worth the time and expense.
Over the 1980's, the number of masters' degrees in business administration awarded at the nation's 680 business schools grew about 15 percent.
Then came the recession and the much-publicized shrinking of corporate payrolls.


Campus Journal; Dartmouth Is Swept Up In Turmoil Over Paper
On three consecutive Fridays last month, black students at Dartmouth College swept through dormitory hallways collecting thousands of copies of a conservative student newspaper, embroiling the campus in a debate over free speech and racial intolerance.
This is hardly the first time the paper, The Dartmouth Review, has been at the center of a dispute.
Founded in 1980, published off campus and supported by prominent conservatives like William F. Buckley Jr., it has long been a lightning rod for protest.


Books of The Times; From Japan, Big Macs and Marlboros in Stories
The Elephant Vanishes  By Haruki Murakami Translated by Alfred Birnbaum and Jay Rubin. 327 pages.
Alfred A. Knopf. $21.
Haruki Murakami's frequent-flyer fiction crosses the Pacific from Japan effortlessly and makes a soft landing in the United States for the American reader.
But I wish the characters in "The Elephant Vanishes," his new book of short stories, wouldn't spend so much time at McDonald's, lighting up Marlboros, listening to Bruce Springsteen records and watching Woody Allen movies as a prelude to romance.
Just when you're ready for some wisdom from the Orient, the author serves up a Big Mac.


Topics of The Times; A Mosaic Moment
A woman approached a Manhattan sidewalk display of bags and wallets, examined the merchandise and then asked the price of a particular pocketbook (genuine leather).
"Veinticinco," said the proprietor of about 15 square feet of sidewalk on Seventh Avenue at 28th Street.
The woman looked uncomprehending.


McDermott International reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Critics Circle Names 'Angels' Best Play
Tony Kushner's "Angels in America: Millennium Approaches" was named best new play of the season by the New York Drama Critics Circle yesterday.
The Critics Circle also selected Frank McGuinness' "Someone Who'll Watch Over Me" as the best new foreign play and "Kiss of the Spider Woman" as the best new musical.
A check for $1,000, given annually by Lucille Lortel, will be presented to Mr.
Kushner next Wednesday at an awards ceremony.
Mr.
Kushner previously won the Pulitzer Prize for drama for his play, the first half of his two-part "Gay Fantasia on National Themes."


More Than 200 Die and 500 Are Injured in Factory Fire in Thailand


Topics of The Times; Freya Stark's Journey
"If we could make contours in hearts as we do in maps, to see their loves, we should learn what strange unexpected regions attain the deepest depth. Often we might discover that a place rather than a person holds the secret."
Dame Freya Stark, who died this week at 100, wrote those words about her father in her autobiography, "Traveler's Prelude." His place was England's Dartmoor, "to him a dark and refreshing well, from which the water of his life was drawn." Her place was every place the Bedouins wandered, and she described them with a style and scholarship that left most chroniclers of the old Arab world panting in the dust.


Witt's Big Outing Is Supported by (Gasp!) the Bullpen
Mike Witt pitched seven marvelous innings before Buck Showalter asked him to sit.
Witt didn't want to.
He had a three-hitter, a hefty lead and a successful curveball, and he was enjoying his start against the Milwaukee Brewers last night at Yankee Stadium.
He also happened to have a high pitch count and a surgically repaired elbow that the Yankees do not dare risk.
With another pitcher, Showalter might have allowed it.
He might have looked at his relievers, remembered their recent mishaps and left his starter in the game.
But he would not do that with Witt.


Enhance Financial Services Group Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Review/Television; Down Syndrome Boy Helps Classmates Grow
Subscribers to HBO have an opportunity tonight to see the work that won this year's Academy Award for Best Achievement in Documentary Short Subjects.
Since documentaries are rarely shown in the nation's movie malls, its appearance on television is itself something of an achievement.
But whether on the big screen or the small one, "Educating Peter" is worth the price of admission.
The perceptively photographed and edited half-hour film captures the lows and highs of 10-year-old Peter Gwazdauskis's introduction to a third-grade classroom in Blacksburg, Va.
Peter, who has Down syndrome, is one of some 60,000 disabled students who are now attending regular classes at American elementary schools under a Federal law to encourage what is called inclusion.


Turgeon in Game 6? Chance Near 0
Now that Mario Lemieux has overcome back problems -- temporarily, at least -- to lead his Pittsburgh Penguins to a victory, is it possible that Pierre Turgeon will surmount a shoulder injury and do a similar thing for the Islanders?
"I don't think so, not tomorrow," Turgeon said today after a light practice with the team at the Coliseum.
"I wish I could tell you when. I don't even know myself. We were thinking about tomorrow, but tomorrow is out. It's going to take some time. It does feel better. The last five days, it's felt better and better. A lot of positive things."


Clinton Weighs Sending Troops To Macedonia to Limit Conflict
President Clinton said today that he is considering sending American troops to Macedonia to aid international peacekeeping forces and to keep the conflict in Bosnia and Herzegovina from spreading.
"It's one of many things that's been discussed," Mr.
Clinton said.
"We have two objectives. The first is how to confine the conflict. The second is whether we can do anything to end it and to stop ethnic cleansing."


Good Demand at Treasury Auction
The Treasury's quarterly auction got off to a respectable start yesterday with the sale of $16 billion in three-year notes.
Traders said there was good demand at the auction, with buying by retail and institutional investors as well as bond dealers.
Yields at the auction averaged 4.27 percent on the notes, the lowest since three-year notes were first regularly issued in 1978.


Body-Checking a Light Pole
Darius Kasparaitis, the rookie defenseman from Lithuania, put new meaning into the term "hitting the post" this afternoon.
While backing up his black BMW in the Coliseum parking lot after practice, he crashed into a light pole, broke it and knocked most of it down.
Worse, the rear end of the car became impaled on the remainder of the post.
This kept his car from pulling away.
Kasparaitis, who is learning the English language well, climbed out of the car, looked up at the sunny sky and displayed full command of various expletives.
While several teammates offered their condolences and wisecracks, Coliseum workers brought a forklift and separated the car from the pole.


Farm Credit System reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Sharply and Loudly, G.O.P. Rivals Debate
The three major candidates for the New Jersey Republican gubernatorial nomination participated in their first televised debate tonight, getting little chance to differentiate themselves from their rivals but giving voters across the state a barb-filled, free-wheeling 90-minute preview of the final weeks of the campaign.
The clash began with the opening question, on the controversial $2.8 billion tax increase that Gov.
Jim Florio pushed through three years ago.
The three -- Christine Todd Whitman, Jim Wallwork and Cary Edwards -- alternately cut one another other off or tried to shout one another down.


U.N. of Pit Crews Revs For Old Brooklyn Poly
REMEMBER the 1969 Mets, Harry S. Truman in 1948, David?
Well, slingshot, longshot and underdog fans, meet the car racing team from Brooklyn Polytechnic University.
Brooklyn Polytechnic is a no-frills school.
It does not have dormitories or a gymnasium and few of the 4,000 students seem to know that the school's nickname is the Blue Jays.
The students, many of them foreign born or the children of immigrants, come to the downtown Brooklyn buildings, study hard, become engineers and get good jobs.
There is not much rah-rah.


Informers In Bombing Are Missing
Two informers who helped the authorities quickly compile early evidence in the World Trade Center bombing investigation have disappeared and appear to have fled, investigators said yesterday.
They described the two as being among "a lot of people" who provided information after the arrest of the first suspect, Mohammed A. Salameh, on March 4, six days after the Feb. 26 blast.
They said the informers may have been involved "on the fringes" of the plot.


Bridge
The first cash-prize tournament under the auspices of the American Contract Bridge League was played in Las Vegas, Nev., last weekend.
The biggest winners, sharing $5,000 for winning the Open Pairs, were Sabine Zenkel of Chicago and Daniela von Arnim of Wiesbaden, who often represent Germany internationally.
Sharing $3,500 for a hard-won victory in the Knockout Teams were Grant Baze of Costa Mesa, Calif., Dan Morse of Houston, John Sutherlin of Dallas, Hugh Ross of Oakland, Calif., and Bart Bramley of Chicago.
They won the final by 1 imp and the semifinal by 6.
In the latter, Bramley landed in seven no-trump on the diagramed deal.
His four-spade bid as South was Kickback, an economical substitute for Roman Key-Card Blackwood, and the response showed one or four key cards.
Knowing it was four, three aces and the diamond king, Bramley went all the way.


Slain 7-Year-Old Is Buried


In Face of Traffic Accidents, Suffolk Considers Closing Pubs 2 Hours Earlier
For 11 years, Suffolk County has led the state in traffic deaths involving drunken driving.
Now, at the suggestion of two bar owners, the county is weighing a plan to combat the problem: making bars close at 2 A.M., two hours earlier than the 4 A.M. limit.


Corrections
The listing of winning lottery numbers yesterday misstated the days covered.
The New York Numbers, New York Win 4, New Jersey Pick 3, New Jersey Pick 4, New Jersey Pick-6 Lotto, Connecticut Daily and Connecticut Play 4 numbers were Monday's.
The New York Pick 10 numbers were Sunday's.


Corrections
An article on March 3 about a Supreme Court decision upholding an Ohio reapportionment plan misstated the number of legislative districts with black majorities created under the plan.
It was five, not eight.
That error was repeated in a Law page article on April 16 about a lawsuit challenging North Carolina's Congressional reapportionment.


Bonuses Planned For U.S. Medalists
The United States Olympic Committee is planning to offer bonuses of $15,000, and possibly more, to most American athletes who win gold medals at the next winter and summer Olympic Games.
The plan was formulated by the Athletes Support Committee and is due to be approved at the U.S.O.C. board of directors meetings on June 5 and 6.
According to the four-year, $7.6 million plan, silver medalists will receive $10,000, bronze medalists $7,500, and fourth-place finishers $5,000.


'Show Boat' on Screen
To the Editor:
Your May 1 article on protests against a Toronto stage production of "Show Boat" states that the show was filmed twice, in 1936 and 1951.
Actually, the first filmed version was Universal's in 1929, starring Laura La Plante (still living in California), Joseph Schildkraut, Otis Harlan and Emma Fitzroy.
If this version still exists, I hope Universal will decide to release it on tape.
EVE GOLDEN  Secaucus, N.J., May 3, 1993


If This Is May, What Looms in August?


Build a Better Sandwich and . . . Yes! It's In!
IN the course of human events, sandwiches have been maligned and exalted, have been delicate contrivances and overstuffed plebian affairs, alternately objects of desire and objects of scorn.
Either way, summer is high sandwich season.
It is the season of hot dogs at the ball park, hamburgers by the backyard grill and French bread, pate and cheese at picnics -- and now, of leaner, post-modern constructions that rely more on roasted or marinated vegetables than meat and that stylishly recycle leftovers like grilled vegetables, lamb, chicken or fish.


Wine Talk
BURGUNDY is a seductress.
The traveler who keeps his eyes on the road, racing down the auto route from Paris, is probably safe from her blandishments.
But beware: a casual glance to the left, toward Aloxe-Corton, semi-submerged in a sea of vines, or to the right, toward the bustling citadel of Beaune, and all may be lost.
Burgundy will have claimed another victim.
Its art, its history and its people, as much as its vineyards and wine, will have worked their magic.
But even then it will have revealed little.
For who can comprehend in a few hours or days a world that measures time in vintages, that accepts the present but draws its strength and sustenance from the past?


Gephardt Lends Support To the Free-Trade Pact
The House majority leader today broadly endorsed the Clinton Administration's trade policies toward Mexico and Japan, while calling for legislation later this year to extend the use of trade sanctions in labor and environmental disputes.
The endorsement from Representative Richard A. Gephardt, Democrat of Missouri, the most prominent advocate in Congress of a more confrontational trade policy, has political effects.
It is aimed at protecting the Administration from criticism by labor and some environmental groups who argue that Clinton trade policy is not tough enough.


Bernice Feinstein, 67, Music History Lecturer
Bernice Feinstein, a former lecturer on music history at George Washington University, died on Sunday at King Edward VII Hospital in Bermuda.
She was 67 and lived in McLean, Va.
She was stricken during a vacation and died after heart surgery, said her son John, who lives in Bethesda, Md.
She was in Bermuda with her family to celebrate her 40 years of marriage to Martin Feinstein, general director of the Washington Opera.


Seaboard Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 27


Presidents Can't Choose Justices in a Vacuum; Confidence Is at Stake
To the Editor:
Neither Yale Law School professor in "A Litmus Test for Justices?" (Op-Ed, April 28) hits the real issue.
As a day-to-day practitioner litigating for clients, I know that public perception of and confidence in the courts and the administration of justice are the overarching issues.
I have three immutable principles concerning judicial selection, which have evolved over recent years:


Personal Health; So many bike injuries, and so few helmets
MY first bicycle helmet collected more dust than wear.
Years earlier, I had bought helmets for my sons when they got their first 10-speeds.
They wore them sporadically, then eventually not at all.
So my husband and I took their helmets as hand-me-downs.
We wore them on long rides but not around the neighborhood.
Like my sons, I complained that the helmet was uncomfortable and messed up my hair.
Besides, I had been riding helmetless for 35 years and had never hit my head in a spill.


Subway Caper Fueled by Passion for Trains
Sixteen-year-old Keron Thomas's obsession with subway trains did not begin in early childhood because in early childhood he was in Trinidad and Trinidad does not have trains.
But, oh, when he got to New York.


Mets Discover a New Loser and a New Way to Lose
The Mets are running in place -- literally.
Tonight, the Mets lost for the 12th time in 15 games because, among other things, Howard Johnson staggered between second and third base and turned himself into the last out of a triple play.
They lost because of Chico Walker's weak defense up the middle and because their new control pitcher, Eric Hillman, could not throw bull's-eyes.
They lost because Bobby Bonilla finally blasted a home run -- and there was no other Met on base.
The pitiable final score was 7-4 in favor of the St.
Louis Cardinals, although the Mets showed more of a pulse in the later innings.
They were behind 6-0 after four innings, but light-hitting shortstop Tim Bogar (.083 coming in) recorded three runs batted in, Bonilla (2 for his last 14) nearly dented the scoreboard in left-center field, and the team accumulated 12 hits.


10 Students Given Churchill Grants
Ten American college students have been awarded this year's Winston Churchill Scholarships for graduate work in mathematics, engineering and the sciences at Cambridge University.
The students, who were selected for outstanding academic and extracurricular achievements, will receive about $20,000 toward tuition, travel and living expenses to attend Cambridge's Churchill College during the next academic year.


Western Beef Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to April 2


Right to Challenge Borrowing Is Upheld
The New York State Court of Appeals ruled today that citizens have the right to challenge state borrowing done without voter approval, reversing its earlier position and opening the door to a flurry of lawsuits.
The decision is a potential problem for the state, although the extent of the problem depends on further court decisions.
The State Constitution says the state has to have the approval of voters for taxpayer-supported debt, though the reality is that most borrowing is conducted by public authorities outside voter scrutiny.
Courts have upheld this in the past, but today's decision opened the way to a new wave of challenges.


Clemens Fans 13 In 35th Shutout
Red Sox 4, Orioles 0
Roger Clemens pitched a five-hitter for his 35th career shutout, striking out a season-high 13 last night as Boston ended a three-game losing streak beating the Orioles, 4-0, in Baltimore.
Clemens walked two and did not allow a runner past second base until the ninth inning in lowering his earned run average to 1.73.
It was the 53d time in his 10-year career that he has fanned at least 10 batters.
The 13 strikeouts were Clemens's most since he fanned 13 California Angels on Aug. 31, 1989.


Indicator's Decline Hurts Some Chip Stocks
A decline in the semiconductor industry's leading indicator of sales hurt the stocks of some chip manufacturers yesterday, but many Wall Street analysts said that some investors had overreacted and that the industry's outlook was strong.
The industry's book-to-bill ratio fell to 1.13 in April from 1.17 in March, the Semiconductor Industry Association reported late Monday.
The ratio of 1.13 means that for every $100 worth of products shipped, manufacturers received $113 worth of new orders, an indicator that the industry was still growing, but not as rapidly as before.
April was the third consecutive month of declining growth, after the indicator reached a high of 1.20 in January.


Bishops Plot Stance if Health Plan Covers Abortion
The nation's Roman Catholic archbishops held a private meeting in Chicago yesterday to discuss what stance they will take toward a national health-care plan if it covers abortions.
Church officials described the meeting as preliminary to a full discussion of the issue when all the nation's bishops hold their regular spring meeting in New Orleans on June 17-19.


Dinkins Concedes a Setback On Board of Education Post
Mayor David N. Dinkins conceded yesterday that he had failed to delay the expected election of Carol A. Gresser today as the new Board of Education president, tacitly acknowledging that he had lost a battle to retain influence over the selection.
If Ms.
Gresser, who has already lined up support from a majority on the board, is chosen today, it will mark the first time in seven years that the board's leader is not a mayoral appointee.


Croatian-Muslim Fighting In Bosnian City in 3d Day
For a third day, Bosnian Croat and Muslim soldiers exchanged fierce mortar and heavy machine gun fire above the red tile roofs of this mountain town today, sending thick clouds of smoke boiling from burning buildings and pinning down United Nations peacekeeping troops on roads above the steep valley.
The continued fighting all but cut off the city, where an estimated 30 soldiers and civilians have already died and more than 70 have been wounded.
Among the latter is a Spanish soldier belonging to the United Nations forces, hit by shrapnel when two United Nations armored pesonnel carriers made a mad dash through the center of the city this afternoon to deliver blood and medical supplies to a hospital in a Muslim-controlled part of town.


CHRONICLE
No one knows which of the two august culinary groups planned their dinner first, but suddenly denizens of the world of food -- restaurant owners, chefs, critics, writers, wine experts -- face a dilemma: two formal sit-down dinners at the same time in different places in Manhattan.
The French Culinary Institute and Les Dames d'Escoffier have both planned black-tie parties for the evening of June 2, leaving people invited to both wondering what to do.
To go to the culinary institute's affair?
It will benefit a scholarship fund established in memory of Sonya Selby-Wright, who produced food segments for "Good Morning America" and who died in 1990.
The dinner at the institute, in SoHo, will feature a "vertical tasting," in which the five courses will complement different vintages of Chateau Beychevelle wine, and will be planned by Jacques Pepin.


CHRONICLE
TIPPER GORE carried her camera on the campaign trail when her husband was running for the Vice Presidency, and tomorrow, 40 of her photographs go on view at the Woodrow Wilson House in Washington, in an exhibit that will continue through June 28.
Looking through the photographer's lens, Mrs.
Gore said she saw a great deal that she might not necessarily have noticed as a campaigning spouse.
"I really wanted to capture the enthusiasm and excitement that the campaign generated," she said yesterday, speaking on a car phone on the way to a lacrosse game at one of her daughter's schools.


Lester del Rey, 77, Editor and Author
Lester del Rey, an editor and author of dozens of science-fiction novels, died on Monday at New York Hospital.
A resident of Manhattan, he was 77.
He had suffered a brief illness, according to Ballantine/Del Rey/Fawcett/Ivy, a division of Random House.
Until his retirement just over a year ago, he was fantasy editor for the Del Rey Books imprint named after him.


Corrections
A brief article by The Associated Press on Monday about the increase in the United States prison population misstated the figure in some editions.
The total number of inmates in state and Federal prisons was up 59,460 in 1992, a 7.2 percent increase over 1991.


U.S. Considering Force in Macedonia
President Clinton is considering sending American troops to the former Yugoslav republic of Macedonia as one option for confining the Balkan conflict and preventing it from spreading to involve other countries like Albania and Greece and Turkey.
Article, page A8.


Presidents Can't Choose Justices in a Vacuum
To the Editor:
While I agree that President Clinton should consider the legal views of a potential nominee to the Supreme Court, I believe that both Stephen L. Carter and Paul Gewirtz overlook an important, and ironic, point in "A Litmus Test for Justices" (Op-Ed, April 28) that makes their debate largely moot.
The Constitution itself requires the President to consider the judicial philosophy of his nominees.


Where to Buy a Well-Built Sandwich
THE city's sandwich makers are busiest in summer, when New York turns inside out and lunchtime crowds spill into parks, office plazas and nearly every other available open space.
Here is a varied menu of sandwiches and where they are made to order at their best.
The prices do not include sales tax.
BAKED HAM La Fromagerie, 1374 Madison Avenue (95th Street), (212) 534-8923; $4.50.


Pennsylvania Station Rebirth Will Aid Region
To the Editor:
Your May 2 article on Amtrak's proposal to move New York's Pennsylvania Station to the General Post Office building across the street fully investigates important esthetic issues.
But it does not discuss other considerations, which should be seen as equally significant.


Voter Bill Passes In a G.O.P. Defeat
Senate Democrats broke a Republican filibuster today and sent to President Clinton legislation intended to increase voter registration by almost 50 million people.
Mr.
Clinton has promised to sign it.
Today's victory for Mr.
Clinton and his party showed that a Republican filibuster was not a lethal weapon threatening every Administration proposal, contrary to the impression created last month, when Senate Republicans used the tactic to kill the President's jobs package.


Howe Out at Least 4 Weeks
The already sorry state of the Yankees' bullpen became even more grave yesterday when the team announced that Steve Howe would be out four to six weeks with his ankle injury -- a not altogether unexpected development, but certainly not the news the Yankees wanted to hear.
Howe, who sprained his left ankle last Saturday on the clubhouse steps leading to the dugout in Detroit, was re-examined yesterday by the Yankees' team physician, Dr.
Stuart Hershon, who called the injury "an acute sprain." The original diagnosis was a Grade 3 sprain that would keep Howe out for one to two weeks.
The Yankees had placed him on the 15-day disabled list and were concerned that the injury could sideline him longer, but Howe seemed optimistic that he would be able to return as soon as he was eligible.


Note to Readers
The Op-Ed page welcomes unsolicited manuscripts.
Because of the volume of submissions, however, we regret that we cannot acknowledge an article or return it unless it is accompanied by a self-addressed, stamped envelope.
If manuscripts are accepted for publication, authors will be notified within two weeks.


Manuel Alum, 50, A Modern Dancer And Choreographer
Manuel Alum, a modern dancer and choreographer, died on Monday at Tisch Hospital in Manhattan.
He was 50 and lived in Manhattan.
The cause was cancer, his family said.


Arrest in Sergeant's Death
Amaury Bonilla, 19, of 2314 Crotona Avenue, the Bronx, was arrested last night and charged with the murder of Staff Sgt.
Richard Rodrigues, 32, a marine recruiter who was shot to death Sunday night as he sat on a park bench in East Tremont, the police said.
Sergeant Rodrigues died from four shots in the back only a few feet from where his brother, Luis, 27, was fatally wounded 17 months ago.


Dr. David Blankenhorn, 68, Dies; Pioneer in Heart Disease Research
Dr.
David H. Blankenhorn, a professor of medicine at the University of Southern California who pioneered research showing that a low-fat diet and drug therapy could reverse heart disease, died Sunday at his home in Pacific Grove, Calif.
He was 68.
The cause was prostate cancer, a university spokesman said.


Andreychuk Goals Lift Leafs to 3-2 Lead
Maple Leafs 5, Blues 1
Dave Andreychuk is someplace he has never been before in the month of May: in the National Hockey League playoff spotlight.
He's loving every minute of it.
"I'm having a great time," said Andreychuk, surrounded by reporters after scoring twice to help the Toronto Maple Leafs to a 5-1 victory at home last night over the St.
Louis Blues.
"I've been on the dark side so many times.


Mayor of Jersey City Wins Re-election
Mayor Bret Schundler today won a lopsided victory over two opponents and the once-powerful Hudson County Democratic organization.
Mr.
Schundler, 34, a former investment counselor, became the first Republican mayor here since 1917 when he won a special election in a crowded field in November.
The Democrats, led by Robert Janiszewski, the Hudson County Executive who headed the Clinton-Gore Presidential campaign in New Jersey last year, poured money and manpower in their effort to unseat him.


Review/Dance; City Center and Its Stars Celebrate 50 Years
For half a century, City Center has been doing something right.
More than that.
It has been doing many things right.
That was made clear on Monday night in "50 Years at City Center," a gala celebration at this remarkable theater, which has been presenting dance, opera, drama and musical comedy since 1943.
City Center also did something right when it put its anniversary program together.
The evening, which lasted less than two hours, was crowded with attractions.
Elizabeth Ireland McCann, the event's producer, and Steve Lawson, its writer and director, helped make the gala both instructive and fun.


Facing 4th Year of Cuts, Berkeley Chancellor Leads Budget Revolt
Over three years of state budget cuts, the University of California has reacted more or less stoically, with administrators saying they would simply have to run a leaner, more competitive institution.
But this year, when state lawmakers called for reductions even beyond the $138 million proposed by Gov.
Pete Wilson for 1993-94, the politeness evaporated.


No Headline
"It's not like getting behind the wheel of a Chevy and pulling away from the curb. He came almost fully equipped. And you know the old saying: If it walks like a duck and talks like a duck, it's a motorman." -- ALBERT W. O'LEARY, New York City Transit Police spokesman.  [ B2:1. ]


Finding of Murder In Indians' Deaths
An Indian couple found dead in their Park Avenue apartment last month were asphyxiated, apparently by robbers, the New York City Medical Examiner said yesterday.
The finding by Dr.
Charles S. Hirsch in the murders came a month after the bodies of Chitresh Khedker and his wife, Nenescha, of Khed Anjanvel, India, were found on the floor of their six-room apartment at 521 Park Avenue at East 60th Street on April 12.


In the Cellar
Megacards Inc. makes and markets baseball cards and other sports picture cards.
At this time last year, as the 1992 baseball season was beginning, its share price was around $8.
But the St.
Louis company's stock has been falling ever since.
Yesterday, it was one of the biggest percentage losers in Nasdaq trading.


TOUGH QUESTIONING OF LIBEL PLAINTIFF
Jeffrey M. Masson's memory was challenged on the witness stand today when cross-examination highlighted quotations he had once disputed in Janet Malcolm's articles in The New Yorker magazine, only to hear them later, in his own voice, on tape-recordings of their interviews.
With glossy graphics for the jurors to look at and muffled tapes they could barely hear, Ms.
Malcolm's lawyer, Gary L. Bostwick, methodically ran through a list of quotations that Mr.
Masson had challenged in old memorandums and early versions of his legal complaint, all of them written before he had access to Ms.
Malcolm's tape recorded interviews.


CUNY Violated Speech Rights Of Department Chief, Jury Says
A Federal jury decided yesterday that the City University of New York had violated Dr.
Leonard Jeffries's right to free speech when it removed him as chairman of the City College black studies department last year after he delivered a racially charged speech.
The verdict left to Judge Kenneth Conboy of Federal District Court in Manhattan to decide whether Dr.
Jeffries should be reinstated.
The jury, which included five blacks, is still deliberating on whether he should be awarded any monetary damages.


60-Minute Gourmet
MACARONI and cheese is one of those dishes indelibly engraved in my mind as purely American.
When I was growing up in France we had various noodle dishes that called for grated Gruyere or aged goat's cheese, but nothing like this bubbling, crusty, creamy concoction that appeals so much to children.
My grandchildren love this dish, too, so I have become quite familiar with the recipe.
My variation produces a mixture that is more distinctly flavored, and somewhat lighter, than the traditional dish.


A Five-Dollar Cancer Cure
It is hard to imagine a world where children are immunized against cancer before their second birthday, where Alzheimer's Disease is cured with a single shot, where AIDS can be taken care of in one visit to the doctor.
But before Jonas Salk's discovery in 1952, most Americans couldn't imagine a polio vaccine, either.
The fact is, while the health care debate has focused on cutting costs and expanding services, disease and disability continue to drive costs up.
Medical research is the key to eliminating diseases and making a health care system less costly and more effective.
As part of any comprehensive reform package, we should establish a trust fund to guarantee increased research spending.


U.S. Petroleum Data
In millions of barrels except refinery utilization
May 7
Apr. 30
May 8
1993
1993
1992
Gasoline production, daily
7.4
7.2
6.9
Distillate production, daily
3.0
3.0
2.8
Gasoline stocks
220.5
223.1
216.3
Distillate stocks
99.0
100.1
89.8
Crude imports, daily
6.5
7.6
6.0
Product imports, daily
1.5
1.7
2.0
Crude stocks
346.3
347.6
353.5
Crude production, daily
6.9
6.9
7.1
Refinery utilization (%)
89.9
89.2
85.0
Source: American Petroleum Institute


Egypt-Sudan Border Tension Rises
Tensions between Egypt and the Islamic Government in the Sudan over a disputed border area rose today when Khartoum announced that it would mobilize its armed forces.
The announcement, which followed a reported Egyptian ultimatum calling on the Sudan to withdraw police officers from the disputed area, the Halaib triangle, has prompted Cairo to prepare for a border clash.


Look Inward, Tokyo Urges Trade Critics
Under intense pressure from trading partners to open its markets, Japan counterattacked today, accusing the United States and other nations of engaging in unfair trade practices.
In a second annual report released by the Ministry of International Trade and Industry, Japan asserted that the United States was violating international rules or otherwise trading unfairly in nine of 12 categories.
The European Community is accused of unfair practices in six categories.


Review/Cabaret; An All-American Voice
Steeped in the traditions of the European boite and the Manhattan after-hours club, cabaret is not a genre that is readily associated with the musical climate of sunny California.
But as Amanda McBroom, a singer, songwriter and actress from Los Angeles, demonstrates in her wonderful new act at the Russian Tea Room, there is definitely a place for an extroverted all-American voice in a genre that is too often associated with an attitude of world-weary sophistication.
Ms.
McBroom, who is still best known for writing the title song for the Bette Midler film "The Rose," has appeared sporadically in New York for nearly a decade.
During that time she has grown steadily more accomplished as a performer.
Most of the songs in her show, which plays Thursdays through Saturdays through May 22, are originals.


Handy &amp; Harman reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


While Europe Stalls . . .
With the failure of Secretary of State Christopher's mission to Europe, the Clinton Administration has run out of viable military options for intervening in the Bosnian tragedy.
Neither Britain nor France are prepared to support Washington's idea of arming the Bosnian Government and buying time with selective air strikes against Serbian artillery.
America is not prepared to intervene in a European quarrel by itself.
That leaves Mr.
Clinton with no good choices.
The least bad would be to pull back and regroup, distancing himself both from military threats he is in no position to carry out and from the dangerous urgings of Europe's negotiator, Lord Owen.


Black Beans via China
BLACK beans are a popular ingredient of Cantonese cooking.
They make a happy marriage with scallops, as they do with just about any kind of seafood you can think of, from shrimp to flounder.
They also match well with chicken and frogs' legs.
Chinese black beans are sometimes called fermented black beans or salted black beans.
You have to go to a Chinese market to find them but once you have them on hand they will keep for months and months in the refrigerator in a covered jar. (I've had some for several years.)


Massachusetts Offers 5 3/4% Yield
The largest municipal bond offering yesterday was by Massachusetts, which sold nearly $769 million of general obligation bonds through underwriters led by Goldman, Sachs &amp; Company.
The maximum yield on the initial pricing was 5.75 percent for a bond due in 2012.
For investors in a 28 percent tax bracket, the taxable-bond equivalent yield is about 7.99 percent, and for those in the 31 percent bracket, it is about 8.33 percent.


INSIDE
Dinkins Unlikely to Delay Vote
Mayor David N. Dinkins tacitly acknowledged that he lost his fight to influence the selection of New York City's school board chief.
Page B1.
Airwaves Auction Supported
A House committee overwhelmingly approved a bill that would for the first time allow the Government to auction radio frequencies.
Page D1.
N.C.A.A.
Director Resigns
Dick Schultz, who led a reform effort, quit because of a controversy over athletic loans when he was at the University of Virginia.
Page B9.
Guerrilla Army in Algeria
Fifteen months after the Algerian military seized power to stop Islamic militants, the outlawed religious party is now a guerrilla army.
Page A3.
A U.S.
Shift on Abortion
The United States said efforts against global overpopulation must recognize abortion rights for women.
Page A11.
Brisk bidding at Sotheby's ended in a record price for the Impressionist painter's work.
Page C13.


L.L. Bean Switches Boston Agencies
L.
L.
Bean in Freeport, Me., has selected Bronner Slosberg Humphrey in Boston to handle its account, which had been at Hill, Holliday, Connors, Cosmopulos in Boston for six years.
Billings were estimated to exceed $5 million.


A.L. Laboratories Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


N.C.A.A.'s Executive Director Decides to Resign
Dick Schultz, who has led an effort to reform the National Collegiate Athletic Association since he took over as its executive director in 1987, resigned yesterday after deciding the organization could be damaged by a controversy involving his own integrity.
At issue is Schultz's alleged knowledge of improprieties committed while he was athletic director at the University of Virginia.
Even as he announced his resignation yesterday, Schultz continued to maintain that he was unaware of improper loans to athletes made by the Virginia Student Aid Foundation.
The N.C.A.A. cited Virginia for major violations and last week placed the university on a two-year probation.


Elbit Ltd. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Ailing Johnson Is Probable
Larry Johnson cut short his workout with the Hornets yesterday in Charlotte after 10 minutes, saying his bruised right foot was stiff and causing him pain.
Johnson, who was diagnosed to have a bruised tibia after falling in the second minute of Game 1 against the Knicks last Sunday at Madison Square Garden, was immediately whisked off to have another set of X-rays at the office of the team physician, Glenn Perry.


Health Plan Expected to Cover Prescription Drugs
A senior White House official said today that President Clinton's health plan would probably guarantee insurance coverage for prescription drugs and for some long-term care, so elderly people need not impoverish themselves to qualify for assistance in paying for a nursing home.
The official, Ira C. Magaziner, manager of the President's Task Force on National Health Care Reform, outlined the Administration's thinking on these and other issues at a meeting with consumer groups.


Panel Eases Employers' Tax on Domestic Workers
The House Ways and Means Committee today kicked off the prickly task of writing President Clinton's economic program into law by giving some taxpayers a break: it voted to raise sharply, to $1,750 a year, the $50-a-quarter threshold that an employer can pay a domestic worker before becoming liable for Social Security taxes.
That was a belated bow to Zoe Baird, the Connecticut lawyer whom Mr.
Clinton dropped as his choice for Attorney General after it was found that she had failed to pay taxes on the earnings of her chauffeur and nanny.
The Internal Revenue Service says the changes approved today, if enacted, would benefit far more than the rich, affecting three million or more Americans who hire cooks, maids, sitters, gardeners and other household help.


Thomas Gambino Is Guilty of Racketeering
Thomas Gambino, a Manhattan millionaire who runs a trucking business and whose father gave his name to a Mafia group, was found guilty yesterday of racketeering charges.
Mr.
Gambino, the son of Carlo Gambino, the preeminent Mafia figure in America until his death in 1976, was convicted of being a captain in the Gambino group, directing its gambling and loan-sharking operations in Connecticut in recent years.


Fugitive General Accuses Peruvian Army, Saying Officers Run Hit Squad
When he passed confidential information to a longtime friend and fellow officer, Gen.
Rodolfo Robles Espinoza says, he thought he was helping the Peruvian Army investigate the country's most troublesome human rights case -- the summary execution last July of 10 university students and a professor, all suspected of being members of the Shining Path rebel group.
Instead, says General Robles, who was the third-ranking officer in the army and in line to be its chief in 1995, he was betrayed.


Southwest Air's Gain Noted
The Department of Transportation has documented the growing influence of Southwest Airlines, calling the carrier "the dominant airline in the nation's busiest markets."
According to a Transportation Department report, Southwest carries more passengers than any other airline in the busiest 100 markets, which represent about one-third of domestic traffic.
Over all, Southwest ranks fifth among all United States airlines in terms of total passengers, the department said.


Official Quits At Shearson
Prudential Securities said yesterday that it had hired Alan A. Rhein, an executive vice president at Shearson Lehman Brothers, to manage all of Prudential's 300 branch offices and 6,000 brokers.
Mr.
Rhein, who was manager of Shearson's northern group, with about 100 branch offices, is the most senior official from the Shearson brokerage business to leave since Smith Barney, Harris Upham &amp; Company announced plans in March to buy Shearson from American Express.
Although officials at other firms have said they would be interested in hiring some of Shearson's best brokers, there has not been been any exodus.


Raid of Drug Lab Led to Arrests In Assassination of a Journalist
No one knew it at the time, but when Federal agents raided a warehouse in a gritty industrial neighborhood in Brooklyn last June and found a laboratory that refined 100 to 200 pounds of cocaine a day, they had serendipitously uncovered the first break in the long, frustrating investigation into the killing of Manuel de Dios Unanue.
With the arrest of a young Colombian who had helped manage the laboratory, investigators say they began the slow unraveling of a vengeful plot to kill Mr. de Dios, a Spanish-language journalist whose writings had so angered the leaders of a drug cartel 3,000 miles away in Colombia.


Eating Well
FOR the first time, the Government is asking the public whether it wants food labels to include information about substances that are used in food production.
And the Government will make the decision using an outside advisory panel that includes consumer representatives.
At hearings in Washington last Thursday and Friday, the Food and Drug Administration and its advisory panel heard testimony from about 50 witnesses on both sides of a debate that will determine whether milk containing recombinant bovine somatotropin, or BST, must be labeled.


Venture Stores reports earnings for Qtr to May 1


7 Deadly Sins of Living Linked To Illness as Well as Mortality
As if he were a medieval artist depicting the depravity of the seven deadly sins, Dr.
Lester Breslow, a California public health specialist, has created a solemn portrait of self-destruction.
The weapons are seven unwholesome habits he first identified more than a quarter-century ago.
By following the fates of nearly 7,000 adults living in California's Alameda County over three decades, he proved that the more of these poor health habits people practiced in 1965, the greater their chances were of dying within 10 years.


Oracle Links With U S West
The Oracle Corporation, a Silicon Valley software publisher, and U S West, the regional telephone company based in Englewood, Colo., announced a partnership today to develop technology that could provide a range of multimedia services for the home, from home shopping to video conferencing.
The two companies said they were developing the services based on massively parallel computers that could fill thousands of requests each second.
The task -- delivering digital video to the home on demand -- sounds mundane, but it poses an awesome challenge.


How an Actor Found Comedy and Tragedy In Battling Leukemia
If you are Evan Handler, you are pretty much resigned to the reality that most theatergoers don't remember your critically praised roles on Broadway.
What people are more likely to recall is the incident that sparked news items and a collectible New York Post headline: "Broadway Swordplay Becomes Real: Hamlet Actor Storms Off Stage After Co-Star Whacks Him."
Yes, Mr.
Handler was the actor who had that much-publicized misadventure two years ago in "I Hate Hamlet" with Nicol Williamson, who smacked him with a three-foot sword in a dueling scene.
Mr.
Handler walked out of the Walter Kerr Theater, never to return to the role.
A One-Man Disaster
He's back on stage now, in a new one-man show he's written, "Time on Fire," at Second Stage Theater, 2162 Broadway, at 76th Street in Manhattan, which opens tomorrow.
The performance is Mr.
Handler's tragicomic account of a life-and-death battle that had more significance than a tabloid headline: Mr.
Handler's successful struggle with acute myeloid leukemia, an often fatal disease.


Peter Zondervan, 84, A Founding Publisher
Peter John Zondervan, a founder of one of the nation's largest publishers of religious texts, died on Thursday at the St.
Andrews Estates North retirement community in Boca Raton, Fla.
He was 84 and lived at St.
Andrews.
His wife, Mary, said the cause of death was complications from a stroke suffered four years ago.


Compromise on Military Gay Ban Gaining Support Among Senators
Senior Senate Democrats and Republicans are beginning to coalesce around a proposal that would end the military's efforts at unmasking homosexuals but would continue to bar gay men and women from serving if they are open about their sexuality.
Senator Sam Nunn, the Georgia Democrat who heads the Armed Services Committee, summarizes the policy as, "Don't ask, don't tell." It would mean that the military would not ask new recruits about their sexual orientation or conduct investigations meant to ferret out homosexuals.


East Harlem Schools Have Success Story Too
To the Editor:
I read "Our Students, Still at Risk" (Op-Ed, May 3), about New York City's Community School District 4 and its system of choice with dismay.


Review/Film: Time Indefinite; Taking the Measure of One's Life Through the Lens of Death
Intriguing contradictions run to the heart of Ross McElwee's enthralling autobiographical film journal, "Time Indefinite." Even though the creator and central figure in this cinema verite documentary matter-of-factly bares his anxieties about death, marriage and parenthood, he emerges as a shadowy enigma, a man in hiding.
And since "Time Indefinite" comes about as close as a movie can to capturing the texture of everyday life, what does this absence of personality imply about film reality versus actual experience?
"Time Indefinite," which opens today at Film Forum 1, is the sequel to Mr.
McElwee's 1986 documentary "Sherman's March," which won him acclaim for his dry comic sensibility.
That nearly three-hour movie followed the film maker around the South on a whimsical erotic odyssey whose path loosely paralleled the swath cut by Gen.
William Tecumseh Sherman at the end of the Civil War.


Recession? Why Worry?
Reputable economic attitudes hold that the economic norm is high, if not quite full, employment and a reliable rate of expansion in economic output.
Recessions are an aberrant departure from that norm.
Correction must come.
The question after nearly three years is whether this is so.
Or is it possible that the economy has settled into an underemployment equilibrium of small or negligible growth?
There is no great novelty in this suggestion.
It happened in the Great Depression: there were 10 years of stagnation that ended not because of any internal dynamic but from the massive spending for the war.
And one mildly esoteric branch of economic thought has long allowed for the possibility of an enduring underemployment equilibrium, of stability with high unemployment, of low or negligible economic growth.


United Retail Group Inc.  (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to May 1


Book Notes
One Over Par
Does Simon &amp; Schuster have no sense of humor, or does Doubleday have no sense of fair play?
Doubleday is now publishing "Mulligan's Laws: A Lifetime of Golfing Wisdom From the Genius Who Invented the Do-Over," by Thomas Mulligan, Fourth Earl of Murphy, edited by Henry Beard.


Pentagon Warns McDonnell It May Cancel C-17 Program
The Pentagon warned the McDonnell Douglas Corporation yesterday that it would end the development of the C-17 cargo plane unless the contractor overhauled the troubled program, which has been hit by delays, cost overruns and technical problems.
In a letter to John F. McDonnell, the chairman of McDonnell Douglas, John M. Deutch, the Under Secretary of Defense for Acquisition, said that without "strong resolve" on the part of the management of the company to meet contract requirements, "the C-17 program cannot be continued."


Corrections
An article on Monday about Israeli politics carried an incorrect byline in some editions.
The article was by Clyde Haberman.


COMPANY BRIEFS
ALLIED PRODUCTS CORP., Chicago, plans to close its Richard Brothers Die and Prototype unit this year.


Dow, in Closing Surge, Ends 25.47 Higher
In a reversal of Monday's trading, the stock market languished in near-torpor for most of yesterday's session but surged strongly in the last half- hour.
The Dow Jones industrial average, which had climbed as much as 26 points late in the day, closed up 25.47 points, to 3,468.75.
All other major indexes were up in relatively moderate trading.


In Hartford, The Budget Is Passed And Signed
The Connecticut General Assembly, after stumbling last week in its effort to pass a budget a month ahead of the deadline, gave final approval today to an $8.58 billion spending plan for the year that begins July 1.
The budget, which was immediately signed into law by Gov.
Lowell P. Weicker Jr., restores most of the cuts in welfare and other social programs that Mr.
Weicker proposed earlier this year, and does so without major tax increases, because existing taxes are generating more revenue than expected.


Rabin Staves Off Collapse of Israeli Coalition, at Least for a Week
Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin today averted an immediate Government crisis that had threatened his parliamentary majority, but he may have only delayed the day of reckoning by a week.
While the unresolved political drama includes elements that prompted one of its central figures to call it "a surrealistic play," it is also a serious business that has distracted and perhaps weakened the Rabin Government at a time when it would prefer to put full energy into the Middle East peace talks under way in Washington.


Traffic Alert
Because of President Clinton's visit to New York City today, the city's Transportation Department is urging motorists not to drive into Manhattan between 2 and 9 P.M.
The President will fly into Newark International Airport and will arrive in lower Manhattan at 2 P.M.


Death cigarettes carry mixed message: Don't smoke, but do buy this product.
FOR decades, doctors have been warning that smoking a cigarette is death.
Now, Death is a cigarette.
Death cigarettes, in packages adorned with the skull and crossbones symbol, are making their way into retail outlets across the country, where they appear alongside conventional cigarettes.
The product, which is generally priced about the same as Marlboro or Winston cigarettes, comes in one flavor (regular), one length (85 millimeter) and one package color (black, naturally.)


Bus Accord Lifts Hopes For Unions
In the Greyhound terminal here, two groups of bus drivers crossed paths.
They stopped to look at one other, as if something ought to be said.
But there were no words exchanged, just glares.
For the last three years, these men had stood on opposite sides of the picket line.
Now, they would be co-workers, even fellow union members, because of the ratification of a strike settlement last week.


A.T.&amp; T. and Kodak in Image-Phone Effort
A.T.&amp; T. and the Eastman Kodak Company said yesterday that they would form an alliance to develop applications for a telephone that displays full-color still images transmitted over ordinary phone lines.
Executives at the American Telephone and Telegraph Company said they would work with Kodak to incorporate its Photo CD image-storing system into A.T.&amp; T.'s Picasso Still-Image Phone, which was introduced yesterday.
The Picasso telephone, priced at $3,295, takes about 10 seconds to transmit a single image.
The intended market is engineers and other professionals who require fast transmission of detailed images.


FIRST LADY SPEAKS TO WEST VIRGINIANS
Hillary Rodham Clinton gave a preview of the health-care campaign on television tonight, assuring West Virginians with an array of health-insurance problems that their concerns would be met when the Clinton Administration unveiled its proposals next month.
In a statewide town meeting conducted by satellite, Mrs.
Clinton and one of the state's Democratic Senators, John D. Rockefeller 4th, quizzed a series of carefully selected West Virginians who typified the problems of the uninsured, of small businesses struggling to afford insurance and of hospitals and other providers trying to give care without reimbursement.


Fiat, in Scandal, Adopts Ethics Code
Seeking to extricate itself from Italy's huge year-old corruption scandal, Fiat S.p.A., Italy's biggest private company, today became the first corporation in the country to issue a code of ethical conduct for its employees.
The code, said by Fiat executives to be modeled on those used by leading American corporations, forbids any of Fiat's 300,000 employees to offer bribes of any kind -- including sponsorships or consultancies -- to public officials or politicians to promote corporate interests "even if under illicit pressures."


Dollar General Corp. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Sports of The Times; Even Schultz Was Caught By 'System'
MAKES you wonder.
If a thoughtful-sounding leader like Dick Schultz can get tripped up by hints of impropriety at one of America's showcase colleges, what is the point of having tight academic and financial rules for intercollegiate sports?
More to the point, what is the point of combining big-time sports and higher education?
I don't believe they have anything in common.
I happen to think a lot of people believe the same thing, but they are stuck with a system that makes them pompously intone phrases like "student-athlete" about guys who are taking vocational training for the Green Bay Packers or the Phoenix Suns.
We're all stuck with this monster, the monster that brought down Dick Schultz.


Yeltsin, Pressing His Reforms, Ousts 2 Aides
President Boris N. Yeltsin dismissed two advisers from the ranks of his Government today, continuing a Cabinet shuffle in which the litmus test is personal loyalty to the President and his program.
Georgi S. Khizha, a Deputy Prime Minister responsible for industrial policy, and Yuri V. Skokov, secretary of the Security Council, were released for "other duties," confirming rumors that arose more than a week ago after Mr.
Yeltsin's vow to purge the Government of those who oppose his program of change.


Executive Changes
GE CAPITAL, Stamford, Conn., a unit of General Electric Co., named Granville H. Bowie senior vice president and manager of human resources.
ELJER INDUSTRIES CO., Dallas, a manufacturer of kitchen and bath fixtures, appointed Henry W. Lehnerer chief financial officer.


Cardinal Distribution Inc.  (NMS) reports earnings for Year to March 31


COLLEGE LACROSSE
Syracuse
Because the university is under probation by the National Collegiate Athletic Association for basketball violations, any infractions that surface in the current investigation of the lacrosse program could result in the outright suspension of the sport for one or two seasons.
University authorities announced last Thursday they were conducting an internal lacrosse investigation after learning about accusations made to a local newspaper, The Post-Standard, by a former player and current student, Jerry DeLorenzo.


Christopher Sergel, Publisher of Plays And Playwright, 75
Christopher R. Sergel, the president of the Dramatic Publishing Company and a Broadway playwright, died on Friday at his home in Wilton, Conn.
He was 75.
The cause was heart failure, said his wife, Gayle.


Record Store of Near Future: Computers Replace the Racks
Computer technology has turned its hungry gaze on a pair of well-known institutions: the record store and the video shop.
A vision of the future of entertainment retailing, announced yesterday by I.B.M. and Blockbuster Entertainment, could do away with sprawling stores, aisles and aisles of offerings, and back rooms full of inventory -- be it the latest Michael Jackson recordings, Arnold Schwarzenegger video releases or Nintendo games.


Cub Foods Takes Supermarket Honors
Cub Foods in Stillwater, Minn., took top honors yesterday at the 27th annual Food Marketing Institute/Woman's Day Advertising Merit Awards competition for supermarket advertising.
Cub won three first-place awards and two certificates of merit at a ceremony in Chicago.
The Piggly Wiggly Corporation in Memphis followed with two first-place awards and one certificate of merit.


Microwave Cooking
RISOTTO is a perfect example to show that the microwave oven provides benefits that have little to do with its acclaimed rapidity.
In fact, cooking risotto in the microwave is only marginally quicker than cooking it on top of the stove.
The advantages are a consistent and superior finished dish made in a cool kitchen without the constant stirring and vigilance of the cooking.
This factor frees the cook to do other things, like making a main course if the risotto is to be a first course, or washing salad greens, or setting the table.
The attentive cook will also note certain apparent realities of microwave cooking that these recipes illustrate.
With microwave ovens, the recipe cannot always be increased to serve more people.
To properly cook seafood risotto, it is best to have most of the shellfish in a single layer on top of the rice.
You are limited therefore by the size of your oven and pan.


The Unfinished Abortion Battle
President Clinton is pro-choice.
So, according to a recent ABC News/Washington Post Poll, are most Americans.
So, it appears, is Congress.
One might assume that those who believe a woman should be free to make up her own mind about her own reproductive life have nothing more to worry about.
One might also assume that every woman who chooses to end a pregnancy, whether rich or poor, urban or rural, will now have easy access to a physician.


IDB Communications Group Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  American League
CLEVELAND INDIANS -- Placed Ted Power, pitcher, on the 15-day disabled list.
Recalled Jerry DiPoto, pitcher, from Charlotte of the International League.
SEATTLE MARINERS -- Optioned Mike Hampton, pitcher, to Jacksonville of the Southern League.
Recalled Zak Shinall, pitcher, from Calgary of the Pacific Coast League.


Public &amp; Private; Where's the Pork?
To Bill Clinton
Re: The Economy
Well, Mr. President, it's time to go back to the future.


Gold-Stock Sale By Goldsmith
Sir James Goldsmith and a group of associates are selling 9.5 percent of the Newmont Mining Corporation, the largest American gold company, reports posted at the London exchange on Monday said.
On behalf of the Goldsmith group, a consortium of three investment bankers -- Morgan Stanley International, Barclays de Zoete Wedd and the Gordon Capital Corporation -- is offering 6.5 million shares of Newmont Mining at $45.50 a share to foreign buyers.
The Goldsmith group will receive $44.50 a share, or $287 million.


Moody's Gives Junk Rating To $4.6 Billion of Delta Debt
The rating on about $4.6 billion of long-term debt of Delta Air Lines was lowered to junk bond status yesterday by Moody's Investors Service Inc., which is concerned about the operating performance and cash flow of the No. 3 domestic airline.
"While Delta's proportionate share of international revenue to total revenues is not as large as other U.S. competitors," Moody's said, "Delta's international activities are heavily reliant on flying to Europe."


HOW UNITY ELUDED CLINTON ON BOSNIA
Secretary of State Warren Christopher returned from a week's trip to Europe to inform President Clinton that the only way to break the impasse in the Western alliance over the use of military force in Bosnia was for Mr.
Clinton to personally impose a policy on Europe, Administration officials said today.
But at a meeting on Saturday, Mr.
Christopher told Mr.
Clinton that even if he tried an all-out diplomatic campaign, he might fail because there was so much allied opposition to the Administration's proposal to arm the Muslim-dominated Government of Bosnia and Herzegovina, officials at the White House and State Department said.


Limited's Net Off Despite Sales Gain
Although first-quarter sales at The Limited Inc. grew at a relatively healthy clip, a malaise at three of its largest divisions caused profits to dip slightly.
The company, which operates several specialty store chains including the Limited, Lane Bryant and Victoria's Secret, said yesterday that net income fell 14 percent, to $44.2 million, despite a 7 percent increase in sales, to $1.52 billion, from the comparable quarter last year.


Stein Proposes Requiring Bids For the Underwriting of Bonds
Responding to recent news reports about the selection of bond underwriters in New York City and New Jersey, Andrew J. Stein, the City Council President, proposed yesterday that the city request companies to submit sealed, competitive bids for its $5 billion-a-year bond underwriting business.
Mr.
Stein, who is challenging Mayor David N. Dinkins for the Democratic mayoral nomination, said the way the city selects underwriters inevitably leads to conflicts of interest because the companies contribute to the political campaigns of the mayor and the comptroller, who in turn decide who will manage the bond sales.


80,000 Lobbyists? Probably Not, but Maybe . . .
Where did they all come from, those 80,000 lobbyists that President Clinton said on Monday "are lining the corridors of Washington as never before"?
"I know exactly where they came from," said James Thurber, a professor of government at American University here.
"Off the top of my head."


SERBIA'S PRESIDENT CALLS FOR MEETING OF HIS COUNTRYMEN
In a move apparently intended to override the rejection of an international peace plan by Bosnian Serb leaders, President Slobodan Milosevic of Serbia demanded on Tuesday that the leaders cancel their proposed referendum on the plan.
He called on them to come to Belgrade on Friday for an extraordinary gathering of legislators from all of the Serbian-populated regions in the Balkans.


Minnie Gentry, 77, An Actress on Stage And 'Cosby Show'
Minnie L. Gentry, a stage and television actress, died at her home in Manhattan on Tuesday.
She was 77.
Ms.
Gentry, whose given name was Minnie Lee Watson, was born in Norfolk and grew up in Cleveland, where she sang in church choirs and performed in operettas.
Through Lloyd Gentry, whom she later married, she joined the Gilpin Players, one of the first acting companies at the Karamu Playhouse, in Cleveland, where she was a featured performer in dramatic, musical and operatic roles for 30 years.


Jones Medical Industries (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


U.S. Weather Service Shuts a Local Window
NEXT year, for the first time in almost a century, Connecticut will be without a weather forecast center of its own.
To those who grew up hearing home-grown forecasts from Bradley International Airport here, the departure of the National Weather Service means the loss of another link to the past.
For many, it was reassuring to know that the fickle New England weather was being watched right in their own backyard.


Chinese Premier Reported to Be Ill
Prime Minister Li Peng has disappeared from public view, and is believed to have suffered a heart attack that may keep him from running the country for weeks or months.
Officials say Mr.
Li is suffering from a cold.
But a Chinese with access to high-level information said today Mr.
Li had suffered a heart attack and was recuperating in an army hospital.


Home Video
Action movies deliver thrills on screen, and as Hollywood has discovered, they also make for a star-studded breed of interactive video game.
Thanks to the multi-media compact disk, called CD-ROM, the Arnold Schwarzeneggers and Sylvester Stallones can jump into the contest, too.
"Real characters are better to interact with than those little green guys," said Peter Dille of Sony Imagesoft, which produces video games for the corporation that owns the Columbia Pictures and Tri-Star studios and Columbia Tri-Star Home Video.


We Need Student Loan Reform, and Soon
To the Editor:
"Slow but Sure on National Service" (editorial, May 5) argues that President Clinton's student loan program may not be cheaper than the current program because the saving from eliminating bank profits "could easily be swallowed up by bloated bureaucracy and less vigilant collection from deadbeats." You therefore recommend maintaining the guaranteed student loan program, rather than conversion to direct lending.


'Hi-yo, Kemo Sabe!' A King of Nostalgia
IT is 12:03 P.M., Saturday, on the 17th floor of the CBS building on West 52d Street, and the Ingram mess, as Dan Ingram himself calls it, has begun to spread out for 60 miles on the FM band.
The familiar beat of a 1965 Four Tops recording can be heard on the studio speakers.
Mr.
Ingram clears his throat, opens the microphone and speaks over the music: "This is the song of the midget and the smorgasbord, "I Can't Help Myself."


Intergroup Healthcare (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Valspar Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Classical Music in Review
James Richman  Harpsichordist  Merkin Concert Hall
About 20 years and a considerable change in tone separate Book I and Book II of Bach's "Well-Tempered Klavier." The first is, for Bach at least, a relatively public work: a rush of 24 preludes and fugues progressing chromatically up the major and minor keys that have the consecutive sweep of, say, the Chopin Preludes, which bear their influence.


Essay; The Kurdish Example
Remember those gut-wrenching pictures two years ago of Kurdish villagers fleeing the wrath of the defeated Saddam Hussein, tearfully abandoning their homes, children freezing in the snow?
The nation's horror at the sight of that first televised exodus drove George Bush into doing what his advisers warned against: intervening in the complex internal affairs of Iraq, with all its ancient ethnic hatreds and vengeful savagery.
U.S. air cover sealed off most of the Kurdish portion of northern Iraq, creating a haven for the targets of genocide.


Reno to Meet With Sessions on Keeping F.B.I. Post
Attorney General Janet Reno has scheduled a meeting on Thursday with F.B.I.
Director William S. Sessions to decide whether he will keep his post in the wake of a highly critical internal ethics report on his conduct.
After her confirmation hearings in March, Ms.
Reno promised she would grant Mr.
Sessions a hearing to respond to the report's findings.
The report was issued in January by the Office of Professional Responsibility, the Justice Department unit that examines accusations of employee misconduct.


Woolworth Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to May 1


Review/Television; Bart and All, Outrageously
If you just want to count guest stars, evidently the hottest television show of the moment is a cartoon.
Of course, "The Simpsons" isn't just any cartoon.
It also happens to be one of the most inventive and cheekiest romps on prime time.
Lending one's voice to the animation has become a prestige stint, and tonight's season finale, on Fox at 8, sets a record with a lineup that includes Johnny Carson, Hugh Hefner, Bette Midler, Luke Perry, the Red Hot Chili Peppers and Elizabeth Taylor.
Actually, in this instance the Simpson family largely plays second banana to Krusty the Clown, the irrepressible performer whose hoary routines cloak an effusively mean-spirited heart.
He's young Bart's favorite television comic, notwithstanding some nasty business in the past about a summer-camp scam.
This evening, in "Krusty Gets Kanceled," the veteran performer runs up against some fierce competition in the form of a ventriloquist's dummy named Gabbo.


Cost-Free Aid for New York City
Mayor David Dinkins's new budget for New York City counts on more state aid than the $6 billion already committed.
Forget it, some seasoned observers say.
The Legislature has sealed the state's budget for fiscal 1994, and isn't about to reopen it for Mr.
Dinkins.
But that misses the point.
There are ways Albany can help without sending more money.
And the money itself could be apportioned more equitably -- if there's a will to do so.
Here are some examples:


E.P.A. Clears Use of Virus By Farmers to Fight Insects
It may be hard to start thinking of a virus as a pal after so many disastrous relationships with them, but farmers will soon have a band of virus allies to help them fight some insects that have been developing resistance to chemical insecticides.
Crop Genetics International, a biotechnology company in Columbia, Md., announced yesterday that the Environmental Protection Agency had cleared it to sell a virus-based bioinsecticide fatal to the beet armyworm, which attacks vegetables and flowers.


'I Love Tourism': 3 States Try To Resume Luring Visitors
Fifteen years after New York tourism officials imprinted the phrase "I Love New York" on the nation's collective consciousness and "New Jersey and You" seemed so perfect together, efforts to promote the metropolitan region as a travel destination are emerging from their darkest hour.
New York and New Jersey, which had television promotion campaigns throughout the 1980's, went off the air in the early 1990's because of state budget cuts.
Connecticut has not had an active statewide travel promotion for seven years, an eternity in building the kind of recognition that marketers say is needed to influence decisions on where to take a vacation.


U.S. Sees Conciliatory Atom Steps by North Korea
North Korea has taken some conciliatory steps since its withdrawal from the treaty to halt the spread of nuclear weapons, meeting twice with American diplomats in Beijing and issuing limited visas to United Nations inspectors, Administration officials said today.
While North Korea has also sent renewed signals of hostility to the West, the American officials said the signs of conciliation might be indications that Pyongyang will prove willing to resolve an international dispute over its departure from the accord.


Agency Reorganizes To Serve Oldsmobile
Leo Burnett U.S.A. of Chicago yesterday announced a substantial reorganization of the way it handles its important Oldsmobile account.
The changes were promised to the auto maker when Burnett retained the account in February after an unprecedented review.
James E. Thompson, 48, the agency's executive vice president and director of creative services, has been appointed to the additional position of client service director on the Oldsmobile account.
He succeeds Ted Jordan, who is currently between assignments at the agency.


Slain Marine Mourned a Day After an Arrest
The slaying of Richard S. Rodriguez, the 32-year-old Marine gunned down in a small park near his parents' Bronx home on Mother's Day, became all too real yesterday for the many friends and loved ones who filed by his flag-draped open casket.
Dressed in a blue Marine uniform, the staff sergeant lay in a silver-gray military coffin, his mother, wife and three children nearby.
His father, Santiago Rodriguez, a thin, graying man, preferred to pace outside the Rivera Funeral Home in East Tremont, greeting relatives and friends with a glassy-eyed sadness.


Heroism and AIDS
To The Home Section:
What is it about AIDS sufferers that makes them think they are the only true, heroic sufferers of illness and who should be given awards?
I refer to the article "At Home With Randy Shilts: "Writing Against Time, Valiantly" (April 22). "Straight people," he says, "should be giving awards to those of us with AIDS who go on being productive members of society."


Report Calls Simple Test Effective In Reducing Colon Cancer Deaths
After decades of debate and inconclusive findings, a major new study has shown that a yearly test can significantly reduce deaths from colorectal cancer, the second leading cause of cancer deaths among Americans.
In the 13-year study, those in a group randomly chosen to undergo annual tests for blood in their stools experienced 33 percent fewer deaths from cancers of the colon and rectum than did those in a similar group who were not offered the test.


Foe of Chancellor Elected Head Of New York City School Board
The New York City Board of Education yesterday elected as its new president the board member who cast the deciding vote to oust Schools Chancellor Joseph A. Fernandez, a move that underscores just how much Mayor David N. Dinkins has lost control of the board.
The new president, Carol A. Gresser, the Queens representative on the board, rose to leadership from volunteer service in a series of Queens parent associations, a contrast to the previous three presidents, whose roots have been in the Manhattan political establishment.


WAL-MART STORES INC. (N)
Wal-Mart Stores reported first-quarter earnings yesterday that met analysts' expectations and seemed to soothe some of the anxiety over its prospects.
Investors, who have been pummeling the stock since the company suggested that comparable-store sales might be slowing down after increasing at a double-digit pace for almost 10 years, bid it up yesterday.
Unusually bad weather and the retreat in consumer confidence affected Wal-Mart as much as any other retailer, but the company has such a strong reputation that investors seem to believe it should be impervious to such factors, analysts said.


American Israeli Paper Mills Ltd.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Elron Electronic Industries (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Economic Scene; Why the energy tax has turned into a political hard sell.
IT was meant to be simple -- messy to administer, perhaps, but simple to sell to Congress.
But now President Clinton's proposed levy on energy is in political trouble, and for reasons that apparently have a lot to do with the Administration's haste to raise maximum revenue with minimum political pain.
The President may yet be able to build a winning political coalition for the levy.
But tinkering will not save Mr.
Clinton from the interest group collision he hoped to avoid.


New York Refinancing Correctional Bonds
Strong investor demand and low interest rates continue to encourage bond refundings, in which proceeds are used to pay off bonds sold when rates were higher.
Taking advantage of the opportunity yesterday was the New York State Urban Development Corporation, which priced $670 million of correctional facilities revenue bonds through underwriters led by Morgan Stanley &amp; Company.


Amtran Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Mayor Takes A Phone Call From Florio
Gov.
Jim Florio, Democrat, called Mayor Bret Schundler, Republican, today to congratulate him on his convincing victory in Tuesday's mayoral election and to talk about getting together to see if there was anything the state could do to help the state's second-largest city.
The Mayor said Mr.
Florio told him the election results "were a repudiation of how government has worked in Hudson County in the past" and was a "clear call for change." The Governor probably did not mention it, and Mr.
Schundler did not have to remind him but Democrats have been in control of the city and the county since World War I.


Claire's Stores Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to May 1


Transactions
Baseball  American League
BOSTON RED SOX -- Signed Franklin Stubbs, first baseman-outfielder, to a minor-league contract.
Released Sean Ross, outfielder.
TEXAS RANGERS -- Placed Nolan Ryan, pitcher, on the 15-day disabled list, retroactive to May 8.
Recalled Jeff Bronkey, pitcher, from Oklahoma City of the American Association.


Joining Effort to Cash In on Corporate Upheavals
A new recruit at Dillon, Read &amp; Company is the latest evidence that Wall Street is trying to cash in on the corporate upheavals initiated by major investors.
The investment bank has hired Lilli A. Gordon, a leading provider of intellectual ammunition to rebellious shareholders, to put her ideas into practice by working on makeovers and takeovers.
Ms.
Gordon, whose Boston-area consulting firm bears her name, has provided research and advice for pension funds that have sought to shake up passive boards, overthrow chief executives and redirect wayward companies, including Westinghouse Electric, Eastman Kodak and I.B.M.
According to her findings, major investors who take responsibility for improving corporate performance can reap superior long-term results.
Such activists as Ms.
Gordon are the milder-mannered successors to the corporate raiders of the 1980's, who often sought to wrest outright control from management.


DeKalb Energy Co. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Chairman Is Hopeful At Kodak
Kay R. Whitmore, the embattled chairman of the Eastman Kodak Company, told shareholders yesterday that Kodak would have a "solid earnings increase" this year and predicted that next year, earnings per share would set a record.
A restructuring plan for the company is to be announced by September, and Mr.
Whitmore pledged to press it.
The plan is to include the sale of some Kodak assets and a financial belt tightening marked by salary freezes and an unspecified number of layoffs.


Speared, and Still Alive to Tell About It
A major problem with having an eight-foot aluminum javelin lodged in your neck is that you can't fit into a helicopter with it.
This is the predicament in which Jeremy Campbell, a 15-year-old sophomore high school student, found himself Monday afternoon.
Jeremy Campbell doesn't normally go around with a javelin, or anything else, protruding from his neck in this fashion.
But this was an unusual situation.


Takeover of Flushing Hospital Leads to a Review
The takeover of one of the oldest hospitals in New York City has escalated into a battle over health care in Queens, prompting allegations of conflicts of interest involving some of the hospital's trustees and drawing the attention of New York State's Attorney General.
On Tuesday the trustees of Flushing Hospital, an unaffiliated community hospital that is struggling financially, voted to affiliate with a network of hospitals and health centers based in Brooklyn.
The affiliation was prompted by the trustees' desire for a firmer financial footing.


Corrections
An article yesterday about a New York State Court of Appeals decision to let private citizens challenge the state's borrowing practices omitted the context for a comment by a lawyer, Michael E. Katzenstein.
He referred specifically to a complicated state plan in 1990, under which a public authority borrowed money to buy a state prison, when he said, "Obviously, the plaintiffs' view in this case is that the one-shots, like the prison bond case, have become more and more abusive and less tasteful."


Psychoanalyst and Lawyer Duel Over Nuances at a Libel Trial
Jeffrey M. Masson's voice, sometimes low and throaty, other times rising in excited falsetto, filled a Federal courtroom here today as jurors considered the nuance, context and vocabulary of five disputed quotations that are at the heart of his libel suit against Janet Malcolm and The New Yorker magazine.
Mr.
Masson says these quotations were fabricated or substantially altered; Ms.
Malcolm says they are accurate, save for some minor changes in syntax.
Only one of the quotations appears on the tape recordings of Ms.
Malcolm's interviews with Mr.
Masson, but she says that all were spoken and that three of them were set down in her notes, one was taped and another was indelible in her memory.


Richard K. Irons, 86; Long a Groton Teacher
Richard K. Irons, who taught history and coached tennis and debating teams at the Groton School for more than 40 years, died Monday at his home in Groton, Mass.
He was 86.
The cause was cancer, his family said.


Design Books Reveal Ambivalence on Glamour
DESIGN books in the 1980's packaged rich and exotic rooms for the American coffee table, and the nation's style quotient soared.
But a new ambivalence about glamour emerges from this spring's range of books.
At one end is a volume of designer-name decorating (no instructions included), and at the other is an anti-decorating treatise complete with how-to details and an attitude.
The voyeuristic "Rooms With a View" (PBC International, $45), by Chris Casson Madden, assembles 20 years of rooms from the Kips Bay Decorator Show House.
Ms.
Madden groups them by purpose, not by year, which focuses the book and duplicates the room-to-room suspense of a real show house.
Turning the page on Anthony Hail's red-tented Russian dining room, the unsuspecting reader slips pleasurably into a romantic, cream-colored dining niche from another year, by Mariette Himes Gomez.
Anyone absorbed in the study of rooms will relish the photographic tour, grateful for close-ups of normally roped-off details.


Free-Agent Center Chooses the Patriots
The New England Patriots, continuing their search for a center, have signed the unrestricted free agent BILL LEWIS to a two-year contract.
Lewis also considered offers from Minnesota and Seattle.
Details of the deal were not released.
The Patriots have a gap at center, with GENE CHILTON considering retirement because of injuries and GREGG RAKOCZY having been waived in February.
The only other centers on the New England roster are DEAN CALIGUIRE and STEVE GORDON, neither of whom has much pro experience.


Judge Says Hazards Make Cigarettes Defective by Law
A judge has ruled, apparently for the first time, that cigarettes are defective and unreasonably dangerous for human consumption, and that even the role smokers play in their own undoing should not insulate the tobacco industry from liability.
Judge Eugene Bogen of Washington County Circuit Court in Greenville, Miss., said cigarettes were defective as a matter of law "because when used as intended, they cause cancer, emphysema, heart disease and other illnesses." He called cigarettes "the most lethal product which may be legally sold in the country."


Reno Urges Senate to Curb Anti-Abortion Violence
Attorney General Janet Reno today urged Congress to move swiftly to make violence or threats against abortion providers and women seeking abortions a Federal crime.
Ms.
Reno told the Senate Labor and Human Resources Committee that legislation now before it would not threaten the free-speech rights of abortion foes.


Flights of Fancy For the Garden
ARCHITECTS cannot resist designing quirky weather vanes and birdhouses, though they may lack clients who want them.
So when charities beckon, architects get to work indulging their fantasies.
When the Garden Education Center of Greenwich in Cos Cob, Conn., wanted to raise money, it asked 20 architects and designers to design garden ornaments.
The result is "Finials to Fountains," an exhibition and auction of 20 birdbaths, birdhouses and watering cans, to be held on May 20 at the center.


Whalers Owner Says No Move . . . Yet
The Hartford Whalers aren't about to move to Minnesota any time soon, their owner, RICHARD GORDON, said yesterday, but he warned that the team can't continue losing money indefinitely in its current home.
Gordon visited politicians and business leaders in Minneapolis and St.
Paul, but insisted he only was examining the possibility of his club's playing some exhibition and regular-season neutral-site games at Target Center in downtown Minneapolis.


Bridehood Reregistered: Beyond Tiffany
BEFORE Beth Gelson married Dr.
Dan Dragalin in January, they registered for their bridal gifts at Home Depot.
"We had a black-tie wedding," she remembered.
"One guest came with a wheelbarrow, and another showed up with a very nicely wrapped hand truck. I'm sure the caterer thought it looked a little funny."
Ms.
Gelson, a tax consultant with Deloitte &amp; Touche, already had a crystal bowl.
"This was my second marriage, and I didn't need more china and silver," she explained.
When she was married the first time, she registered at S. Marsh jewelers in Millburn, N.J.; Altman's, and Tiffany's.


CHRONICLE
Some of ALEXANDER JULIAN'S most recent men's wear creations have been seen on collegiate and professional basketball courts rather than fashion runways, and seem somehow connected to winning plays.
Mr.
Julian designed the uniforms worn by the University of North Carolina Tar Heels when they won the National Collegiate Athletic Association championship last month.
And now the Charlotte Hornets, the first sports team to don his designs, have moved into the second round of the National Basketball Association playoffs against the New York Knicks.


Markel Corp. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Islanders' Find a New Definition for Heart: Brawn
A handshake instead of a seven-game rumble?
Not in this series.
Not tonight.
By hook and by crook and sometimes by the playbook, the Islanders looked elimination in the face, turned the other cheek, and forced sudden death in Pittsburgh Friday with a 7-5 browbeating of the Penguins tonight at Nassau Coliseum.
"They talked about finishing us off tonight, so we pasted the quote to the blackboard and used it as inspiration," said Steve Thomas, who broke out of a slump in this series and scored two goals, one of them the game-winner.
"We tried to bump anything we could get to, but we tried not to get out of position when we made our hits."


Coverage Cited by Groups Opposing Sale of Post to Murdoch
Civil rights groups and minority businessmen seeking to block Rupert Murdoch's proposed purchase of The New York Post have argued in filings with the Federal Government that the move would perpetuate poor coverage of the city's black and Hispanic communities.
They told the Federal Communication Commissions that allowing Mr.
Murdoch to own both a local television station and The Post would stifle competition.
They also accused Mr.
Murdoch and all of the city's daily newspapers of discrimination in both hiring and promotion practices and coverage of minority issues.
Mr.
Murdoch owns WNYW-TV, Channel 5, which is part of the Fox network.


Elderly Residents Win a Promise From Dinkins to Restore Budget Cuts


NERVE CELLS TIED TO IMMUNE SYSTEM
Scientists have found the first evidence of an anatomical connection between the nervous system and the immune system.
Nerve cell endings in the skin and white blood cells of the immune system are in intimate contact, and chemicals secreted by the nerves can shut down immune system cells nearby.


Roy J. Karrell; Cosmetics Entrepreneur, 44
Roy J. Karrell, who founded a cosmetics company, died Monday at his home in Malibu, Calif.
He was 44.
The cause was complications of AIDS, his family said.


General Microwave reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28


Woman in the News; A 'Full-Time Volunteer': Carol Ann Gresser
To stand at the center of contentious issues, take time with deliberations and live with a "burdensome conscience," as Carol A. Gresser once described her own, is to sometimes court two different perceptions.
Often regarded as a classic swing voter on New York City's Board of Education, Mrs.
Gresser, in her three years as a board member from Queens, has been described, by turns, as thoughtful and Machiavellian.
Most often, though, she is perceived as a classic mom who saw four children through the public school system and has since maintained a soft personal touch, a penchant for thank-you notes, a strong commitment to parents' concerns and a tendency to agonize over such difficult issues as sex education, the Rainbow Curriculum and the distribution of condoms in high school classrooms.


Clinton Supports Creating Fund Designated Solely to Cut Deficit
Responding to accusations by Ross Perot and Republicans that he is just another tax-and-spend Democrat, President Clinton yesterday endorsed a proposal to require that all the money raised by tax increases in his new budget be used solely to reduce the Federal deficit.
Locking new tax revenues and savings from some of his proposed budget cuts into what he termed a "trust fund" would guarantee that the sacrifices the budget demands of the voters would go toward their stated purpose, Mr.
Clinton said.


Dollar Ends Mostly Higher As European Rates Decline
The dollar rose against most leading currencies yesterday after European interest rates dropped while American rates showed signs of remaining firm.
"The rate cuts in Europe helped push the dollar higher today," said Paul Farrell, chief dealer at Chase Manhattan.
Lower interest rates make investments in a country less attractive, diminishing demand for its currency.


Scotts Co. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to April 3


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt  *
Bank of Delaware, Wilmington, a unit of PNC Bank Corp., Pittsburgh, $200 million of 3.30 percent notes due in 1994 at par through Merrill Lynch &amp; Co.
The noncallable issue is rated Aa-3 by Moody's Investors Service Inc. and A+ by Standard &amp; Poor's Corp.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-12  U.N.
PLANS BORDER MONITORS  The United Nations Security Council appeared close to agreement on a new plan to put monitors on border crossing points between Serbia and Bosnia and Herzegovina to insure that President Slobodan Milosevic keeps his promise to cut off vital supplies to Bosnia's Serbs until they accept the international peace plan.
A1  YUGOSLAV SANCTIONS AND PEACE  A looming cash shortage brought on by the United Nations sanctions is a major element in the sudden push by President Milosevic for peace in Bosnia, Clinton Administration officials say.
A8


Doctor Fears Changes May Be for Worse
Dr.
Bruce H. Yaffe relishes his life in New York and delights in being a doctor.
He regularly treats patients to evenings of Off-Broadway theater and holds monthly discussion groups at his home to debate politics and art.
But Dr.
Yaffe, who practices internal medicine and gastroenterology in Manhattan, is ever more worried that the type of medicine he loves is slipping away.


Accord Returns U.N. Troops to Mostar
United Nations patrols returned cautiously to the battle-scarred streets of Mostar this afternoon, after United Nations officers and rival commanders announced another cease-fire aimed at ending four days of fighting between Croats and Bosnian Muslims.
Lieut.
Gen.
Philippe Morillon, commander of United Nations forces in Bosnia, announced the accord after 10 hours of negotiations today in this resort village, 12 miles south of Mostar.
A Spanish contingent of United Nations troops that had been driven from Mostar by fighting Sunday morning reported only sporadic small arms fire tonight.
Earlier today, heavy exchanges of mortar fire blocked roads to the scenic mountain town, cupped in the steep Neretva River valley.


Hyatt Account Goes To BBDO New York
The Hyatt Hotels Corporation of Chicago said yesterday that it had selected BBDO New York to handle its $25 million account, which had been at Hill, Holliday, Connors, Cosmopulos Inc. of Boston.
Hyatt and Hill, Holliday said in November that they would end their five-year relationship because of "fundamental, philosophical disagreements over the future direction of the national advertising."
BBDO was awarded the account after a review that had been narrowed to it, Leo Burnett U.S.A. of Chicago and Ogilvy &amp; Mather New York.
Last month, Ogilvy left the review amid circumstances that were unclear; the agency said it withdrew, but Hyatt said that it had asked Ogilvy to withdraw.


Pennsylvania Abortion Law To Be Argued in Court Again
A Federal district judge in Reading today gave Planned Parenthood a new opportunity to challenge a state law restricting abortions.
Judge Daniel H. Huyett 3d, said in his ruling that although the United States Supreme Court last year had upheld Pennsylvania's 1989 abortion law, the decision set a new standard for judging the constitutionality of abortion laws, so the case should be re-examined under that standard.


Sports of The Times; 'No Telling Where He's Coming From'
HIS sneakers are almost as big as he is.
The number on his Charlotte Hornets' uniform is 1 because any other number wouldn't fit.
He's only 5 feet 3 inches and 140 pounds, but he's not the last body on the bench.
He's a starter.
If not a star.
Tyrone (Muggsy) Bogues is the shortest player in National Basketball Association history.
He's so small, he resembles a child lost in a redwood forest.
But he's so small, sometimes his opponents can't find him.


Cross-Country Champion Is Reinstated
The Kenya Amateur Athletics Association lifted its sanctions against JOHN NGUGI, the 1988 Olympic 5,000-meter champion who was suspended Feb. 13 for refusing to a take a drug test.
The five-time world cross-country champion still faces a possible ban of up to four years by the International Amateur Athletics Federation for snubbing the organization's doctors when they visited him at his central Kenya farm.


METRO DIGEST
METRO DIGEST  FEARS GROW OVER HEALTH-CARE CHANGES
Dr.
Bruce H. Yaffe, a Manhattan gastroenterologist, is, like doctors across the country, waiting anxiously to see how the Clinton Administration's proposals for overhauling the health-care system will alter his life.
A1.
For doctors in San Francisco, managed care is familiar and dependable.
B6.


United Fire &amp; Casualty Co.  (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Books of The Times; Taking the Frivolity of Games Seriously Indeed
Game Over How Nintendo Zapped an American Industry, Captured Your Dollars and Enslaved Your Children By David Sheff 445 pages.
Random House. $25.
In their recently published book, "Computer Wars: How the West Can Win in a Post-I.B.M. World," Charles H. Ferguson and Charles R. Morris mention the surprising fact that among the potential big winners in the entire computer field is the Japanese game maker Nintendo.
Now, in his beguiling "Game Over," David Sheff, a reporter who spent two years interviewing Nintendo executives in Japan, Europe and the United States, makes it dramatically clear why the company seems so promising.


Not Ethnicity, but Religion, Fuels Balkan Fury
To the Editor:
In "Bosnia: Talk Plus Threat" (editorial, April 29), you once again speak of "ethnic cleansing." In "A Springtime of Grief: Shall We Add Bosnians?" (letter, April 27), Sheila W. Reicher speaks of "ethnic hatred" and "racial rivalry."


Polk Audio (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 28


Review/Music; Britten's Signature, New for Every Work
With the war of the sexes being fought behind closed doors, debated on streets and prosecuted in the courts, "The Rape of Lucretia" made a timely appearance in Brooklyn on Friday night.
In it women suffer unjustly, but Benjamin Britten's chamber opera, composed as World War II was ending, probably had a broader notion of violent conquest on its mind.
The story is from Rome: a prince's violation of a companion's virtuous wife and her suicide because of it.
Past and present are stacked like layers in this opera.
The stern, often cruel standards of an ancient civilization are depicted but through a modern Christian's eyes.
A chorus of two singers (Carl Halvorson and Karen Hale) narrates and offers commentary.
A stage work takes on the air of an Anglican church service in which text and sermon provide moral guides for communicants.


CHRONICLE
Some of ALEXANDER JULIAN'S most recent men's wear creations have been seen on collegiate and professional basketball courts rather than fashion runways, and seem somehow connected to winning plays.
Mr.
Julian designed the uniforms worn by the University of North Carolina Tar Heels when they won the National Collegiate Athletic Association championship last month.
And now the Charlotte Hornets, the first sports team to don his designs, have moved into the second round of the National Basketball Association playoffs against the New York Knicks.


Events: Tours and Fairs, Quilts and Azaleas
Wright Community  Municipal Art Society, the Urban Center, 457 Madison Avenue (51st Street); (212) 397-3809.
A series of tours continues on Saturday from 1 to 6 P.M. with a bus trip to Usonia, a Westchester community designed by Frank Lloyd Wright in the 1950's.
A $60 fee includes a $10 donation to the Frank Lloyd Wright Building Conservancy; for members, $50.
Reservations are required.
Other tours, from $15 to $30, include Vanderbilt's New York (May 22) and restoration of public art (June 5).
A brochure is available by calling.
Quilt Talks  Pier 92, 12th Avenue at 52d Street; (212) 765-0141 or (212) 977-7298.
The Great American Quilt Festival continues through Sunday.
Open today and tomorrow, 10 A.M. to 8 P.M.; Saturday, 10 A.M. to 7 P.M.; Sunday, 10 A.M. to 6 P.M.
Admission is $10.
Lectures, $12, include morning star quilts (today, 2:45 P.M.) and imagery in art quilts (Saturday, 2:45 P.M.).
Workshops and seminars are $25 to $60.
Information and reservations are available by phone.
Azaleas in Bloom  Brooklyn Botanic Garden, 1000 Washington Avenue, off Eastern Parkway, Prospect Heights; (718) 622-4433.
On Sunday at 1 P.M., there will be a guided tour of the azalea collections.
Dr.
Philip Waldman, a garden author, will give a talk on azalea hybrids at 2:30 P.M.
No charge.
Student Show  Fashion Institute of Technology, Shirley Goodman Resource Center, Seventh Avenue at 27th Street; (212) 760-7665.
Designs for restaurant interiors, fabrics, jewelry, toys and clothing will be on display from Tuesday through May 28.
Open Tuesday through Friday, noon to 8 P.M.; Saturday, 10 A.M. to 5 P.M.
No charge.
Sephardic Fair  The Spanish and Portuguese Synagogue, Central Park West and 70th Street; (212) 873-0300.
The fair, on Sunday from 10 A.M. to 5 P.M., will feature sales of Judaica and crafts, entertainment and cultural programs.
Admission is $3; for children under 13 and those 62 and older, $1.
Furniture Plus  Jacob K. Javits Convention Center, 11th Avenue at 34th Street; (800) 272-7469.
Public day at the International Contemporary Furniture Fair is Wednesday, from 10 A.M. to 5 P.M.
Admission, to benefit the Design Industries Foundation for AIDS, is $20.
Hudson Valley Town  Metro North Railroad Station, Route 9D near County Road 28, New Hamburg, N.Y.; (914) 297-5681.
Walking tours of New Hamburg, a river community built in the late 1800's, will be offered Saturday at 1, 2 and 3 P.M.
Admission is $10; for children under 12, no charge.


U.S. Says Penalties Forced Serb to Act
A looming cash shortage brought on by new United Nations sanctions helped persuade Serbia's President to push for peace in Bosnia, Administration officials say.
The officials said that last month in Cyprus, the banking authorities seized as much as $500 million in Yugoslav assets.
Article, page A8.


Review/Dance; The Wider Dimension of Lubovitch's Male Duet
Two men in white approach each other from opposite sides of the stage, dance together with the clarity of geometric form and then part, exiting separately into the wings from which they entered.
The dancers' mutual support speaks of a caring relationship.
Yet what is now the most famous male duet in the international dance world is more about love than lovers.
Julio Bocca and John Gardner beautifully brought out the wider dimension of Lar Lubovitch's choreography with their quiet intensity on Tuesday night with American Ballet Theater at the Metropolitan Opera House.


Internet Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Olympia's Creditors in U.S. Square Off With Canadians
Creditors of the main United States branch of the Canadian real estate giant Olympia &amp; York Developments Ltd. are becoming increasingly irritated over efforts by Canadian interests to broaden their influence and might take legal steps including forcing the American unit into bankruptcy, people close to the parties say.
Although the parent company declared the Canadian equivalent of bankruptcy last May, the American subsidiary, which is New York City's largest commercial real estate taxpayer, managed to avoid that action.
Olympia &amp; York USA continues to operate while negotiating with creditors, led by Citibank and the Japanese bank Sanwa, over its $5.3 billion in debt.


Recoton Corp. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Sin or Not, Supposed Relic Of Cross Is Sold in France
Despite warnings by a Vatican official that it is a sin to trade in relics, two slivers of olive wood said to come from the cross on which Jesus was crucified were sold for more than $18,000 in a crowded auction house here today.
Accompanying the bits of wood were two certificates, one dated 1855 from the Vatican apparently authenticating the wood as part of Jesus' cross and the other dated 1856 recording that it was a gift from the Patriarch of Jerusalem to Edouard Thouvenel, at the time France's Ambassador to Constantinople.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
6.50
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
3.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.25
2.98
4.00
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
2.88
2.87
3.58
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
2.99
2.98
3.68
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
5.53
5.49
6.98
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
6.85
6.81
7.84
TELEPHONE BONDS
7.77
7.75
8.78
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
5.85
5.84
6.63
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


18 Suburban Homes: A Dream Undermined
The American dream holds nine families hostage here.
The first thing 15-year-old Ivette Reyes does when she gets home from school is take aspirin for chronic headaches.
Since her friends won't visit, she usually plays alone.
And the children of the neighbors next door, Brenda and Louis Guarino, rarely get to see their grandparents, who don't like to visit at their home.


Mary Sanford, 98, A Leading Socialite And Philanthropist
Mary Duncan Sanford, a philanthropist and society grande dame for many years, died Sunday at her home in Palm Beach, Fla.
She was 98 and also had residences in Saratoga Springs, N.Y., Locust Valley, L.I., and Manhattan.
She died in her sleep.
Mrs.
Sanford reigned over Palm Beach society for half a century.
She was a founder of the Polo Ball and was active in many charities, including the American Cancer Society, the American Red Cross and Planned Parenthood.


No Surgery for Sabres' LaFontaine
The Buffalo Sabres' captain, PAT LaFONTAINE, does not need surgery on his injured right knee and instead will undergo extensive physical therapy.
LaFontaine first sprained the knee in January, then reinjured it last week in Game 3 of the Montreal Canadiens' four-game sweep of the Sabres in the playoffs.
The team said yesterday that LaFontaine injured the anterior cruciate ligament of the knee but that, with physical therapy, he would be ready for next season.


Price Tag: Home Office Machines
Here is a look at the price ranges of selected office machine.
Estimates are based on maufacturers' suggested retail prices and on current listing from office supply and electronics catalogs, which may offer a discount.
For most equipment, prices vary widely, reflecting a broad range of available models.
The machines described here are suited to home use; estimates do not apply to more sophisticated professional equipment.


When Managed Care Manages Psychotherapy
To the Editor:
"Health Insurers and Patients' Confidentiality" (letter, May 1) by Arlene Kramer Richards, a psychologist, contains serious inaccuracies.
It also fails to address the most relevant issues in the debate over managed mental-health care.


Clinton Aide Ends China Trip With No Sign of Accord
With United States-China relations at a possible turning point, the Clinton Administration's top official for the Far East concluded a crucial three-day visit to Beijing today, without any indication that he had made much headway in bridging the sharp differences between the two sides.
The apparent failure to achieve progress was particularly significant because in coming weeks, President Clinton will have to transform his tough campaign oratory about China into a specific China policy.
In particular, he must decide what kinds of conditions he wants to attach to a renewal of China's low-tariff trade status.


At Christie's, Passion for a Middle Range
Just when you thought you could make sense of the art market, it threw yet another curve.
At Christie's sale of Impressionist and modern paintings, drawings and sculpture last night, there was surprising enthusiasm.
Not only did the expected gems sell and sell well, but even the so-called middle market, those works in the $500,000 range that have suffered most during the last two years, made a comeback.
The sale totaled $48.5 million, slightly above Christie's low estimate of $45 million, but well below its high estimate of $59 million.
Of the 60 works for sale, 48 found buyers.
While the figures didn't compare with Sotheby's Impressionist sale on Tuesday night, which totaled $75.9 million, Christie's, anticipating less of a success, was ecstatic.
Well Over Expectations
"There was more bidding than we've seen in a long time," said Christopher Burge, the president of Christie's in New York.
"Nine lots sold for over $1 million. We did better than we could have possibly expected."


Nugget Wins Improved Player Award
CHRIS JACKSON of the Denver Nuggets yesterday was voted the National Basketball Association's Most Improved Player Award for 1993.
Jackson, who led his team in scoring, assists, free-throw percentage and 3-point percentage, received 25 of a possible 98 votes from sportswriters and broadcasters.


NYMagic Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


House Panel Backs Clinton Student-Loan Plan
The House Education and Labor Committee today approved President Clinton's proposal to allow needy students to borrow directly from the Federal Government to pay for college.
In a voice vote, the panel resisted lobbying by the banking industry and agreed to replace the current guaranteed student-loan program, which is highly profitable for private banks.
But the new direct lending approach still faces strong opposition in the House, and even higher hurdles in the Senate.


Have Your Plate and Wear It, Too
THE woman who likes Gianni Versace's flashy clothes, printed with gold chains or medallions against a richly colored background, can now have porcelain dishes to match.
"The dinnerware market is sometimes a little stale -- I don't want to say boring -- and it needs something like Versace, very rich, very ornate," said George Simon, president of Rosenthal China U.S.A., which is producing four china patterns in collaboration with Mr.
Versace.
As he does on his clothing, Mr.
Versace has applied historical motifs from Greece, China and France.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article on Monday about the fraud and bribery trial of Robert A. Altman misstated the disposition of a Federal money-laundering charge against Dildar Rizvi, a key prosecution witness.
The Government has agreed to dismiss the case against Mr.
Rizvi in return for his cooperation with the prosecution.


Physicians Health Services Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Marka T. duPont, 82, Health and Art Patron
Marka Truesdale duPont, a patron of mental-health groups and the performing arts, died Tuesday at her home in Wilmington, Del.
She was 82.
She had had a prolonged illness, her family said.


Review/Film; If You Can't Conform, Rebel
Films about illness almost always take stronger attitudes toward their subjects than "Herman" does.
This Norwegian film, which opened yesterday at the 68th Street Playhouse, adopts a strangely whimsical, erratic tone as it tells of the title character, a handsome 11-year-old boy (Anders Danielson Lie) who reveals his medical condition in his first moments on screen.
Herman has alopecia areata, a disease that has caused him to lose his hair.
It has also transformed his inner life.
With opening titles that evoke the robust, ski-sweater Scandinavia of the 1950's, "Herman" can treat its young hero's sickness as a form of unwanted social rebellion, something that sets him in direct opposition to the conformity of the world in which he is growing up.


Continental's Boeing Deal Is Confirmed
The Boeing Company said yesterday that Continental Airlines had ordered 92 jetliners with a value of approximately $4.5 billion.
The aircraft maker hailed the order as a sign of new life in its industry, but analysts were more reserved.
The bulk of the order was a reinstatement of an order that had been erased when Continental entered bankruptcy proceedings more than two years ago.
But the airline, which emerged from Chapter 11 protection last month, also placed new orders for both of Boeing's wide-body twin-jet models, the 767 and Boeing's newest aircraft, the 777.


10 Rivals Will Try to Keep Sea Hero From Gaining a Second Jewel
Who -- or what -- can beat Sea Hero when he tries to win the 118th Preakness this Saturday?
MacKenzie Miller, who trains the colt for Paul Mellon, drove his station wagon down the New Jersey Turnpike today from Belmont Park to Pimlico Race Course and had time to consider the possibilities.


SPI Pharmaceuticals reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


'I Just Refuse to Be Intimidated'
The patented smile is gone.
And so are most of the expectations borne on the shoulders of a player brought in to restore the winning ways of a franchise, only to see his fortunes and those of the team sink into the cellar.
But Bobby Bonilla, the much-maligned and most visible target of the New York Mets' frustrated and vocal fans, is not a man ready to bolt from what others believe to be an untenable, irreversible falling-out with the city he calls home.


Turner Broadcasting System reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


DeSoto Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Dow Climbs by 13.56 to a Record 3,482.31
Shrugging off discouraging news on producer prices and a decline in the bond market, traders bid up the stocks that make up the Dow Jones industrial average yesterday, pushing it to a record 3,482.31.
Other market indexes were mixed, with the Nasdaq composite index dropping.
Gold stocks, however, posted strong gains.


Customedix Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Cypress Sells Chip Unit for $23 Million
The Cypress Semiconductor Corporation said today that it would sell its Ross Technology subsidiary, a chip-making unit that Cypress once touted as an exemplar of American entrepreneurship, to Fujitsu Ltd., the Japanese computer giant.
Ross Technology makes Sparc microprocessors, a type of chip used in the popular and powerful work stations made by Sun Microsystems Inc.
But for the latest generation of Sparc chips, Sun -- the work-station market leader -- has turned away from Ross to make Texas Instruments its chief supplier.


American Re Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


When Managed Care Manages Psychotherapy; Stranding Employees
To the Editor:
In "Health Advisers Plan Exemption for Big Business" (front page, April 26), pros and cons are voiced on the proposal of President Clinton's health policy advisers to "let the nation's biggest companies serve as their own health insurers, bypassing the regional insurance pools that would serve as the core of Mr. Clinton's health-care plan."


Details Offered On Alternative To Westway
Details of a proposed "boutique" boulevard, flanked by a walkway and bike path along the Hudson River, have been completed by the New York State Transportation Department as the latest alternative to Westway, the abandoned project that was supposed to replace the razed West Side Highway between the Battery and 59th Street.
In a draft environmental impact statement, transportation officials have prepared four versions of the boulevard that appear to differ in, among other things, the site of pedestrian bridges and tunnels along the five-mile route and in the cost, which ranges from $300 million to $1 billion.


Even a One-Man Staff Needs a Little Help
Dwight Gooden needed the eight other Mets tonight.
He throws a shutout about every other start, but some of Gooden's pitches spun incorrectly here in the Missouri rain, and -- as is typical -- his teammates could not bail him out.
Luis Alicea's ninth-inning sacrifice fly off of pitcher Mike Maddux scored Geronimo Pena to give the St Louis Cardinals a 6-5 victory at Busch Stadium.
Met relievers are now 0-8 this season, and Maddux is 0-4 after an ugly last inning here.
He yielded a leadoff double to Pena, muffed Jose Oquendo's sacrifice bunt and walked pinch hitter Gerald Perry to load the bases.
Then, in the midst of a sudden downpour, Alicea lined a flyball out to center fielder Joe Orsulak, whose rushed throw was an eyelash late to the plate. 13th Loss in 16 Games
The Mets have now dropped 13 of their last 16 games, prompting catcher Todd Hundley to say afterward, "I'd like to take out the whole dugout. This loss is sickening."


Charles and Diana Taped? M.I.5 Snooping Denied
The British Government said today that it was possible that private conversations among members of the royal family had been surreptitiously recorded, but it denied responsibility for what a newspaper asserted was a tape of an argument last year between the Prince and Princess of Wales.
The article in The Sun was the latest in a string of press reports that have sought to connect British intelligence services to surveillance of the royal family.


A New Shine
The Armor All Products Corporation makes car polishes and protective finishes.
But since it hit a peak of more than $20 in December, the stock has drifted downward.
Yesterday, a major shareholder, the McKesson Corporation, sold a large block, increasing the liquidity of Armor All stock and prompting investors to bid up the shares.


Why Has New York City Just Recognized Small Businesses?; A Role in Exports
To the Editor:
It is to be hoped that those responsible for the new initiatives to alleviate small-business burdens in New York City (news article, May 3) will integrate their efforts with the New York State export finance program, formed just over a year ago by the State's Department of Economic Development and the private New York Business Development Corporation.


Movie Star Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Offshore Logistics (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Classical Music in Review
Cleveland Orchestra  Jean-Yves Thibaudet  Pianist  Carnegie Hall
Rachmaninoff's Second Piano Concerto, with its sweeping melodrama and eminent singability, poses almost moral questions for the virtuoso.
Does one manufacture the thrill of the moment from each beloved fragment as it appears, or does one find, almost against the music's will, connecting threads of coherence: the means by which a caring musician creates the one out of the many?


PARENT &amp; CHILD
ALTHOUGH she'd been accepted as a freshman at Brown University three years ago, Rebecca Bond decided she needed a break from academia.
While most of her graduating high school classmates spent their next year taking introductory courses in biology, sociology, foreign languages and English composition in college, Ms.
Bond learned about the world outside the classroom.
Over the next 15 months she studied birds of prey with wildlife biologists in the mountains of Nevada and Utah, worked to improve small farms in Arkansas and Mexico with Heifer Project International, built houses with Cree Indians in northern Ontario, and wrote educational materials for the Vermont Youth Conservation Corps.
Most of the projects provided her with room and board in exchange for her labor.
Two provided transportation, and one gave her a small stipend.


Dinkins Plan For Homeless Under Attack
The Dinkins administration's proposal to create a new agency for homeless services -- a centerpiece in the administration's plans to overhaul the city's troubled shelter system -- has run into widespread opposition in the City Council.
The City Council Speaker, Peter F. Vallone, who had been an early supporter of the plan to create a new agency, said yesterday that the city's current proposal fell far short of what he had in mind.
He said the current plan would still leave homeless services fragmented among many different city departments.


Officer Is Charged In Prostitute Attack
A New York City Housing Authority police officer was arrested yesterday on charges that he robbed and severely beat a prostitute after an argument developed when he refused to pay her for sex, District Attorney Robert M. Morgenthau of Manhattan said.
The officer, Gregory Draney, 28, was charged with robbery and first-degree assault after he beat the prostitute early one morning in February in Chelsea, Mr.
Morgenthau said.
The prostitute, whose name was withheld by law-enforcement officials, suffered several cuts, a broken nose, four chipped teeth and swollen eyes.
The force of the blows drove a bottom tooth through her upper lip and into her cheek, said Gerald McKelvey, a spokesman for Mr.
Morgenthau.


Pressure From Companies
In the most united display of corporate-lobbying muscle on a trade issue in two years, 298 large companies and 37 trade groups sent a letter to President Clinton today urging him not to suspend China's favorable trade access to the United States market or attach any conditions to its renewal.
The letter was the latest indication of deep concern in the American business community that American access to the Chinese market might be lost if the Clinton Administration confronts China about its human rights record, arms exports and trade barriers.


Something Old Is New Again
IS it possible that there is no such thing as an original idea?
In the 1940's, Americans draped their tables with white cotton cloths printed with wicker baskets full of apples, peaches, bananas and grapes.
The tablecloths now show up at flea markets.
At the end of this month, a similar design will make its debut at Boussac, a French textile company with a showroom at 979 Third Avenue (at 59th Street).
What's surprising is that while the cloth looks vintage American, it was designed in France in the 1840's, where it languished until last year.


Shellshocked Island Has Had Enough of the Navy
When the Pentagon recently announced its list of 165 military bases to be completely or partly closed, people here were angry and disappointed.
Despite their best efforts, the Navy "weapons training facility" that occupies two-thirds of this small island just east of Puerto Rico was not placed on the list.
While communities throughout the United States are fighting to persuade the Base Closure and Realignment Commission not to close local military bases, nothing would please the 8,000 residents of Vieques (pronounced vee-ECK-es) more than to be rid of the military presence here.


As the Shelter World Turns
I AM looking at a 23-year-old shingled house by a pond in suburban Chicago, contemplating the meaning of zing.
It is the presence of zing, "in all its colorful forms," Traditional Home magazine says, that makes this house such a joy to behold.
You would not have found the word zing in HG, a magazine that has long served as an urbane arbiter of taste.
But throughout their history, home magazines have been a Rorschach test of American values.
If the announcement of HG's closing and the rise of magazines like Traditional Home are any indication, Americans have grown weary of visual repartee.
Forget cutting edge.
They want zing.


RESULTS PLUS
TENNIS  Sampras and Courier Work for Victories  Pete Sampras and Jim Courier, ranked No. 1 and No. 2 in the world, overcame tough matches yesterday to reach the round of 16 in the Italian Open in Rome.
Sampras defeated qualifier Alex Corretja, 6-4, 7-5.
Sampras staved off a set point, coming back from 4-5, 15-40 in the second set.
Courier, the defending champion, needed three sets to defeat 83d-ranked Paul Haarhuis, 6-3, 2-6, 6-0.
Boris Becker, seeded third, overpowered qualifier Sandor Noszaly, 6-3, 6-2, and No. 4 Goran Ivanisevic defeated Magnus Gustafsson, 6-3, 6-4.
Sixth-seeded Michael Chang rallied to defeat qualifer Andrea Gaudenzi, 5-7, 6-4, 6-3.
Last year's runner-up, 15th-seeded Carlos Costa, was upset by Christian Bergstrom, 6-2, 6-7 (7-3), 6-3. (AP) Graf Rallies: Defending champion Steffi Graf, seeded No. 1, recovered from a disastrous first set to beat fellow German Sabine Hack, 0-6, 6-3, 6-2, and advance at the German Open in Berlin.
Second-seeded Gabriela Sabatini overpowered Marketa Kochta, 6-1, 6-0, and No. 3 Mary Joe Fernandez defeated Isabelle Demongeot, 6-0, 6-3.
Fourth-seeded Jennifer Capriati overcame Wiltrud Probst, 6-2, 4-6, 6-0. (AP) SOCCER  Cup Winners Cup Goes to Parma  Lorenzo Minotti and Alessandro Melli scored first-half goals last night, leading Parma of Italy to a 3-1 victory over Royal Antwerp of Belgium in the final of the European Cup Winners Cup in Wembley, England.
It was the first European trophy for Parma, fourth in the Italian League this season with a 14-9-7 record. (AP)


Rostenkowski Urges Clinton To Seek Support 'Out There'
As he struggled to forge the tax legislation that is the core of President Clinton's economic program, Representative Dan Rostenkowski, the chairman of the House Ways and Means Committee, suggested today that the President needed to generate more enthusiasm in the country for his plan if he hoped to get it enacted.
"The Administration, never having written a tax bill, doesn't understand that you have to get supporters out there, not exclusively in the House of Representatives or the Senate," Mr.
Rostenkowski, an Illinois Democrat, told reporters after meeting for hours with the other Democrats on his committee.


Horwitz Gives Himself An Error on the Play
Bobby Bonilla has been blamed, rightly or wrongly, for a lot of things.
Today, though, someone else stepped forward to take the blame for one of the more controversial moments in the right fielder's tenure in New York.
The moment came on June 25 of last year in the first inning of a game at Shea Stadium in which the visiting Chicago Cubs had scored seven runs, and Bonilla was charged with an error.
Moments later, in the dugout, Bonilla was observed making a call on a dugout phone directly linked to the press box.
Jay Horwitz, the media relations director for the Mets, later admitted that Bonilla had called.
Both described the call as one Bonilla made to inquire about Horwitz's health.


U.N. Steps Said to Dry Up Serbs' Cash
A looming cash shortage brought on by the latest United Nations sanctions is a major element in the sudden push by Serbia's President, Slobodan Milosevic, for peace in Bosnia, Administration officials say.
The new sanctions, which took effect on April 26, have seriously disrupted the intricate network of banks and front companies Serbia relies on to evade the year-old Western embargo, the officials said.


Investor Group to Operate Nutri-System
The financial distress of Nutri-System Inc. began to ease yesterday when a bankruptcy court judge in Philadelphia allowed prospective investors to operate the company for 30 days.
At the request of the company and its franchise operators, Federal Bankruptcy Judge David A. Scholl dismissed a trustee he had appointed last Friday and gave the investors, led by the Heico Acquisitions Company of Chicago, 30 days to complete arrangements to buy all the assets of the diet food company, which is based in Blue Bell, Pa.


Belding Heminway reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


N.C.A.A. Looks for Another Schultz
Presented with Dick Schultz's sudden resignation on Tuesday as executive director of the National Collegiate Athletic Association and the responsibilities that come with the end of the academic year, officials responsible for finding a successor are not expected to begin work until next week.
Both Joseph Crowley, the president of the N.C.A.A. and the University of Nevada, and Gregory O'Brien, chancellor of the University of New Orleans and chairman of the Presidents Commission, are scheduled to attend graduation ceremonies on their campuses this weekend.


Federated Net Aided By Controls
The first-quarter results issued yesterday by Federated Department Stores Inc. demonstrated that attention to cost control could mitigate the impact of high markdowns and weak sales.
Federated's divisions, which consist of Abraham &amp; Straus, Bloomingdale's, Burdines, Rich's and five other regional department store chains, were forced to take greater markdowns than planned in the quarter because severe weather and slowing sales threatened to clog inventories.
But the company still managed a whopping 83.7 percent increase in profits before an extraordinary charge related to debt reduction, even though sales in stores open at least one year were less than planned.


Frederick E. Lane, 84, Is Dead; Doctor Helped Found 2 Hospitals
Frederick E. Lane, a physician, hospital administrator and charity fund-raiser, died on Tuesday at his home in Plandome Manor, L.I.
He was 84.
The cause was pancreatic cancer, his family said.


Brascan Ltd.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Cuomo Selects A Top Aide To Lead Party
Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo today nominated a longtime political aide, Al Gordon, to be the next chairman of the state Democratic Party.
The 33-year-old Mr.
Gordon, who is the Governor's director of legislative and intergovernmental relations, has worked in all of Mr.
Cuomo's campaigns since 1977, when he was 17 years old.
The state Democratic Committee is expected to ratify the nomination at a meeting on May 19.


No Headline
"I had my own stereotypes about Marine Corps colonels, and I assumed because of the life style he chose, he would have certain political views. Knowing what I know now I wish I had had more faith in my father and talked to him a long time ago." -- SCOTT PECK, who told his father of his homosexuality just days before the colonel's Congressional testimony.  [ A19:1. ]


Citing Safety, Airline Curbs CD and Computer Use
American Airlines said yesterday that it would join the growing number of carriers that have banned the use of laptop computers, compact-disk players and other electronic devices during takeoffs and landings.
The policy underlines an emerging safety issue in which questions outnumber answers.
Although there is no scientific evidence that such devices interfere with planes' navigation or communications systems, the restrictions being imposed by airlines stem from a growing number of reports by pilots that their navigation instruments were inexplicably disrupted in flight, and that they resumed normal operation when flight attendants asked passengers to turn off these electronic devices.


U.N. NEAR ACCORD ON PLAN TO WATCH SERBIAN FRONTIER
The United Nations Security Council appeared close to agreement today on a new plan to put monitors on border crossings between Serbia and Bosnia to insure that the President of Serbia, Slobodan Milosevic, keeps his promise to cut off supplies to Bosnia's Serbs until they accept the international plan for ending the country's civil war.
The observers would check all traffic moving across the frontier from Mr.
Milosevic's Serbian republic into Bosnia to check on Belgrade's enforcement of its pledge to send only goods such as food and medicine to the Bosnian Serbs and to deny them fuel and military goods.
Earlier this week Serbian officials in Belgrade said they would cooperate with such inspections.
Latest Security Council Move
The border monitoring plan, which is likely to be approved next week, represents the latest move in the Security Council's tactic of using its economic blockade against the Yugoslav federation of Serbia and Montenegro to force President Milosevic to press Bosnia's Serbs into accepting the peace plan.


Round One in G.O.P. TV Debates May Have Gone to Florio
The first televised debate of the election season may have been among three Republicans, but Gov.
Jim Florio, a Democrat, may have come out as much a winner as any of them.
The three major Republican candidates -- Christine Todd Whitman, Cary Edwards and James H. Wallwork -- have for months built their campaigns on attacking Mr.
Florio, his policies and his record.
But Tuesday night, even as they explained why they were best qualified to try to unseat him, they took pains to point how tough it will be to beat him.


Corrections
An article on Tuesday about the cocaine trade in Jackson Heights and Elmhurst, Queens, misstated the composition of the borough's Hispanic population.
Puerto Ricans are the largest Hispanic group in Queens; Colombians are the largest group of Hispanic immigrants.


Ex-Panthers Lose Retrial Motion
Three former Black Panthers who were convicted of murdering two New York police officers in 1971 are not entitled to a new trial, a Federal judge ruled yesterday, despite his conclusion that important evidence was withheld from the defense and that a prosecution witness had lied.
In a 26-page ruling, Judge Morris E. Lasker of District Court in Manhattan agreed with the claim of Herman Bell, Anthony Bottom and Albert Washington that evidence of ballistics tests was not provided to their lawyers.
But the judge said it was not clear that prosecutors in the Manhattan District Attorney's Office knew that the material had been withheld, or that it would have changed the outcome of the case.


Corrections
A book review on Tuesday about "Martyrs' Day: Chronicle of a Small War," by Michael Kelly, referred incorrectly to another author.
He was A. J. Liebling.


Silcorp Ltd. reports earnings for Year to Dec 27


On Lady Bird Johnson
To The Home Section:
What a pleasure it was to read "Amid the Wildflowers With Lady Bird Johnson: Spreading the Natural Colors of a Great Society" (May 6).
I am not a devoted fan of Lady Bird, but I have often felt that the media did not treat her with any understanding or appreciation.


Yankees Have That Rundown Feeling
In reality, the Milwaukee Brewers beat the Yankees with an unaccustomed burst of power in the first two innings and an excellent performance by Bill Wegman on the mound.
That is not, however, how the Yankees will remember it.
The big play, the embarrassing play, the memorable play happened after the Yankees already trailed by two runs in what would eventually be a 4-1 Brewers victory.
It was a trademark Brewers play that New York knew about it, dissected and planned a response to.
The Yankees simply didn't manage to execute.


Tradeoffs and Benefits of a California H.M.O.
The health-care delivery system that is being hailed as the wave of the future is the only system Dr.
Rhoda Nussbaum has ever known.
Since graduating from medical school in 1982, she has been a salaried obstetrician-gynecologist in San Francisco, on the staff of a health maintenance organization.
That was the same year Dr.
Bruce H. Yaffe, a Manhattan internist, opened his private practice.
He, like many doctors and patients in the New York area, has not had experience with the H.M.O.'s that Dr.
Nussbaum finds so familiar, and he is worried about his future and the future of American medicine.


Seeking Stature in Cambodia, Japan Gets Deathly Dilemma
Only months after Japan began its first military venture abroad since World War II, the killing of two Japanese in Cambodia has set off a national uproar.
It is forcing Government leaders to choose between condemnation at home for keeping unarmed nationals amid violence and condemnation abroad for trying to sweep them out of harm's way.
The attacks on Japanese peacekeepers have shattered the Government's earlier public assurances that there would be no Japanese blood spilled in the first real test of Japan's oft-stated desire to contribute more to the world than just yen.
But the rising violence in Cambodia has raised angry calls to pull back or pull out, no matter what the cost to its international reputation.


Tax Breaks in Puerto Rico
Only infrequently, and then fitfully, do mainland Americans pay much attention to their offshore ward Puerto Rico.
Many islanders now fear their vulnerable economy will be devastated by a Clinton Administration deficit reduction proposal.
These fears could well be overblown, but 3.5 million Puerto Ricans are owed a better demonstration that Treasury Department mandarins have responsibly done their homework.
President Clinton has endorsed, and Congress is weighing, a Treasury proposal to amend Section 936 of the tax code that gives U.S. companies an exemption from Federal taxes on income earned in Puerto Rico.
This tax break, which extends to interest on local bank deposits, is seen in Washington as an excessive giveaway whose prudent trimming can yield $7 billion over five years.


Garden Q.&amp; A.
Serious Digging
Q.
I keep coming across the term "double digging," as if I should know what it means.
I don't.
Kindly explain. -- Loren Keenan, Worcester, Mass.
A.
"Double digging is a loosening and enriching of the lower soil, the area called the 'second spit,' " said Page Dickey, who discusses the subject in her book "Duck Hill Journal" (Houghton Mifflin, $19.95).
"Nothing beats it for preparing soil for perennials or veggies."
First, divide the planting area into a long narrow strip.
Then, dig into the soil and remove one spadeful -- that's the top spit -- and set it aside on a piece of burlap.
The second spit will then be exposed to make it easy to stir in compost or cow or horse manure.
Next, move to the right along the bed and remove the top spit of the adjacent area.
Place it on the subsoil you have just finished working on, and then add some compost or manure.
Return to the area now exposed, and add compost or manure to it.
Continue moving along the bed to the right, repeating this procedure until you reach the end.
Finish off the last section by adding onto it the original top spit you set aside on the burlap earlier.
"You've enriched and loosened the bed's subsoil area," Ms.
Dickey said, "and most importantly, you haven't lost any of the topsoil."  Not a Rose
Q.
Blooming in a friend's garden recently was a beautiful plant she called Lenten rose.
Its flower time overlapped with a plant she called Christmas rose.
Can you tell me about them? -- George H. Friedman, Springfield, Mass.
A.
Neither the Lenten rose nor the Christmas rose is a true rose.
Each is a Hellebore, an exquisite perennial member of the buttercup family, and superb for growing in areas with part shade, like a city backyard or the edge of a woodland.
While their large, dark evergreen leaves brighten the garden through winter, hellebores are treasured for their somewhat bell-shaped blooms.
The colors range from creamy white to shades of maroon.
Both species have an unusually long season of bloom, typically six weeks or more, depending on the weather.
And while the Christmas rose (Helleborus niger) is more likely to begin flowering in January than in December, and the Lenten rose (H. orientalis) starts a month or so later, in my backyard garden the Lenten rose lasts into early summer.


TV Baseball Package Draws Fire
Facing growing criticism from Congress and others over a proposed network television deal that would significantly limit nationally televised post-season games, the Major League Baseball owners are not expected to act on the TV package when they meet today in Chicago.
"I said originally that it would be an informational meeting, and I hold to it," Allan (Bud) Selig, owner of the Milwaukee Brewers and the de facto baseball commissioner, said yesterday.


HOME IMPROVEMENT
IF you have difficulty starting up your gasoline-powered mowers, garden tillers, string-trimmers or other yard-care machines in the spring, you may have neglected them when you stored them in the fall.
When the equipment hasn't been properly maintained -- the gas and oil emptied, the filters cleaned -- problems like difficulty in starting and poor performance result.
Following are some simple procedures for curing common engine woes.
Before starting an engine that has been stored, remove the oil-filler cap or plug and check the oil level.
If there is little or no oil in the engine (proper preparation for storing small engines calls for draining the oil), fill it with fresh oil of the type specified in the owner's manual; operating an engine without oil can destroy it.
Judging from experience, oil left in a mower over the winter can be used safely; but most mower makers recommend changing it.
If the manual is not available, ask at a service center about which oil to use.


Vishay Intertechnology reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Death Toll in Ecuador Landslide Rises to 200


A Recruiter's Dream
The most moving testimony at this week's hearings on whether to lift the military ban against homosexuals came from Col.
Fred Peck, the Marine officer whose clean-cut face was beamed into millions of American living rooms when he served as spokesman for the rescue operation in Somalia.
Colonel Peck described the close and primitive living conditions in Somalia and suggested that homosexuals could not coexist with other troops in the field.
But then the colonel dropped his bombshell.
His oldest son, he revealed, is homosexual.
Colonel Peck said he had learned this only five days before the hearing.


Knicks Collapse, Catch a Breath, Then Charge
After a tremendous game and a tremendous comeback, the Knicks escaped with another memorable victory.
Hubert Davis came from nowhere to hit clutch shots from everywhere.
Patrick Ewing scored 34 points, grabbed 11 rebounds and carried the team on his back, refusing to quit and not allowing his teammates to quit either.


Lawrence Insurance Group Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Review/Theater; Dreams and Clowns: Bergman's Vision In a New 'Peer Gynt'
In his vision of "Peer Gynt" (at the Brooklyn Academy of Music), Ingmar Bergman interprets the Ibsen epic as both dream play and clown play.
Searching for a key to unlock this awesome poetic drama, the director finds it in Peer's childhood fantasies, the dreams that he shares with his mother.
To a background of trolls and international intrigue, the title character acts out one man's lifelong quest for spiritual self-awareness.
Coming after Mr.
Bergman's highly politicized "Hamlet" and his revelatory season of Strindberg, Ibsen and O'Neill at the Brooklyn Academy, "Peer Gynt" reaffirms his position in the pantheon of experimental theater artists.
In his 70's he retains a youthful brashness.
His "Peer Gynt" is a fabulistic folk tale filled with visual richness and an ebullient sense of comedy.
His first production of the play in 1957 was apparently stark and simple.
It starred Max von Sydow, who had recently appeared in "The Seventh Seal," which might have been considered a cinematic companion piece.


INSIDE
U.S. and China Still at Odds
An American official's three-day visit to Beijing concluded without any indication that the two countries' differences were being resolved.
Page A10.
Italian Executive in Scandal
The head of the biggest Italian public corporation was arrested on corruption charges as the 15-month-old bribery inquiry pressed deeper.
Page A6.
Advice for Economic Plan
The House Ways and Means Committee head said the President needed to generate more popular support for his economic plan.
Page 20.
Reputed Relic of Cross Sold
Two slivers of olive wood said to have come from the cross on which Jesus died were sold for over $18,000 at a Paris auction.
Page A12.
Baseball TV Deal in Doubt
Major League Baseball owners are not expected to act on a television package with ABC and NBC because of criticism from Congress.
Page D1.


Gay Groups Are Opposed At St. John's
A day after their gay-rights student group returned from the march in Washington last month, the sense of exuberance and confidence that James Van Bramer and six of his classmates at St.
John's University felt quickly evaporated: the student government informed them that their group could not operate as a student organization at the university.
"It was like a slap in the face, the euphoria we felt was gone," recalled Mr.
Van Bramer, a 23-year-old co-chairman of the Gay, Lesbian and Bisexual Alliance, which formed last fall at the university.
"We were trying to be more up front with ourselves and other people at the university. But then we're told we're not good enough to have our group there."


L.I.R.R. Postpones Changes in Its Timetable
Switching signals after receiving hundreds of complaints, the Long Island Rail Road said yesterday that it was postponing and reconsidering a systemwide timetable change it had billed as "the most extensive undertaken in the last 20 years."
The new schedule was supposed to take effect on Monday.


Cascades Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Bridge
Seven years ago, Fred Stewart and Steve Weinstein failed to win the prestigious Cavendish Invitational Pairs by the equivalent of a couple of overtricks.
During the past weekend they made up for that disappointment, winning by 690 imps, one of the biggest margins ever.
They surged to the front on the second day with considerable help from the diagramed deal, on which they climbed to five diamonds in the face of a weak two-bid by East.
Stewart, as South, did not like his chances when West led a spade and the dummy appeared.
He had plenty of tricks in one sense after winning the spade ace, but the defense was ready to take three decisive tricks.


Astro Sciences Corp. reports earnings for Year to March 31


COMPANY NEWS
FRUIT OF THE LOOM INC., Chicago, will spend $50 million to build a 500,000-square-foot production facility in Vidalia, La.
The plant is expected to be ready in 1995 and will employ 1,000 workers.


Surf's Up at Tackle for Jets' Malamala
The hottest topic along the Jets' offensive line at the team's mini-camp this past week involved a couple of players -- left tackle Jeff Criswell and left guard Dave Cadigan -- who weren't in attendance.
But the most intriguing figure on the Jets' offensive line, Siupeli Malamala, was present and accounted for and was focusing on his new role as the starting right tackle.
The absence of Criswell and Cadigan, who are under contract and have not explained their failure to be here, has not occupied many of Malamala's thoughts.


Ethiopians Return, Glad to Help Build a New Land
After two decades of Marxist rule and civil war that have left the economy in ruins, a handful of Ethiopians have returned here from exile to help build a new government in a nation that has never had a democratic tradition.
It is proving to be an enormous, painful task.
With eight months left before the transitional Government must step down after national elections, it is still unclear whether Ethiopia -- which has finally achieved peace and with it some stability -- can avoid falling back into ethnically fueled civil war.


Arbour May Prove No Man Is an Islander Forever
By taking the Islanders to the late stages of the second round of the Stanley Cup playoffs, Coach Al Arbour has enhanced his reputation and, at the same time, his bargaining power.
Arbour won't talk about it, but he will be, in essence, a free agent this summer at a time when several coaching jobs are likely to be open.
One of those openings will be in Miami, where Bill Torrey is the new president of an expansion team called the Florida Panthers.
Twenty years ago, Torrey and Arbour hooked up and built the expansion Islanders into a Stanley Cup dynasty in less than a decade.
Might Torrey, who left the Islanders to join the Panthers, convince Arbour to join him again?


El Bireh Journal; Exile, Back Home, Finds Home Better and Worse
After 20 years in exile, Abdel Jawad Saleh went shopping again the other day in the town where he used to be Mayor.
Like a time traveler, he found himself in a different world -- in some ways better, in some ways disappointing.
One of 30 deported Palestinians whom Israel allowed back into the occupied territories after the Middle East peace talks resumed in Washington, Mr.
Saleh said his homecoming has been at once disturbing and uplifting.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
Producer prices leaped six-tenths of a percent in April, the biggest jump in two and a half years and significantly larger than most forecasters had expected.
The data raised fears over a resurgence of inflation.  [ Page A1. ]
President Clinton endorsed a proposal to require that the money raised by tax increases in his new budget and saved by cuts in spending be used solely to reduce the Federal deficit.  [ A1. ]


Classical Music in Review
Lauren Wagner Soprano Weill Recital Hall
Lauren Wagner has won prizes in competitions sponsored by Concert Artists Guild, Joy of Singing and the Pro Musicis Foundation, and on May 5 Pro Musicis presented her in a recital of American songs.


Introducing New Faces to the World of Architecture
IN the American Institute of Architects, a professional society with thousands of members, 7.48 percent of the members belong to minority groups and 9.55 percent are women.
Marc Sokol, executive/program director of the nonprofit section of SITE, a design firm in Manhattan, is trying to increase those percentages.
Last year, he developed the Architectural Youth Program for Minorities and Women, an educational after-school program for public high school students in New York.
It consists of 10 weekly two-hour architecture classes held at SITE during each public school semester.


G.E. Deal Will Help Save GPA
GPA Group P.L.C. said late today that it had reached a deal under which the General Electric Company will help the giant aircraft-leasing company avert financial collapse.
As part of the deal, G.E. would acquire 45 planes from GPA for $1.35 billion.
GPA said the deal could lead to G.E. owning as much as 80 percent of the Irish company.


Spring Heat Can't Melt Islanders' New Ice Age
The Pittsburgh Penguins may still win their third consecutive Stanley Cup championship this spring.
They are the best team in the National Hockey League.
They have the best player, Mario Lemieux, who is healthy again after suffering with back problems.
And the Penguins are playing an underdog Islander team that is without its best player, Pierre Turgeon.
But if the Penguins make it as far as the third round of the four-round tournament this time, they will need to beat the Islanders in Game 7 of the Patrick Division finals on Friday night in Pittsburgh.
That's because the Islanders beat the Penguins, 7-5, tonight at Nassau Coliseum to tie the series at three games each.


CLINTON DELAYING PLAN TO AID BOSNIA
In the face of overwhelming European opposition, President Clinton has set aside, at least for the moment, his proposal to allow weapons to flow to the Bosnian Muslims and use air strikes to keep the Serbs at bay until the arms arrive.
Interviews with senior Administration and European officials indicate that Mr.
Clinton is primarily focusing on other steps that can be carried out quickly in with the allies, amid disagreements with some of his senior officials over his strategy.


For Clinton, Barricades But Few Hands to Shake
Maybe it was the police presence that made Cooper Square look like an occupied country.
Maybe it was the prospect of waiting in the hot sun for three hours.
Or maybe, it was simply that spectacle-weary New Yorkers would just as soon have watched the whole thing on television.
Whatever the reason, the crowd greeting President Clinton when he stepped out of Cooper Union after delivering his economics address yesterday afternoon was surprisingly small by Presidential -- or New York -- standards.
At many places along the metal barricades, in fact, onlookers stood less than one deep as they waited for the chance to shake hands with Mr.
Clinton.


Classical Music in Review
New York Philharmonic Avery Fisher Hall
Colin Davis's program with the New York Philharmonic over the weekend was straightforward practicality itself: three symphonies, no soloists.
It was undoubtedly formulated to allow Mr.
Davis to look ahead to a more complex undertaking, his concert performances of Weber's opera "Der Freischutz" with the Philharmonic, which begin tonight.


Wilder's 'Wilder' Is to Close
"Wilder, Wilder, Wilder," three short plays written by Thornton Wilder and directed by Edward Berkeley, is to close after the matinee on Sunday at the Circle in the Square Theater.
The Sunday matinee will be the 44th performance.


Profits in Quarter Doubled At the News Corporation
The News Corporation, the Australian media conglomerate headed by Rupert Murdoch, reported yesterday that after-tax operating profit, after unusual items, more than doubled in its fiscal third quarter, to $129.6 million from $59.4 million in the period a year earlier.
Analysts found the results particularly impressive because revenue was off slightly, to $1.806 billion from $1.840 billion.
Because of currency fluctuations, however, revenue in terms of Australian dollars showed a gain.


Marine's Son Personalizes Gay Debate
The debate over allowing homosexuals to serve openly in the armed services, which has divided the country, has now brought one military family closer together.
The story of Col.
Fred Peck of the Marine Corps and his 24-year-old homosexual son, Scott, symbolized a poignant personal drama within a debate frequently defined by generalizations and stereotypes.


Taxable and Tax-Free Funds Have Lower Yields in Week
Yields offered by tax-exempt and taxable money market funds were down in the latest week.
Analysts said there appeared to be little chance that money market fund yields would rise or fall sharply soon.
IBC's Money Fund Report said yesterday that its latest survey showed tax-exempt money fund yields were down in the week ended Tuesday after a sharp rise the previous week.
Yields were off an average 5 basis points, or hundredths of a percentage point, as investors moved $918 million into tax-free money funds, bringing total assets to $99.6 billion.


Why Has New York City Just Recognized Small Businesses?
To the Editor:
I found your May 3 report that New York City is looking to small businesses to provide jobs right on target.
Though the Department of Business Services classifies 98 percent of all companies in New York as small shops, the city has fewer small businesses than in 1969.


When Managed Care Manages Psychotherapy; Self-Insurance Scams
To the Editor:
The Employee Benefit Research Institute chart accompanying "Health-Care Advisers Plan Exemption for Big Business" (front page, April 26) contains a seemingly innocent error with macroeconomic implications.
The chart portrays vast contributions to health care coverage by self-insured, big-company benefit plans as a "major source of health insurance." However, "self-insurance" is not insurance.


LeaRonal Inc.  reports earnings for Year to Feb 28


CHRONICLE
GIAN CARLO MENOTTI is not one to believe in completing projects far in advance.
His newest composition, a one-act opera titled "The Singing Child," is truly a work in progress.
It is scheduled to have its world premiere on May 31 at the Spoleto Festival U.S.A. in Charleston, S.C.
That is, the Pulitzer Prize-winning composer and director said yesterday, "if I get it finished."
"Every time I do this, I say I won't go through that agony again," he said, "but then I always postpone that terrible moment when I must freeze my inspiration on a sheet of blank paper."


You Read The Book, Now Quiz The Author
Years before she became a best-selling author, Sue Miller enjoyed the intellectual challenge and camaraderie of a reading group.
She and some academic colleagues from the Boston area met every few weeks for nearly eight years to discuss Kundera, Foucault and Coetzee.
It was an eclectic group, with one Marxist member who would rail against Isak Dinesen's works for paternalistic colonialism while another, a feminist critic, defended them.


ICH Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


John Hersey Memorial
A memorial service for the writer John Hersey is to be held on Saturday at 2 P.M. at Battell Chapel of Yale University, Elm and College Streets in New Haven.
Mr.
Hersey, who won the Pulitzer Prize in 1944 for his novel "A Bell for Adano," died on March 24 at his home in Key West, Fla., at 78.
Howard R. Lamar, Yale's president, and others are to speak.
Mr.
Hersey graduated from Yale in 1936.


KnowledgeWare Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Corrections
A table yesterday showing localities with high levels of lead in water carried an incomplete description of the statistics.
The table listed water systems serving more than 50,000 customers apiece and identified as exceeding the Federal lead standard.
The number shown for each system was the minimum measurement in the 10 percent of houses with the worst lead levels.
The measurements were expressed in parts per billion.


Ewing and a Rookie Team Up in Crunch
This was the year that Patrick Ewing finally got the supporting cast he deserved.
This was the night it more or less deserted him.
This was the game that Ewing wound up with Hubert Davis, a rookie benchwarmer, as his partner in the Knicks' playoff dance.
Strange partners, to say the least, yet here was Ewing, with the ball in the lane, nowhere to go, looking for help in the final crucial seconds of a 99-99 game in overtime.
There was Davis, out on the right perimeter, all by himself, his hands in the air.


New York's subway puts its problems on the line in a campaign.
A BROOKLYN teen-ager loved the subway so much that he impersonated a motorman and spent nearly three and a half hours behind the controls of an A train.
But can the Metropolitan Transportation Authority persuade more New Yorkers to love the subway enough to ride it as passengers?
The M.T.A. is introducing the second phase of an advertising campaign aimed at burnishing the besmirched image of a mode of transportation that is sworn at as much as it is sworn by.


Clinton Names Head Of Stock Exchange As Envoy to Mexico
The Clinton Administration has chosen the chairman of the American Stock Exchange, James R. Jones, as the new United States Ambassador to Mexico, American officials said today.
Mr.
Jones, a former Democratic Congressman from Oklahoma and senior aide to President Johnson, would replace John D. Negroponte, a career diplomat who has served during a period in which relations between the two countries have grown warmer than at almost any time since the 1910 Mexican Revolution.


Terrorism From Colombia
Fourteen months have passed since Colombian drug lords murdered Manuel de Dios Unanue in New York City for writing muckraking stories about the drug trade.
As time slipped by, anguished friends and family asserted that police were dragging their feet because Mr. de Dios was from the Spanish-language press and little known to the English-speaking audience.
Not so.
The portrait of the investigation that emerged this week showed that police had worked quietly but doggedly to break the case.
The results so far should provide solace for Mr. de Dios's friends and family.
For President Clinton and his new drug czar, Lee Brown, this murder should be an alarming reminder of how deeply the Colombian drug lords have penetrated American defenses.


Giving Time and Pillows To Help the Homeless
ASK a fashion designer to make a pillow, or an interior designer to set a table, and if the goal is to benefit the homeless people of New York, usually they say yes.
On Tuesday, 175 witty, one-of-a-kind pillows by fashion designers like Carolina Herrera, Todd Oldham and Richard Tyler will be auctioned at a cocktail party at Harvey's Chelsea House, 108 West 18th Street.
The silent auction will benefit Housing Works, a nonprofit organization that finds permanent housing for people with AIDS or H.I.V.
Next Thursday, 11 interior designers, including Robert Metzger, Vicente Wolf and Michael de Santis, will be on Central Park West in a model apartment overlooking the park, perched at tables they have set, regaling guests who will have paid to chat with them.
Proceeds will benefit Furnish a Future, a nonprofit group that accepts donations of new and old furniture, picks it up and gives it to people who have been living in shelters and are about to move into permanent housing.
Furnish a Future is a program of the Partnership for the Homeless in Manhattan.
Tickets to the Housing Works benefit are $100 for donors, $250 for patrons.
Information: (212) 977-9317.
Tickets to the Furnish a Future benefit are $350 and include cocktails and dinner.
Information: (212) 645-3444, ext. 116.


Accounts
*
BAe Corporate Jets, Washington, to Keiler &amp; Company, Farmington, Conn., to handle its account, previously at Wyble Advertising, Millville, N.J.
Keiler was awarded the account, with billings estimated at $4 million, after a review that included the incumbent and the Richards Group, Dallas.
Also, the Savings Bank of Manchester, Conn., awarded its $1 million account to Keiler.
The account was previously handled by Decker, Rickard, Glastonbury, Conn.


Quidel Corp. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Bosnia and the Credibility Trap
The debate over U.S. military intervention in Bosnia is reaching a fever pitch.
Senators Bob Dole and Joseph Biden are talking tough from both sides of the aisle.
Newsweek warned in its latest issue that President Clinton "can't back down without looking weak." A Time magazine cover story stated that the President will "risk a loss of credibility by backing away." And on Sunday's "McLaughlin Group," the pundit Fred Barnes promised that without intervention -- unilateral if necessary -- Mr.
Clinton will henceforth be considered "President Marshmallow."
Such arguments have surrounded every dispute over using U.S. military force since the cold war began.
As recently as the gulf war, proponents of military action argued that free and open debate over sending troops to free Kuwait would give aid and comfort to Saddam Hussein, as if the proper functioning of a democratic system undermines protection of a democratic society.
Even worse, frequently during the cold war America's leaders insisted on military action that they admitted had little strategic importance.
Henry Kissinger defended the Vietnam War as a means of pretecting our "credibility" in such places as "the Middle East, Europe, Latin America, even Japan."


Pop and Jazz in Review
Tom Jones  Limelight
In prospect, it made no sense: Tom Jones, the Welsh pop belter of cheesy 1960's hits, performing in the Tuesday night Communion series at Limelight, which is usually dedicated to the latest blasts of harsh electronic dance music.
When it was over, it still made no sense; Mr.
Jones had concentrated on 1960's soul hits, and in his 90-minute set he used the word "love" more often than any dozen of Communion's usual performers.
He also pumped his hips and smilingly leered in ways that 1990's bands would find distinctly uncool.


ITALIAN EXECUTIVE FACES GRAFT CASE
The head of the biggest Italian public corporation, with interests from banks and supermarkets to the national airline Alitalia, was arrested on corruption charges today as the 15-month-old bribery investigation pressed deeper into the vast state industries.
Franco Nobili, head of the giant Istituto per la Ricostruzione Industriale, was seized in Rome and transferred to San Vittore Prison in Milan, investigators said.


In Praise of a Praiser
To The Home Section:
Your article "Amid the Wildflowers With Lady Bird Johnson: Spreading the Natural Colors of a Great Society" (May 6) had the delicate touch; she is a special person and does shun personal publicity -- except for a cause.


Regency Health Services reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Backer Spielvolgel Names Top Officers
Backer Spielvogel Bates Worldwide announced changes yesterday in top-level management positions at its European operations.
Gunther Gahren, 65, who has been managing director at Scholz &amp; Friends, a Backer Spielvogel unit in Hamburg, Germany, has been named chairman at BSB Europe in London.
He succeeds Michael Bungey, who was promoted to president and chief operating officer at Backer Spielvogel last year.
Peter Martin Schoning, 47, a partner at Scholz &amp; Friends, has been appointed managing director at Scholz, succeeding Mr.
Gahren.
And Michael Geraghty, 56, who has been commercial development director at BSB Europe, has been promoted to the new position of chief operating officer at the agency.


Producer Price Rise Jars Treasury Market
There was a rude awakening for the Treasury market yesterday: The April jump in producer price inflation was much higher than expected and signaled that there is less hope now for a new rally based on declining inflation.
The metaphorical slap in the face pushed prices lower, with the 30-year bond down 19/32 point and the yield up to 6.85 percent, from 6.81 percent Tuesday.
The prices of two-year to five-year notes fell much less, however, because inflation, which erodes the value of fixed-income investments, has less impact on shorter-term securities.


Learning the Ins and Outs of Circus Life


A PRICE RISE FANS INFLATION CONCERN
An unexpected surge in wholesale prices last month, the latest of a string of higher price reports, left many economists and investors wondering whether the inflation genie was starting to slip out of the bottle.
Producer prices leaped six-tenths of a percent in April, the Labor Department reported yesterday.
That jump -- the biggest in two and a half years and significantly larger than most forecasters expected -- unsettled everyone from bond investors to homeowners who had not gotten around to refinancing their mortgages and worried that an uptick in inflation could push interest rates higher. 4.7% Annual Rate
Although bad weather was partly to blame and the monthly rate probably exaggerates the average increases over a longer stretch of time, the spurt suggested that the sanguine inflation forecasts of the Federal Reserve and the Clinton Administration, of 2.5 to 3 percent for the year, could ultimately prove a shade too rosy.


One Less Thing to Believe In: Fraud at Fake Cash Machine
This is a tale of audacity, high-tech thievery and, to no small degree, loss of innocence.
For it seems that even the lowly automated teller machine, so common as to be almost invisible in malls and marketplaces everywhere, is not always to be trusted.
For two weeks, an ATM machine -- ordinary-looking in just about every way, but completely bogus -- operated in a shopping mall near here, giving nothing but apologetic receipts that said no transactions were possible.
Meanwhile, police investigators and bank officials say, the machine was recording the card numbers and the personal identification numbers that hundreds of customers entered in their vain attempts to make the machine dispense cash.
Let the Fraud Begin
Starting late last Friday in Manhattan, while the machine was still running at the Buckland Hills Mall in Manchester, the first withdrawals began.
Using counterfeit bank cards encoded with the numbers stolen from Connecticut customers, the thieves strolled through midtown Manhattan, tapping into the 24-hour automated teller network, and netting, by today, at least $50,000.


Corrections
An obituary on Saturday about Rowland H. George, an investor and health insurance pioneer who died on May 6 at the age of 98, referred incorrectly to one of his employers and to the length of his second marriage.
The employer was Halsey, Stuart &amp; Company.
Mr.
George was married for 48 years.


H &amp; H Oil Tool Co. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Art in Review
'Three Masters, Three Decades'
Laurence Miller Gallery  138 Spring Street  SoHo  Through tomorrow
The drama of city children at play is a central theme of this fascinating show, which features photographs by Henri Cartier-Bresson, Helen Levitt and Roger Mayne.
Working in different cities and different decades, the three artists recorded children as they turned urban streets into places of magic and mystery.


Agency Rejects Japan's Bid for Limited Whaling
Japan suffered an embarrassing setback today in its efforts to resume whaling when the International Whaling Commission rejected a compromise proposal that would have allowed Japan to engage in limited hunting close to its shores.
The vote in the commission's annual meeting came as no surprise, in that Japan has lost on this issue year after year.
But this year, as host of the meeting, Japan made a concerted effort to push for resumption of whaling, supported by dozens of whalers and fishermen who demonstrated outside the conference hall.
The setback prompted vague threats from Japan that it would leave the regulatory body.


Review/Film; A Western in the Hands of a Revisionist
"Posse," a big, brawny western starring and directed by Mario Van Peebles, displays a stormy love-hate relationship with westerns gone by.
On the one hand, this obviously talented film maker celebrates all the aggrandizing features of the genre: the laconic tough talk, the manly camaraderie, the proud posturing, the power of walking tall past the awestruck citizenry of a prairie town.
On the other hand, "Posse" does its best to reject and avenge what it regards as the flagrant distortions of the past.
So the turbulent, high-voltage "Posse" is part entertainment and part history lesson.
In the course of describing the adventures of a band of black heroes (with one token white boy in their midst), it also seeks redress for the racial attitudes of Hollywood's most thoughtless cowboys-and-Indians pictures.
Mr.
Van Peebles and his screenwriters, Sy Richardson and Dario Scardapane, care most about making their points emphatically, even if that sometimes leaves "Posse" riding heavy in the saddle.
Luckily, most of their film is fast-paced and star-studded enough to avoid an overly preachy tone.


Art in Review
James Welling
Jay Gorney Modern Art  100 Greene Street (near Spring Street)  SoHo  Through May 29
The Industrial Revolution and its ambiguous legacy hover in the background of James Welling's latest photographs.
In stark black-and-white images, Mr.
Welling records the looms and other machines of lace factories in Calais, France.


Saudis Crack Down on a Dissident Islamic Group
After years of tolerating unrestrained growth of militant fundamentalist practices, the Saudi Government has adopted a series of measures signaling its readiness to crack down on Muslim dissidents accused of using religion to further their political aims.
Citing the "dictates of the public interest," the Saudi Government announced the dismissal today of four militant Muslim scholars from Government jobs at universities and ordered the closure two fundamentalist lawyers' offices.


Senator Sues Over Lost Trust Fund
Senator Christopher S. Bond of Missouri sued Paine Webber Group Inc. and a former Paine Webber investment adviser today, charging that he lost more than $1 million from a blind trust because of the adviser's "Federal securities fraud."
Mr.
Bond, a lawyer who comes from a wealthy brick-making family, opened the trust in 1973 to avoid the appearance of conflict of interest when he was elected Governor of Missouri.
Such trusts became common after Watergate led to an increase in concern over politicians' ethics.


Art in Review
Magdalena Abakanowicz
P.S. 1 Museum  46-01 21st Street  Long Island City  Queens  Through June 20
Marlborough Gallery  40 West 57th Street  Through June 5
With their massive scale and intense expressivity, Magdalena Abakanowicz's sculptures titled "War Games" at P.S. 1 are a memorable sight.
Each piece consists of a single fallen tree -- found by the artist in the forests of her native Poland and stripped of branches and bark -- fitted with steel bands or capping devices and often partly swathed in burlap.


Falcons Woo Allen
Free agent MARCUS ALLEN dined with Falcons officials yesterday in Atlanta and prepared to talk contract.


Ares-Serono reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


CBS Throws a Curveball to Baseball's Owners
Major league baseball owners gathered today with hopes of firming up their television future by hashing out a proposed joint venture with ABC and NBC.
But the owners left this Chicago suburb not with a definitive decision but with a new wrinkle prompted by some of their own.
CBS, saying it was acting in part at the behest of some of the owners, tried to force a reopening of the bidding war by announcing it has offered baseball a guaranteed two-year contract extension that would mean more money for the game.


Spain and Portugal in Devaluations
Europe's embattled monetary system was shaken again today when Spain and Portugal reduced the value of their currencies, casting additional doubt on the European Community's plans to forge closer economic links.
The actions come five days before Denmark is to vote a second time on whether to ratify the treaty on European union, which sets out a process for creating a single currency and a European central bank.


Annual Food Festival
The 20th Annual Ninth Avenue International Food Festival, featuring booths from restaurants and food specialty shops, craft exhibits and live music, will be held from 11 A.M. to 7 P.M. tomorrow and Sunday from 37th to 57th Street in Manhattan.
Information: (212) 581-7217.


Pentagon Panel Weighs Keeping Much of Gay Ban
A Pentagon panel appointed to devise ways to allow homosexuals to serve in the military has proposed two plans, one of which would keep many parts of the current ban, senior Defense Department officials said today.
The second option presented by the panel, which is composed of 50 military officers and enlisted personnel, would allow declared homosexuals to serve in the armed forces but would ban homosexual conduct.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
6.50
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
3.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
2.93
2.95
4.00
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
2.90
2.88
3.58
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.01
2.99
3.69
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
5.62
5.53
6.99
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
6.95
6.85
7.86
TELEPHONE BONDS
7.87
7.77
8.81
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
5.86
5.85
6.63
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Sports of The Times; Kasparaitis Doesn't Duck Superstars
THE entire New York region owes a mighty debt to the hockey team called the Islanders and the basketball team called the Knicks.
Without these worthy chaps, this spring would have long since given way to terminal ennui.
Drive the Expressway to see the Mets?
No thank you.
Instead, in the wall-to-wall-mall of Long Island, they will be huddled in front of the collective tube tonight, watching a game of massive importance.
The Islanders, one game away from being the destiny's darlings of their time, will be playing the Stanley Cup champions in Pittsburgh for the right to keep going.


Danka Business Systems (NMS) reports earnings for Year to March 31


'The Corner': Where Immigrants and Jobs Intersect; Mamaroneck's Informal Job Market Offers a Sweat-of-the-Brow Kind of Foreign Aid
Dawn had just broken, but already the corner of Jefferson Avenue and Van Ranst Place was buzzing.
As a red sports car pulled up to the curb, about a dozen men sprinted to its side from a nearby park, all of them craning to get a word with the driver.
Moments later, the crowd was dispersing, except for Benny Lorensana, a 22-year-old native of Guatemala, who climbed into the passenger seat, flashing the thumb's up sign as the car sped off.


BADILLO DROPS OUT OF RACE FOR MAYOR WITH SPARSE FUNDS
Herman Badillo dropped out of the New York City Democratic mayoral primary yesterday and Rudolph W. Giuliani, the Republican challenger, said he was seeking an alliance with Mr.
Badillo running for city comptroller instead.
The sudden elaborate maneuvering showed the crucial importance of Hispanic voters in this year's mayoral race and could spell trouble for Mayor David N. Dinkins, who defeated Mr.
Giuliani by just 2 percentage points with strong Hispanic support in 1989.


Apartment House Burns in Brooklyn Heights


On My Mind; Mugged but Not Out
A writer takes a small truth and uses it to create a large falsehood and carry out a political mugging.
Boring: it happens every day in the gutter press.
But the piece of nastiness I have in mind is in a much-promoted $30 book of memoirs.
And it is about me.
Those circumstances sharpen my interest.


U.S. Move Fails To Win Support In Mideast Talks
In its first intervention in the current Middle East peace talks, the United States tried but failed today to persuade the Israelis and the Palestinians to agree to a statement outlining the principles of Palestinian self-rule in the occupied territories.
The effort, which began Wednesday night and went on throughout the night and into today, marked a change for the United States from a relatively passive mediator into an active participant in the 18-month negotiations.
Setback for Clinton
Its rejection meant that the Israelis and Palestinians ended their three-week round of talks today without making real progress.
It also represented a setback for the Clinton Administration, which had hoped that by playing the role of "full partner" it could help produce results during the first talks conducted since it took office, particularly after its campaign to bring the Palestinians back to the peace table after a nearly five-month hiatus.


Elaborate Scheme Found For Armored-Car Thefts
Describing a far more elaborate scheme than they had originally laid out, Federal prosecutors said today that the owners of a Long Island armored-car company bribed bank officials and used fake paper work to steal $38 million from their clients.
New details of the case emerged in an indictment unsealed today.
Officials said the scheme involved a network of company employees, bank officials and a private accountant, adding that it may have been the largest cash theft in United States history.


Monk-Austin Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


ITT Canada reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Review/Film; Father and Son Find Each Other Again
When Martin Bell made "Streetwise," his highly praised documentary about teen-age vagrants living by their wits on the streets of Seattle, he conjured up a world of clever scams and survival strategies that seemed almost too good to be true.
"American Heart," Mr.
Bell's fictional film that unfolds in a similarly colorful setting, has remarkable verisimilitude and much of the same gritty, honest spirit.
It would be hard to believe some of the events described here if they did not correspond so closely to the earlier film's observations, and if they did not also seem so utterly right.
This tough, audacious film maker eloquently captures both the bitterness and the promise of his characters' lives.


Editors' Note
A diagram on the Health page on May 5 with two articles about mastectomies depicted types of breast surgery, using information from the American Medical Association Encyclopedia of Medicine.
Other experts disagree with some aspects of the descriptions and suggest that these would be more accurate:


Italy Intensifies Crackdown on Organized Crime
The Italian Senate voted by a show of hands today to strip former Prime Minister Giulio Andreotti of immunity from investigation into charges of Mafia association, even as law enforcement agencies rounded up scores of mobsters from all three of the country's principal organized crime gangs.
The two developments were not directly connected, but they illuminated a dramatic shift from only a few years ago when the mob seemed to act with impunity because of what many Italians perceived as high-level political protection in Rome.


Accounts
*
LOT Polish Airlines, New York and Warsaw, to Anderson &amp; Lembke, New York, to handle its North American consumer account, previously handled by Partners &amp; Shevack, New York.
Billings were not disclosed.


Loral Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Egypt Frees and Deports Americans
Apparently under pressure from Washington, President Hosni Mubarak has ordered the release and deportation of three Americans detained in February for proselytizing and promoting Christianity, their lawyer said this week.
The lawyer, Magda Fathi Rashwan, said Brian Eckheart of Buffalo Center, Iowa; Richard P. Dugan Jr. of Fort Wayne, Ind., and Robert M. Cunningham of South Weymouth, Mass., left for Cyprus on Monday on their way back to the United States.
The men were pardoned by President Mubarak last week, she said.


G.M. Warns Of Pension Financing
If interest rates stay low through Oct. 1, the unfunded pension liability of the General Motors Corporation could increase to $19 billion or $20 billion by the end of 1993, up from $14 billion, the auto maker said in documents distributed today.
In a filing with the Securities and Exchange Commission, G.M. said it might be forced to take a $1.8 billion charge against equity by the end of the year to reflect the higher liability.
The charge would not affect earnings but would reduce shareholder equity.


Quilt Festival at Pier
The Great American Quilt Festival, with 110 exhibitors, continues through Sunday at New York Exhibition Pier No. 92, on the Hudson River at West 52d Street, Berths 5 and 6.
It is sponsored by the Museum of American Folk Art and Sanford L. Smith &amp; Associates.
Tickets: $10 for one day; $17 for two days.
Hours: Today, 10 A.M. to 8 P.M.; tomorrow, 10 A.M. to 7 P.M., and Sunday, 10 A.M. to 6 P.M.
Information: (212) 977-7170.


Civil Rights Nominee's Words Make Her a Target
When President Clinton spoke publicly this week about Lani Guinier, his choice to head the Justice Department's civil rights division, he recalled how she had once sued him when he was Governor of Arkansas.
The lesson, he told the audience, was that if he could put up with that, "the Senate should be able to put up with a little controversy" concerning his choice as civil rights chief.


For Children
Picnic Sites
Riverside Park, from 79th Street to 91st Street  Manhattan
(212) 408-0264  Recommended for all ages
May is the time when people start planning picnics, and this section of Riverside Park is prime picnic territory, with lots of green lawns (without much debris), trees to provide comforting shade and the beauty of apple and cherry trees and a community garden filled with Popsicle-colored flowers.
There is also a recently renovated playground.


Gold Reaches Its High Mark Since Late '91
A gale of commodity market wagering and a puff of inflation swept gold prices yesterday to the highest levels since late 1991.
Gold rose $7.50 an ounce to $369.30 on the Commodity Exchange in New York.
Open interest in call options, which allow buyers to multiply their gains from a rise in gold prices, vaulted to a record.


Review/Art; How Underwear Became Outerwear
The average exhibition of clothing doesn't include words like ontological on its text panels, but "Infra-Apparel" at the Costume Institute of the Metropolitan Museum of Art is not average.
The Metropolitan debut of Richard Martin and Harold Koda, who became curator and associate curator at the institute in January, "Infra-Apparel" is beautiful, witty, occasionally pretentious and brimming with ideas.
It also treats an ostensibly sensational subject in a way that is both serious and entertaining.
"Infra-Apparel" examines the influence of intimate apparel -- corsets as well as corset covers, nightgowns, petticoats, morning dresses and slips -- on the evolution of more public garments over the last two centuries.
It moves from late 18th-century corsets, and the relatively loose, chemiselike Empire dresses that superseded them in the Napoleonic era, to Madonna and beyond.


COMPANY NEWS
AMERICA WEST AIRLINES, Phoenix, asked for a sixth extension of the deadline for filing a bankruptcy reorganization plan, to Oct. 13 from June 15, saying its improved performance last quarter has drawn new interest from potential investors.
BROADWAY &amp; SEYMOUR INC., Charlotte, N.C., a unit of Effective Management Systems, completed the previously announced acquisition of Corbel &amp; Co. for about $18 million in cash and stock.


Teams' Tempers Flare After the Last Out
The Yankees and Brewers do not like each other and that was obvious last night when Kevin Reimer's flailing elbow nicked Jim Leyritz in the back on the final out of the game and almost caused the two clubs to square off in a brawl.
With two outs in the ninth, Reimer grounded back to Steve Farr, who threw to Leyritz.
Videotape replays seemed to show Reimer brush against Leyritz as he crossed first and the Yankees clinched the 4-2 victory.
Leyritz said Reimer "clipped him pretty good" but also said it might have been accidental.
Reimer did not remember hitting Leyritz, but that did not prevent both dugouts from emptying in a flash.


Art in Review
Antonius Hockelmann
Michael Werner Gallery  21 East 67th Street  Manhattan  Through June 11
This impressive show is New York's first look at the art of Antonius Hockelmann, an eccentric German sculptor now in his mid-50's, who exhibited in Berlin and Cologne in the 1960's and early 70's before dropping out of the art scene.
Mr.
Hockelmann was known as an obsessive reworker, who destroyed as much sculpture as he made and labored for years on an enormous, unfinished gesamtkunstwerk, or environment.


Mets Get Bad News To Go With the Good
One run would have been enough support for Pete Schourek this afternoon, but the Mets -- always a relief pitcher away from disaster -- figured four runs represented a rounder, safer number.
New York extended batting practice into the first two innings and won a rare 4-0 game when Schourek (2-3) tinkered with his windup and put hitches in St.
Louis Cardinal swings with his dipping, off-speed deliveries.


Scitex Corp. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Weizman Is Sworn In as New Israeli President


Rogers Communications Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Kelly Appoints a Deputy To Watch Internal Affairs
Attempting to keep his Internal Affairs Bureau from falling under the control of an outside monitor, Police Commissioner Raymond W. Kelly yesterday announced the appointment of a Deputy Commissioner for Internal Affairs.
The creation of the new post is the latest in a series of changes that Mr.
Kelly has made to shore up the system for uncovering corrupt police officers.
The move comes at a crucial time for the department, as a mayoral commission considers establishing the position of an outside inspector general who would take the ultimate authority over Internal Affairs out of Mr.
Kelly's hands.


Newsome Has to Retire
Cleveland Browns safety VINCE NEWSOME retired yesterday because of a narrowing of the spine discovered in a routine examination.
Newsome, 32, started 31 games for Cleveland the last two seasons after being acquired as a Plan B free agent from the Los Angeles Rams.
He started all 16 of the Browns' games last season and had no plans to retire until the spinal condition was discovered.


'Knots Landing' Has Signed Off; Islanders Next?
How do the Islanders like their lines?
Scrambled.
What speed setting do they use for their pace?
Breakneck.
When will they find out whether they are genuine upset artists or mere pretenders to the Penguin throne?
Friday night.
The Islanders' springtime soap opera sent its strange cast of characters to Pittsburgh this afternoon, after a 7-5 victory Wednesday night, to prepare for a final showdown with the two-time defending Stanley Cup champion Penguins.


U.N. Presses Croats to Free 1,500 Muslims Held at a Base
Watched by armed guards and locked behind bolted doors, more than 1,500 men, women and children, nearly all of them Muslims, remained crowded inside a former military base near here today while the United Nations and relief agencies pressed their Croatian captors for their release.
The day after warring Bosnian Croats and Muslims signed an agreement promising to muzzle weapons, open roads and free civilians taken into custody during several days of heavy fighting, crucial provisions of the accord were still not being carried out by local commanders and soldiers scattered across this rugged region of south-central Bosnia and Herzegovina.


Attorney General to Review Rerun Rights for Networks
Hinting at the possibility of a major policy reversal, Attorney General Janet Reno has summoned lawyers for ABC, CBS and NBC to discuss rules that prevent them from owning the rerun rights to prime-time programs.
The meeting, which network officials said today would take place next Tuesday, indicates that the Justice Department might be considering a change in its decision to seek the removal of some antitrust restrictions on the networks.


Trade Agreement Will Cost Jobs and Revenue
To the Editor:
You report on declining New York City employment, health-care legislation, trade policy and the North American Free Trade Agreement all on one day (April 28), connected issues that beg for connection.
The decline of employment will be substantially augmented by health-care-reform tax proposals, which will, justifiably or not, raise the costs of doing business in this city.
Simultaneously, trade policy and the North American trade agreement combine to open the eyes of smaller manufacturers in New York and its region to the possibilities of moving production operations to Mexico.
One company may have found it unprofitable, but hundreds of others are having a different experience.


Law Enforcer vs. Pennsylvania Crime Commission
The Pennsylvania Crime Commission is a little-known investigative agency that spends much of its time looking for mobsters in the solid-waste industry.
Many lawmakers of both parties consider it a toothless tiger and a waste of money, and they want to eliminate it from the state budget.
This year they may succeed.
But before the crime commission goes out of business, it might just take Attorney General Ernest D. Preate Jr. -- next year's probable Republican candidate for governor -- down with it.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-10  U.S.
REBUFFED ON MIDEAST PLAN  In its first intervention in the current Middle East peace talks, the United States tried but failed to convince the Israelis and Palestinians to agree to a statement outlining principles of Palestinian self-rule in the occupied territories.
A1  VIOLATIONS OF BOSNIA ACCORD  The day after warring Bosnian Croats and Muslims signed an accord, important provisions were still not being observed by local commanders.
Fighting continued, and roads remained blocked.
A1


Sponsors are toasting the 'Cheers' finale at a price of $650,000 for every 30-second spot.
WILL NBC shed tears for the end of "Cheers"?
Sure, the network will be crying all the way to the bank.
The last original episode in the situation comedy's 11-season run, to be broadcast next Thursday, will command an eye-popping $650,000 for each 30-second commercial.
That's a record for any entertainment program in television history.


More Power to the Powerful
It is time to transform the Group of Seven, a loose and often ineffective cluster of rich countries, into a real international steering committee that can deal with the economic and security challenges of the post-cold-war world.
The need for collective action is mounting.
With the Balkans in turmoil, Russia unraveling, the world economy stagnating and weapons of mass destruction proliferating to renegade nations such as North Korea, the United States and its G-7 partners can watch the world drift into chaos or can assert leadership.
At another turning point, after World War II, Washington provided such leadership.
Today, America cannot -- and should not -- play this role on its own.


Fading Picture
Shares of American Studios Inc., the portrait photography company serving more than 1,700 Wal-Mart stores nationwide, lost almost 40 percent of their value yesterday, after Robinson-Humphrey, the underwriter that took the company public last year, lowered its rating.
Analysts are concerned about lower sales because of American Studio's link to Wal-Mart, which has lost some of its own retailing luster.


Even From a Distance, Petrovic Is Unwavering
It was the first time Drazen Petrovic had been home in the last eight or nine months.
He left the United States on Tuesday night and on Thursday, in a telephone conversation from his strife-torn home of Zagreb, Croatia, from his mother's house, he stood firm on his claim that there was no way he would return to the Nets next season.
While other Nets and many other pro players are resting at home and watching the National Basketball Association playoffs, Petrovic, forever tireless, is practicing with the Croatian national team as it prepares for the world basketball championships in late June.


Babbage's Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to May 1


With Clatter and Clang, Trolley Museum Revives
GLUB, glub, glub went the trolley.
No, no, no went Ted Eickmann, the maintenance chief on the nation's oldest continuously operated suburban trolley line.
Maybe not in those exact words.
When a big northeaster blustered across the Connecticut coast last Dec. 11, there wasn't time to say a whole lot or to write it down for future reference.


Money Fund Assets Down
The total assets of the nation's 632 retail money market mutual funds decreased $1.02 billion, to $385.93 billion, for the week ended Wednesday, the Investment Company Institute said yesterday.
The assets of the 396 taxable retail money market funds were down $943.3 million, to $305.65 billion, while the assets of the 236 retail tax-exempt funds decreased $75.1 million, to $80.28 billion.


Knicks Find Way To Pull One Out: He's Named Davis
Hubert Davis probably woke up Thursday morning wondering if Wednesday night had been a dream.
Meanwhile, the Charlotte Hornets had to recover from another late-game nightmare.
The Knicks' 105-101 overtime victory against Charlotte in Game 2 of their second-round playoff series was New York's most dramatic and important comeback of the season, considering it happened during the playoffs.
The Knicks trailed by 13 points with less than seven minutes left in regulation, and they still trailed by 8 points with three and a half minutes left.


PRESIDENT SELECTS LEADER FOR F.A.A.
President Clinton today named David R. Hinson, an aerospace executive and former Navy fighter pilot, to head the Federal Aviation Administration.
Mr.
Hinson, 60, has firsthand experience with the kind of financial problems now besetting the industry, having served as chairman of Midway Airlines a small, scrappy Chicago-based carrier that was crushed two years ago by its $153 million debt.
He would be the first administrator with wide experience in military and general aviation, domestic carriers and aircraft manufacturing.
He has more than 9,000 flying hours piloting 70 different aircraft, from DC-3's to MD-11's.


DEMOCRAT MOCKS HEALTH-CARE IDEA
An influential Congressman said today that managed competition, the health policy favored by President Clinton, is "a fairy tale" and would probably not be the basis for any legislation passed by Congress to overhaul the nation's health-care system.
Representative Pete Stark, the California Democrat who heads the Ways and Means Subcommittee on Health, made the comments as he issued a report from the Congressional Budget Office.
The report said the strategy of managed competition could reduce health-care spending, but the study expressed doubt whether Americans were willing to make the radical changes needed to achieve such savings.


Review/Film; Even a Beast Is Sweet as Can Be
What will American children make of "My Neighbor Totoro," a Japanese animated film whose tone is so relentlessly goody-goody that it crosses the line from sweet into saccharine?
The film creates an idealized vision of family life that is even more unreal than the perkiest 1950's television sitcom.
In this storybook world, parents possess infinite reserves of encouragement and patience, and their children are unfailingly polite and responsible little angels.
In the English-language version of the film, the actors speak in such uniformly cheery and soothing tones that they could turn even an incorrigible optimist like Mr.
Rogers into a grouch.


Something for (or From) Everybody
From the top of the income ladder to the bottom, from the big-city professional with a portfolio of tax-free bonds to the single parent on the minimum wage, people would face important changes under provisions of the tax law approved today by a Congressional committee.
The fundamentals of the proposal adopted by the tax-writing House Ways and Means Committee are easy enough to state.
For example, just as the Clinton Administration proposed, it would raise the top income tax rates to nearly 40 percent, and it would expand the tax credit that adds cash to the earnings of many poor workers.


Review/Theater; Life After Fooling The Angel of Death
Hypocrisy fights the Hippocratic oath in Evan Handler's "Time on Fire," a laceratingly funny and self-revealing one-man show about the actor's survival of a medical ordeal.
Afflicted with acute myeloid leukemia and told that the chances of reversal were slim, Mr.
Handler finds surprising solace in a hospital visit from a rabbi.
The rabbi tells him an ancient story.
By changing their names, he says, people can make it more difficult for the Angel of Death to find them.
Years later, recovered from his illness, Mr.
Handler realizes that he has in fact "fooled the Angel of Death." It is a moment of euphoria that is shared by theatergoers at Second Stage, where Mr.
Handler is performing his monodrama.
Although he was cured through a bone-marrow transplant, his healing is also one of self-recovery.
As he makes clear in this memoir onstage, he has come through with a surer sense of his own identity and a greater feeling of time escaping.
From now on, for Mr.
Handler time is on fire.


Suspended Start?
Philadelphia Eagles defensive end TIM HARRIS, arrested last week on a drunken-driving charge, failed his blood-alcohol test, California police said yesterday.
Harris, who has a hearing May 27 in Santa Cruz, Calif., faces a possible National Football League suspension if convicted because this would be his second offense in 19 months.


A First for Syracuse
MARIANNA FREEMAN, a longtime assistant at Iowa, one of the nation's most successful women's basketball programs, became the new Syracuse coach yesterday.
She is the first black to be named a head basketball coach at Syracuse.
Freeman replaces BARBARA JACOBS, who resigned in March after 15 years at Syracuse.


Choice of Vatican Envoy, Abortion Foe, Is Opposed
A group of feminists and population-control advocates is opposing the appointment of Mayor Raymond L. Flynn of Boston as Ambassador to the Vatican because of his strongly anti-abortion views.
A joint statement opposing the appointment of Mr.
Flynn, a staunch Catholic, has drawn signatures from 30 organizations, including the Planned Parenthood Federation of America, the Association of Reproductive Health Professionals and Zero Population Growth.


PEC Israel Economic reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Choice of TV System Shifting Into a Political Brawl on Jobs
With only months remaining before the Federal Government is to select a national standard for high-definition television, the contest between several rival systems is quickly being transformed from a technical competition to a political brawl over which system would create the most jobs.
The fight, the first real test of how industrial policy will develop under the Clinton Administration, involves a central pillar in the Government's effort to rejuvenate the American electronics industry.
Lobbying by Governors
The Governors of Pennsylvania and Indiana have both lobbied on behalf of one of the proposals, because the two big European companies backing it have promised to build television sets at factories in their states if the system is chosen as the standard.
That has drawn protest from other companies in the competition, which argue that the jobs impact cannot be measured by assembly work alone.


Review/Film; Simon's Serious Comedy Of Contemporary Nostalgia
Within the canon of its author's work, the Pulitzer Prize-winning "Lost in Yonkers" is an oxymoron.
This is the serious Neil Simon play, the heartbreaking family comedy, the nostalgia piece with the strangely contemporary air.
Whichever way you look at it, Mr.
Simon's best-received play is one of his most idiosyncratic, being the story of an emotionally arrested child-woman, her Prussian general of a mother, two temporarily abandoned teen-age boys and their gangster uncle, who is either "a henchman" or "a hunchback," depending upon who in the family is asked to describe him.
Only because it comes from Mr.
Simon does this material take on universal appeal.
"Lost in Yonkers" somehow isolates a central vision of domestic love and conflict, one that emerges more and more clearly as the play focuses tightly on Bella, the young woman yearning for independence, and Grandma, the mother who refuses to let her go.
Before it is over, the story has traded in its more whimsical touches for moments of real anguish, and for a riveting climactic argument between these two formidable women.


French Disavow Accord On Farm-Trade Subsidy
The new center-right French Cabinet unveiled a tough trade policy today, rejecting a trans-Atlantic agreement on farm subsidies reached in November, rebuking the United States for reprisals, and arguing that liberalism in world trade is not sufficient in itself at a time when many European jobs are threatened.
The five-page statement, released by Prime Minister Edouard Balladur, amounted to a call for a review of European trade policy as far-reaching as that being undertaken by the Clinton Administration.


Qual-Med Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31





A Brooklyn Landlord Kills Two Tenants and Then Himself
A two-day-old argument over whether water was being wasted in a Brooklyn apartment ended yesterday in the deaths of a landlord and two of his tenants, the police said.
The landlord, Lascells Hylton, 56, shot Joyce Lyn Abrigo, 18, and her brother, Victor Abrigo, 23, before turning the gun on himself in his East New York building, said Officer Ralph Saint Just, a police spokesman.


Add These to the Study Of Student Excuses
To the Editor:
As an undergraduate studying folklore at Harvard-Radcliffe 10 years ago, I was naturally interested in tales of student excuses, true or untrue.
To those you report in "Beyond 'Dog Ate My Homework' " (Education page, April 28), I add two from my informal fieldwork:
(1) During an exam, a proctor sees one student who is obviously cheating.
When the exam is over and the students hand in their blue books, the proctor pulls the cheater aside: "I'll take that book, please. I saw you cheating."


Sheehan Seeks to Climb Higher Than the Pinnacle
After earning her way into the toughest Hall of Fame in sports, Patty Sheehan has taken on a new mission: to prove that her career is still thriving.
When Sheehan won the Standard Register Ping in Phoenix in March, she became only the 13th player to achieve the 30 victories needed for entry into the Ladies Professional Golf Association's Hall of Fame.
It also made her an instant has-been.
At the the next tournament, a note from a fellow Hall member, JoAnne Carner, was taped to her locker.
It read, "Welcome to the Old Ladies Club."


Royal Dutch/Shell Group of Companies reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  American League
NEW YORK YANKEES -- Placed Bernie Williams, outfielder, on the 15-day disabled list.
TORONTO BLUE JAYS -- Activated Dave Stewart, pitcher, from the 15-day disabled list.
Placed Dick Schofield, shortstop, on the 60-day disabled list.


Pop/Jazz; Less Folk and More Variety By Composer of 'The Rose'
"Being in cabaret is sort of like learning to be a beekeeper or tatting," Amanda McBroom observed recently.
"It's an archaic form, but I happen to love it."
The auburn-haired singer, songwriter and actress from Los Angeles sounded indefatigably gung-ho over lunch in a friend's Manhattan apartment as she described her new cabaret show at the Russian Tea Room.


Leucadia National Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Review/Music; On the Podium: The Conductor of Sony
There were separate but simultaneous parties going on at Avery Fisher Hall on Wednesday night.
Fortunately, the one did not seem to get in the way of the other.
Onstage, Norio Ohga, the president and chief executive officer of the Sony Corporation, lived out a lifelong fantasy and soothed some longterm musical frustration by conducting Schubert, Beethoven and Johann Strauss.
In the audience . . . well, let me put it this way: if not restrained by the dignity of his office, this music critic could have rotated 360 degrees in place at his seat and collected the autographs of Tony Bennett, Barbra Streisand, Billy Joel and Christie Brinkley.
And gee, wasn't that Lee Radziwill I was sitting next to?


Squeezed by Jets' Moves, Brim Tries Move to Bengals
Cornerback Mike Brim has watched all the moves the Jets made in acquiring players for the defensive backfield in the last three months.
The team signed free safety Ronnie Lott (Los Angeles Raiders) and cornerbacks Eric Thomas (Cincinnati) and Clifford Hicks (Buffalo) and then re-signed cornerback James Hasty.
After the Jets signed Thomas, a starter for the Bengals the last two seasons, and designated him the starting left cornerback -- Brim's position -- during the recent mini-camp, Brim got the message that there wasn't any room on the team for him.
And as an unrestricted free agent, he decided it was best to exercise his option to look elsewhere.


Kimmins Environmental Services reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


The Art Market
There's no making sense of this spring's auctions in New York.
Even the experts, trying to analyze the sales of Impressionist, modern and contemporary art in the last two weeks, are baffled.
Taken as a whole, the sales at Sotheby's and Christie's were a four-night roller-coaster ride on which the highs rose beyond anyone's expectations and the lows hit with a resounding thud.
Instead of one solid auction market, this spring's sales, which ended on Wednesday night, showed a market divided.
The difference between a weak market for contemporary art and a strong one for Impressionist and modern art was glaringly apparent, what with an utterly disastrous sale of Andy Warhols at Sotheby's one week and a record $28.6 million price for a Cezanne at the same house the next.


Newark School Head Opposes Outside Control
While officials in Trenton were moving today to bring a state takeover of Newark's schools closer, the city's Executive School Superintendent, Eugene C. Campbell, was trying to do the opposite.
Speaking at a luncheon of the city's ministers, Mr.
Campbell, with other school officials, defended the district's attempts to improve and said its problems could be solved without the state's moving in.


CHRONICLE
EVELYN LAUDER, senior corporate vice president of the Estee Lauder Companies, and ALEXANDRA PENNEY, editor in chief of Self magazine, went to the White House yesterday, bringing with them a trunk containing petitions asking the Clinton Administration to make the financing of breast-cancer research a major health priority.
They met with HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON yesterday morning.
The 200,000 signatures wrapped in pink ribbons -- the symbol of breast- cancer awareness -- were collected in October at 2,000 Estee Lauder cosmetics counters around country and from readers who responded to an editorial in the October issue of Self.


No Headline
"If planes come from Italian bases to bomb us, then Italy is going to be devastated by Serbian rockets. When the bombing of Bosnia begins, all United Nations soldiers will immediately be killed." -- VOJISLAV SESELJ, head of the Serbian Radical Party.  [ A10:1. ]


Class of 1993 Tests New Waters


718 on Sunday
The Bronx joins the 718 area code this Sunday after a transition period that began July 1, 1992.
During the transition period, callers could dial either the 718 or 212 area code and still reach the Bronx, but beginning at 12:01 A.M.
Sunday they must use the 718 area code only.


Arson or Neglect Suspected In Thai Fire That Killed 209
The police said today that they suspected that arson or gross negligence caused the fire this week in a toy factory in which at least 209 workers died.
Investigators are studying reports that security guards, acting on behalf of the factory's Taiwan managers, blocked escape routes, fearing that workers would steal toys as they fled.


Killings Tied To Slaying Of Journalist
Two men who law-enforcement officials say took part in a conspiracy to murder a crusading Spanish-language journalist in a Queens restaurant on orders from a Colombian cocaine cartel are also suspects in the slaying of two Baltimore businessmen.
The businessmen were gunned down, also at the behest of the cartel, in a warehouse parking lot a little more than six months before the journalist, Manuel de Dios Unanue, was killed on March 11, 1992, in the Meson Asturias in Elmhurst because articles he had written had angered the Colombian traffickers, the investigators said.


Dow Slides 34.32 as Inflation Fears Grow
Driven by renewed inflation fears and pursuing the plunging bond market, the stock market fell headlong yesterday.
All major stock indexes dropped in heavy trading, including the American Stock Exchange index, even though vaulting gold prices and gold stocks on the exchange tended to lift it.


Man Is Convicted of Rape In Case Involving Condom
A jury convicted a man today of aggravated sexual assault in a case in which he claimed that a woman had implied her consent to sex during an attack at knife point by supplying him with condoms.
A Travis County jury of eight women and four men deliberated about two hours before finding the man, Joel Rene Valdez, 28, guilty.
Both Mr.
Valdez and the victim had testified that she had supplied Mr.
Valdez with two condoms on the night he stumbled into her apartment last September.


Brazilian State Leads Way in Saving Children
In the dim, smoke-stained interior of a sharecropper's shack, 1-year-old Maria sat quietly on the dirt floor, her infant spark dulled by diarrhea and malnutrition.
With seven other children to care for, Maria's mother, Antonia Souza Lima, explained that she could not afford the time -- an hour-and-a-half walk -- or the 40-cent bus fare to take her listless baby to the nearest medical post.


U.S. Can Help Heal India-Pakistan Rift
To the Editor:
Pakistan is faced with being listed as a "terrorist state" by the State Department (news article, April 25).
I would like to make a case against such designation in the larger United States interest.
Pakistan harbored hundreds of thousands of Afghan guerrillas, trained them, gave them shelter and refuge to help reverse the Soviet involvement in Afghanistan through 1979-89.
All this with the overt support of the United States Government as well as the Central Intelligence Agency.
When Pakistan served United States interests, it was praised as a bulwark against Soviet Communism.
Now that same country is being labeled as a terrorist state.


Sales of U.S.-Produced Vehicles Up
Sales of domestically produced vehicles rose 30.2 percent in early May, the nation's auto makers said today, extending the strengthening automotive market into a fourth straight month.
Demand for light trucks, which include mini-vans and sport utility vehicles, showed particular strength, with a 44.4 percent sales gain in the period from May 1 to May 10, to 126,324, compared with 87,497 in the comparable period a year ago.


First Among the Sixth
CLIFF ROBINSON, the versatile Portland front-line player with the trademark headband, received the National Basketball Association's Sixth Man award yesterday as the league's outstanding reserve.
The 6-foot-10-inch Robinson averaged 19.1 points, 6.6 rebounds and 2 blocked shots per game this season but came off the bench in 70 of Portland's 82 games.
He received 89 of a possible 98 votes from a nationwide panel of sports writers and sportscasters.
ANTHONY MASON of New York and DANNY AINGE of Phoenix were a far-distant second in the balloting with three votes apiece.


CREDIT MARKETS: New Jump in Inflation Rattles Markets; Treasury Prices Plunge as the Fed Faces a Decision
The surprisingly sharp rise in the Consumer Price Index yesterday jolted the bond market, sending Treasury prices down sharply and the yield on the 30-year bond to its highest level in more than a month.
But the rise probably is more troublesome for the Federal Reserve.
The nation's central bank has to decide much sooner than expected between two courses: whether to raise short-term interest rates to signal its resolve against inflation or to blink at the higher prices and keep interest rates where they are to assure that the economy is moving ahead at a moderate but steady pace.
Results of Decision
A Fed-led rise in short-term interest rates could slow the economy while reassuring traders and investors that the central bank was opposed to any signs of resurgent inflation.
The combination of expected slow growth and a tough Fed could bring longer-term rates lower.
But a Fed that does nothing while inflation appears to be moving higher would push long-term interest rates higher.


Diner's Journal
For Soft-Shell Crab
With soft-shell crab season upon us, aficionados are trawling through the restaurant sea for their favorite renditions.
Many places prepare them exceptionally well: Bridge Cafe, 279 Water Street, (212) 227-3344, Chin Chin, 216 East 49th Street, (212) 888-4555, Manhattan Ocean Club, 57 West 58th Street, (212) 371-7777, and One Fifth Avenue, 1 Fifth Avenue, (212) 529-1515, to name just a few.
One of the most sensational versions tasted this year is at Lespinasse, in the St.
Regis Hotel, at 2 East 55th Street, (212) 339-6719.
The inventive chef, Gray Kunz, who is a master at melding flavors of East and West, has come up with a most unlikely soft-shell crab recipe, one that is as vivid as it is surprising.
He uses medium-size crabs.
"You make sure they are fresh by running your finger across their head to see if they move," Mr.
Kunz said.
He then coats the shell side with a combination of egg yolk, flour and -- "You won't believe this," he says -- Cream of Wheat.
Mr.
Kunz explains that the cereal adds a crunchy texture and, for some reason, prevents burning when the crabs are cooked in hot oil.
The crabs are sauteed, Cream of Wheat side down, until crisp.
"I then add a little butter to the pan, some shallots, lemon thyme, purple basil and garlic," Mr.
Kunz said.
The flavors permeate the crust wonderfully.
The crab is garnished with fried, pickled ramps (sort of a garlic chive) and frizzled julienne of celery root.
This indulgence is not a bargain: $18 as an appetizer, $26 as a main course.
But brilliance rarely is.


Review/Theater; John Epperson, By Any Other Name
"Lypsinka! A Day in the Life," first presented by the New York Theater Workshop at the Perry Street Theater, has reopened in a somewhat revised version at the Cherry Lane Theater, 38 Commerce Street, Greenwich Village.
Following are excerpts from Mel Gussow's original review, which appeared in The New York Times on April 1, 1992.
John Epperson is the master, or rather the mistress, of the marginal theatrical device of lip-synching.
In other words, he can move his lips exactly in time with previously recorded songs and dialogue.
This could be the beginning and the end of his solo show, "Lypsinka! A Day in the Life," were it not for the underlying commentary on roles imposed by men on women.


Navy Moves 6 Officers In Sex Scandal Inquiry
In the first sign of impending punishment resulting from the Pentagon's inquiry into sexual assaults at an aviators' convention, the Navy today temporarily reassigned six senior officers implicated in the matter.
The Navy moved the six officers to desk jobs to "facilitate the ongoing investigative efforts" of Vice Adm.
J.
Paul Reason, a senior admiral who is overseeing possible disciplinary action against 120 Navy officers identified in the Pentagon Inspector General's report into the assault of scores of women at the Tailhook Association convention in Las Vegas, Nev., in 1991.


At the Bar; In retrospect, father didn't know best in the case of a daughter with a habit of making history.
Fiorello LaGuardia may have known he was making history that Saturday when he summoned Jane Bolin to the New York City building at the 1939 World's Fair.
But Ms.
Bolin, then a 31-year-old lawyer in the Corporation Counsel's office, thought she was in for a reprimand, though for what she could not fathom.
"I was very apprehensive," she recalled the other day.
"I couldn't think of anything that I had done."


Preakness Is Stacked Against Sea Hero's Bid
Twelve horses were entered today in the 118th Preakness Stakes, including a late and obscure starter from Florida who joined the stampede out to bushwack Sea Hero on his road to the Triple Crown.
In his final tuneup for the Preakness this morning, Sea Hero flashed the form that won the Kentucky Derby less than two weeks ago.
But then he withdrew to Stall 40 in the Stakes Barn at Pimlico Race Course to take it easy while the fates and his rivals conspired against him.


Critic's Notebook; On Serious Devotion to Beethoven
There were probably more than 120 scores of Beethoven's piano sonatas at Weill Recital Hall on Monday morning, one for each participant in Carnegie Hall's Professional Training Workshop.
The Henle's Urtext editions, Schenker's editions and even Artur Schnabel's editions of those scores were signs of serious devotion.
There were also accomplished pianists who would hardly require a score, including Claude Frank and Yevgeny Kissin.
Most participants were selected only after submitting resumes (and $135 for the three days of sessions).
The purpose was to hear Alfred Brendel talk about Beethoven piano sonatas, and then to hear him play on Wednesday night in Carnegie Hall.


Trust Me
The details of Bill Clinton's latest pledge to reduce the budget deficit do not matter nearly as much as their symbolism and what they say about Mr.
Clinton's determination to repair his own political vulnerability.
Having engaged in endless musing about drift and disarray in his Administration, he now seems ready to do something about it.
This week he proposed to sequester "every penny of new taxes and budget cuts" in a "trust fund" to be used only to reduce the Federal deficit.
That won't change the outlines of his budget, which calls for $496 billion in deficit reduction from extra taxes, spending cuts and lower interest payments.
But it may persuade the public he's serious.


New Jump in Inflation Rattles Markets; Consumer Prices Rose 0.4% in April In Broad Increase
A spurt in consumer prices last month, coming right after a surge in producer prices, increased concerns that inflation may indeed be creeping back, even though economic growth remains modest.
The Consumer Prices Index jumped four-tenths of a percent in April, the Labor Department reported yesterday.
That was twice as much as many forecasters had predicted.
The rise was pervasive, reflecting price increases in most of the goods and services Americans use every day.


Corrections
A Mets Notebook sports article in some copies yesterday misidentified the team for which Jack Armstrong pitches.
It is the Florida Marlins, not the Cincinnati Reds.


Books of The Times; The Vinegar of the Revolutionary Salad
Passionate Sage
The Character and Legacy of John Adams
By Joseph J. Ellis
Illustrated. 277 pages. W. W. Norton &amp; Company. $25.
The odds of it happening were incalculable: within hours of each other, John Adams and Thomas Jefferson both died on the 50th anniversary of the signing of the Declaration of Independence.
Jefferson's last words were, "Is it the Fourth?"; Adams's last were, "Thomas Jefferson survives."


At Cannes, More Of Everything, Including Films
THE 46th Cannes International Film Festival was formally opened at 8:10 Thursday night, in French by the starlet Romane Bohringer and in English and Serbo-Croatian by the Paris-based Bosnian director Emir Kusturica, who is a member of this year's jury.
Despite an international recession, the world's premier event of its kind is bigger than ever.
More films are being screened this year (some 500, in every category, with 23 in the main competition), and there are more formally registered attendees (more than 20,000).
Whether the festival will also turn out to be better than ever can only be answered after May 24, when this year's installment has run its course.


Be Fair to Domestics
Like Zoe Baird, President Clinton's original nominee for Attorney General, millions of Americans don't pay Social Security taxes on workers they hire to do chores around the home.
Part of the problem is a formidably complex system that requires employers to file five or more Federal forms and possibly several state forms.
There's also the absurdity of remitting minuscule taxes for teen-age baby sitters earning about $4 per week, the threshold for paying Social Security taxes.
The system needs change.
But reform need not threaten the noble purpose behind the Social Security law: Workers should be forced to save for their retirement -- for their own sake and for the sake of taxpayers who would otherwise be forced to support them on welfare.


Fox's New Problem for Paramount
The Fox Broadcasting Company raised the already high stakes in late-night television yesterday by announcing a starting date and station lineup for its entry in the comedy-talk sweepstakes, "The Chevy Chase Show."
The move appears potentially most damaging to Paramount Television, which produces a rival talk show starring Arsenio Hall.


Corrections
Picture captions with the Chronicle column yesterday were reversed in some copies.
The bearded man was Alexander Julian; the other was Gian Carlo Menotti.


History by the Hour or the Day
SPRING is the season of noble intentions.
The old, shriveled winter creature you behold in the mirror cries out for renewal, and so does the gray-tinged complexion.
What better way to register the change of season than a self-improvement program that combines outdoor recreation with mental stimulation?
Both in moderation, of course.
An ideal spring program is at hand in the dozens of small towns and cities across Connecticut, each with its own historical society, that offer walking tours.
Some are guided by local historians, on a fixed schedule or as demand arises.
Others are self-guided.
That is, history-minded flaneurs can pick up a brochure and set forth, beholding the local wonders, free to think their own thoughts and form their own impressions.


Last Chance
Here is a sampling of New York City shows closing soon: Closing This Weekend  "GULL AND VOID: REVELATIONS ON ROCK," Viridian Gallery, 24 West 57th Street, Manhattan.
Photographs by Robert Smith.
Through tomorrow.
Hours: today and tomorrow, 10:30 A.M. to 6 P.M.
Free.
Information: (212) 245-2882.
"THREE MEN ON A HORSE," National Actors Theater at the Lyceum Theater, 149 West 45th Street, Manhattan.
The 1930's screwball comedy by John Cecil Holm and George Abbott about a greeting-card writer with a talent for picking winners at the race track, with Tony Randall and Jack Klugman.
Through Sunday.
Performances: tonight at 8; tomorrow at 2 and 8 P.M.; Sunday at 3 P.M.
Tickets: $42.50 to $45.
Information: (212) 239-6280.


Martin Officer to Join Fallon McElligott
Bill Westbrook, who has been vice chairman and director of creative services at the Martin Agency in Richmond, said yesterday that as expected, he would leave Martin to join its sibling shop, Fallon McElligott in Minneapolis, as president and creative director, effective July 1.
"It's a great opportunity to work with an agency that has always been a hero of mine," Mr.
Westbrook said.
As president, he will succeed Steven A. Sjoblad, 43, who was named to the new position of managing director, focusing on client services.
As creative director, Mr.
Westbrook will succeed Pat Burnham, who unexpectedly announced in March that he would leave the agency.


Indictment Accuses Man Of Stealing From Clients
A disbarred lawyer has been indicted on Long Island on Federal charges of stealing more than $1.5 million from at least nine people, including the actress Shirley Jones.
The suspect, Alan David Harris of Westwood, Calif., a former resident of Roslyn Harbor, L.I., failed to appear for arraignment yesterday in Federal District Court in Hauppauge.


INSIDE
More Signs of Inflation
A spurt in consumer prices last month, following a surge in producer prices, increased concerns that inflation may be creeping back.
Page D1.
Verdict in Condom Rape Trial
A man who claimed a woman's request that he wear a condom demonstrated her consent to having sex was convicted of sexual assault.
Page A12.
Big Guns for Senate Race
President Clinton has asked his two top political strategists to help the Democratic candidate running for the Senate in Texas.
Page A12.
Underwriter Dismissed
Mayor David N. Dinkins dismissed a bond underwriter, citing the appearance of a conflict of interest with a loan to the Comptroller.
Page B1.
Suing Over Lost Trust
Senator Christopher S. Bond of Missouri said an investment adviser had wiped out his blind trust.
Page A20.


Robert Dingilian, 60, An M-G-M Executive
Robert Dingilian, a movie executive, died on Monday at his home in Los Angeles.
He was 60.
The cause was heart failure, his family said.


Election of McCall To Office Is Upheld
A state Supreme Court justice today upheld last week's election of the new State Comptroller, H. Carl McCall, but the Republicans challenging the process vowed to appeal the case to New York's highest court.
The ruling by Justice Joseph Harris, an Albany County Democrat, is only the first round in what is most likely to be a prolonged partisan battle over the election of Mr.
McCall.
He became the first black person to hold a statewide elected office last week after Democrats in the Legislature elected him to fill the position vacated by Edward V. Regan.


Sea Containers Ltd.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


MDT Corp. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


N.Y.U. Bestows Degree In Memory of Arthur Ashe
New York University celebrated its 161st commencement yesterday by honoring the memory of Arthur Ashe, the tennis great whose efforts to educate the public about AIDS before he died from the disease this year was the final chapter in a life dedicated to education and humanitarianism.
More than 7,000 graduates and 10,000 guests applauded as Mr.
Ashe's widow, Jeanne Moutoussamy-Ashe, accepted an honorary degree for her husband at the ceremony held in Washington Square Park.


Trenton Names Auditor to Rule Newark Schools
The State Education Commissioner moved today to take fiscal control of the troubled Newark school system by appointing a special auditor to oversee its business and financial operations, with veto power over school board spending greater than $20,000.
The announcement by the Commissioner, Dr.
Mary Lee Fitzgerald, came as she released a detailed report that she says documents chronic failings in the school system, a system that spends more per pupil than most poor urban areas in New Jersey and even many affluent suburban districts.


'Show Boat' Improved Racial Understanding
To the Editor:
Reading the criticism leveled at "Show Boat" by black leaders in Toronto (Arts pages, May 1), one can hardly help wondering to what musical they are referring.
It is certainly not the masterpiece by Jerome Kern and Oscar Hammerstein 2d that opened in 1927 and has ever since been packing them in for countless stage revivals and three movie versions.


Tax Changes for All
Americans rich and poor would face important changes under the tax bill approved by the House Ways and Means Committee.
Page A18.


Art in Review
Dorothy Miller and Holger Cahill
Archives of American Art  1285 Avenue of the Americas (at 51st Street)  Through June 18
Unfortunately, their names are no longer familiar to many in the art world who owe them a sizable debt, but Holger Cahill and Dorothy Miller helped to put American art, especially American modernist art, on the map.
Cahill was an eloquent writer on art who served for a short time as acting director of the Museum of Modern Art and then as national director of the W.P.A.
Federal Art Project.
Dorothy Miller, briefly Cahill's assistant before they married, was a curator at the Modern, where for several decades she organized shows of American artists that were perspicacious, refreshingly undoctrinaire and widely talked about.


Jeffrey Christmas, 39, Media Firm Executive
Jeffrey L. Christmas, a public relations executive and former military journalist, died on Wednesday at a hospital in Brandon, Fla.
He was 39 and until recently lived in Queens.
His family said the cause was bronchial pneumonia.


Repeal Is Likely for 'English Only' Policy in Miami
The county ordinance prohibiting the use of any language other than English for government business has always rankled metropolitan Miami's Hispanic population, which constitutes a majority of Dade County's two million residents.
Now, exercising their newly won political power, they are moving to overturn the measure, and many English speakers here are irate and fearful at the thought that their language is about to lose its official monopoly.
Proponents of doing away with the "English only" policy contend that such a step is a matter both of fairness and of recognizing the rapidly changing demographics of Dade County, which comprises Miami and nearly 30 other municipalities.


Review/Film; In the Show-Biz Jungle, Seeking a Gentler Life
"Joey Breaker," a small, heartfelt movie set dead-center in the show-business jungle of Manhattan, offers an unusually candid picture of a high-powered talent agent gleefully wheeling and dealing.
Written, directed and co-produced by Steven Starr, who used to run the William Morris Agency's motion picture department, the film is filled with colorful nuggets of agent talk.
In its most frenetic behind-the-scenes sequence, the title character conducts a bullying telephone auction of a screenplay with several movie studios, in which the bidding is jacked up to more than $1 million.
The film belongs squarely to the time-honored genre of fiction, movies and television in which a fair-haired boy on the fast track to the top of some lucrative profession suddenly has a vision of a gentler, more authentic way of life and abruptly shifts gear.
In the case of Joey Breaker (Richard Edson), a hotshot deal-maker at the Morgan Creative Agency, the light begins to dawn with his reluctant delivery of a hot meal to an AIDS patient.


Gunman Takes French Nursery Class Hostage; Demands $18.5 Million


Gap Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to May 1


Clinton Readies A Drive to 'Sell' Budget to People
Eager to show Congress that he still has the political wherewithal needed to muscle through his budget bill, President Clinton has planned a new offensive to sell it as a blueprint for tax fairness.
Administration officials said Mr.
Clinton plans a spate of public appearances beginning Friday with his third formal news conference and continuing next week with a trip to New Mexico and California to show his commitment to turning the economy around.


Bowe and Lewis Are Fighting, But With Words and Dollars
The zany heavyweight picture moved no closer to a showdown today despite a $12 million offer made by Riddick Bowe's manager to Lennox Lewis for a November match.
Rock Newman, who manages Bowe, passed around a letter today that he said he was sending to Dan Duva, who promotes Lewis.
The letter proposes a pay-per-view fight with a $35 million net purse, $23 million going to Bowe and $12 million to Lewis.


French Parliament Approves Tighter Immigration Controls
In what is seen as a first step toward tighter controls on immigration, France's new conservative-dominated Parliament voted today to make it more difficult for children born here of foreign parents to become French citizens.
Until now, these French-born children became French citizens automatically at the age of 18, while their parents could apply on their behalf before then.
Under the new rules, they must apply in person between the ages of 16 and 21 and, in some cases, can be turned down.


Leigh Wiener, 62, Photographer Of the Famous and the Historic
Leigh Auston Wiener, a photo-journalist whose cameras captured images of the powerful and the famous, died on Tuesday at his home in Los Angeles.
He was 62.
The cause was complications of a blood disease, said Cliff Dektar, his publicist.
Mr.
Wiener's doctors attributed the disease, Sweet's syndrome, to radiation Mr.
Wiener had been exposed to when he photographed atomic-bomb tests near Las Vegas, Nev., after World War II for Life magazine, Mr.
Dektar said.


Restaurants
Rosemarie's
At first glance Rosemarie's appears to be the snug, subdued little downtown Italian restaurant that is every diner's wistful Grail.
Then you sit down.
The dining room's tormenting acoustics can make the floor of the New York Stock Exchange seem like the reading room of a men's club.
And rather than become acclimated to the din, you find yourself engaging in an escalating war of amplitude with other tables.
Eventually some folks finish their meals and go home.
Then a few more.
Finally, you can talk, if you have a voice left.


Art in Review
Paul Bloodgood
Sandra Gering Gallery  476 Broome Street  SoHo  Through May 29
This is the first one-man show by Paul Bloodgood, a young painter and poet who lives in New York.
The paintings, three triptychs, are abstract cacophonies made with mixtures of acrylic, oil, enamel, urethane and encaustic, on canvases mounted on boards.
The surfaces are thick and heavily worked, and the scale is big: up to 9 feet tall.
Mr.
Bloodgood pushes things right to the edge, but not over it: the combinations of color are raucous and discordant (including Day-Glo yellow and shocking pink) without becoming a mess; the gestures are dizzying, yet not empty or simply derivative of the Abstract Expressionists whose art he inevitably evokes.
There's a genuine and exuberant emotional quality here that suggests Mr.
Bloodgood is someone to watch.


Schools Lose $5 Million Suit by Beaten Teacher
A jury determined yesterday that the New York City Board of Education failed its responsibility to insure the safety of a man who was beaten in 1988 in the hallway of a Bronx junior high school where he taught reading.
The jury awarded the man $5.2 million in damages.
The verdict, if it is not overturned, would impose new legal duties on the board to protect teachers from school assaults.
The teachers' union has long argued that school administrators play down violence in the schools and imperil teachers' safety by failing to take adequate security measures.


THE CLINTON TAX BILL: Reporter's Notebook; Some Familiar Fiddling In a Big, Stately Setting
The cavernous hearing room of the House Ways and Means Committee is one of the most fabulous public spaces that the lower chamber has to show off.
Domed and semicircular, gilded and friezed, the room is a stage-designer setting for momentous governmental labors like fiddling with the tax code.


Art in Review
'The Naming of the Colors'
White Columns  154 Christopher Street  West Village  Through May 23
This coherent group exhibition examines the fate of color -- probably the most purely visual of esthetic phenomena -- in the hands of artists with Conceptual and political intentions.
That fate is not always a happy one; some of the work is fairly didactic, and some, like Rafael Sanchez's paintings made of peanut butter and jelly, is a bit inane.
But despite its lapses, the show moves color off the formal plane into the real world, and especially in the direction of language, expanding one's understanding of color's complex roles and associations.


Yugoslav Serbs Vow to Kill U.N. Troops if West Steps In
About 5,000 Serbian nationalists rallied today in this town on the border between Yugoslavia and Bosnia, vowing never to accept an international peace plan and threatening to attack United Nations soldiers and foreign countries if Western powers intervene in the Bosnian war.
"If they want to win this war, they better send 200,000 soldiers and bring many thousands of coffins with them," the principal speaker, Vojislav Seselj, told the cheering crowd.
"If planes come from Italian bases to bomb us, then Italy is going to be devastated by Serbian rockets. When the bombing of Bosnia begins, all United Nations soldiers will immediately be killed."


Review/Art; Pleasures From Life, Extended Into the Tomb
"O Soul, Come Back!," the title of an exhibition of Chinese Han Dynasty tomb artifacts at the Miriam and Ira D. Wallach Art Gallery at Columbia University, is derived from a poem from the third century B.C. cajoling a wandering spirit to return to its tomb, where all the delights of its former life await it.
It would take a lost soul indeed not to respond to the vigor and poignancy of the 40 objects on display in this quiet, beautiful show.
Drawn in large part from Columbia's own Asian holdings, they have been organized by David A. Sensabaugh of the art history department, with the help of several graduate students in Chinese art.
The results, meticulously installed and documented, illustrate both how engaging objects of less-than-masterpiece quality can be when put to the service of a single theme, and how dramatically that material can illuminate the society that produced it.


Critics' Choices; La Gran Scena Opera
If music is heightened speech, opera sometimes seems like heightened sexuality.
Opera thrives on the excesses of sexuality; it inflates and confuses gender, it dramatizes its dangers and celebrates its allures.
So there are a few ways to enjoy La Gran Scena Opera Company's concerts at Town Hall, 123 West 43d Street, Manhattan, tomorrow and Sunday nights (tickets range from $17.50 and $32.50; information: 212-840-2824.) One is to see members of the company as campy sendups of the opera world, its divas and devotees; the program is even billed as a spoof of the Metropolitan Opera's most recent season.


Tracy-Locke Creates Radio Specialty Unit
Tracy-Locke, a DDB Needham Agency in Dallas, said yesterday that it had created a unit specializing in radio advertising called Radio Monsters.
The new unit, with eight employees, will be headed by David Fowler, Tracy-Locke's chief creative officer.
"Radio is generally shuffled off into the end of the cubicles," Mr.
Fowler said, adding, "We think that's dumb."


Executive Changes
CALPINE CORP., San Jose, Calif., an independent power producer, named Lynn A. Kerby senior vice president.
CURTISS-WRIGHT CORP., Lyndhurst, N.J., the aerospace contractor, named David Lasky president.


John Ford's 'Searchers'
Yes, you can see it on videotape or on television; yes, you probably have.
But here is a stunning reminder of why movie audiences once felt it necessary to leave their living rooms for the sake of peak cinematic experiences.
A superb 35-millimeter print has been struck from this 1956 film's original negative, which amounts to the closest modern equivalent of mint condition.


Dirty Democracy in Paraguay
Fortunately, electoral chicanery did not decide the outcome of Paraguay's first-ever democratic presidential election last week.
Unfortunately, enough chicanery took place to mar what should have been a proud achievement.
Days before the election, a key army commander swore that the military would maintain the long-ruling Colorado Party in power whatever the voters decided.
Earlier, the Colorado's president had promised to win the election by "assault" and "special tricks."


CompUSA Starts Corporate Reorganizing
CompUSA Inc., the red-hot computer retailer, announced yesterday that it was laying the foundation of a decentralized corporate structure to support its rapid growth and its entry into foreign markets.
The company also announced that its president, Nathan Morton, who has guided its growth over the last five years from a two-store enterprise to a $1 billion-plus chain of superstores, had been promoted to chairman.
The previous chairman, Ronald N. Dubin, one of CompUSA's largest stockholders, will remain as a consultant for at least two years.


Huntingdon Journal; Gordon McIntyre v. Quebec: He Wins for English
Gordon McIntyre has lived all his life in this small community of dairy farmers and textile mill workers in the southwestern corner of Quebec.
His father repaired track for the old New York Central Railroad.
Through four earlier generations, his family farmed the land.
He himself is an undertaker.


Due Process for Leonard Jeffries?
The case of Dr.
Leonard Jeffries, who was deposed as chairman of the City College of New York's black studies department for a racist speech, has been billed as a titanic struggle of values -- free speech, academic freedom, fair play and the power of government to shape its educational institutions.
Those large issues have been ignored in the verdict of a Federal court that New York State violated the professor's rights.
Instead the judgment rests on the credibility -- actually the incredibility -- of the state's claim that the speech had nothing to do with the professor's demotion.


Stranger Is Stabbed Saving a Woman's Life
A woman with her 2-year-old toddler, a mugger with a Rambo knife, a college student who never imagined himself a hero: they met on the stairs of an East Side subway Wednesday night in one of those larger-than-life dramas that make New York what it often is -- sinister, dangerous yet chivalrous, even valiant.
The tale was all over town yesterday -- how the mugger grabbed the woman's gold neck chains and she fought back; how the student went to her rescue, was stabbed four times but fought the thug off, and how the woman and authorities often frustrated by a seemingly endless struggle against crime couldn't say enough about the spirit of a stranger who did not look the other way.


G. William Jones, 62; Founded Film Festival
Dr.
G.
William Jones, a professor of cinema and video who founded the film archives at Southern Methodist University and the USA Film Festival in Dallas, died on Tuesday at his home in Dallas.
He was 62.
The cause was brain cancer, his family said.


The Spoken Word
"POLITICAL PARTIES AND THE AFRICAN-AMERICAN COMMUNITY," Voorhies Auditorium, New York City Technical College, 186 Jay Street, Brooklyn Heights.
David Hilliard, former chief of staff of the Black Panther Party; Assemblyman Roger Green of Fort Greene, Brooklyn; Dr.
Basil Wilson, provost at John Jay College, and Charlene Mitchell, executive director of the National Alliance Against Racist and Political Repression, are to be among the participants in a debate, part of the Options and Alternatives Roundtable Discussion Series.
Tomorrow at 1 P.M.
Admission: $5.
Information: (718) 398-6889.
PSYCHOANALYTIC DISCUSSION, Karen Horney Clinic Building Auditorium, 329 East 62d Street, Manhattan.
A screening of the film "Raging Bull" with a psychoanalytic discussion of the characters led by Nathan Horwitz, a clinical social worker.
Tonight at 7:30.
Admission: $7; $4 for students and the elderly.
Information: (212) 838-8044.


Winning Wounded: Mattingly and Williams on D.L.
Sudden silence enveloped Yankee Stadium, concerned looks sprang up throughout the Yankee dugout and every eye was focused on Don Mattingly once he dropped his bat and grimaced after an awkward swing last night.
He edged away from the plate, he stared into the dugout, he tried to swing without pain, but he could not.
There was definite trouble.
Mattingly was fooled by Cal Eldred's 1-2 cut fastball in the fourth inning at Yankee Stadium, so fooled that he checked his swing, so fooled that he jerked his torso trying to pull the bat back, so fooled that he strained a muscle in his lower left rib cage, left the game and will be placed on the 15-day disabled list today.


Lands' End Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


TV Weekend; The Many Hats of George Marshall
Ninety minutes is hardly long enough for an appreciation of Gen.
George C. Marshall, who led America's armed forces through World War II, gave his name and his prestige to the American aid plan that helped raise Western Europe out of the war's devastation and became the only professional soldier to win the Nobel Peace Prize.
The portrait in "George Marshall and the American Century" is of a deeply private public servant.
Without any of the flamboyance of Gen.
Douglas MacArthur, his sometime superior who became his subordinate, or the political ease of Gen.
Dwight D. Eisenhower, his sometime subordinate who became Commander in Chief, Marshall made his way by strong, conscientious leadership and steady, self-effacing ability.


On Stage, and Off
Why Who Got on the Tony List or Not
In the uncharacteristically unrancorous wake of this week's Tony nominations, those with the biggest reasons for grousing (namely the creative team responsible for "The Goodbye Girl," nominated for best musical but not best book or best score) chose to hold their collective tongues.
And even Gene Saks, who was dismissed as the show's director out of town in Chicago only to see his replacement, Michael Kidd, receive a nomination this week, was gracious.
"I don't begrudge him getting the nomination," Mr.
Saks said.
"I was in the room as a member of the administration committee when the nominations came in, and it seemed to surprise most of the committee, but I don't know whether they were just being nice. Anyway, I think I'm past the point of being hurt."


At Elizabeth High School; Changing the World With a Fastball and a Dream
One day, Pablo Munoz, who wears a jacket and tie so his students will see that a teacher can take as much pride in his appearance as does a drug dealer, told one of his bilingual social studies classes about William Howard Taft.
The former President was so large that a special double-seat had to be built for him when he attended baseball games at his alma mater.
And then Munoz said: "You know, President Taft and I had something in common. We both went to Yale."
There was a shocked silence until one student blurted: "Uh, Mr. Munoz? You was really in jail?"


Bahamas Next In Davis Cup
The next opportunity the United States team will have in Davis Cup play will be against the Bahamas, somewhere in United States, in the World Group qualifying round Sept. 24-26.
The winner advances to the World Group for the 1994 competition.
The United States, which won the title in 1992, slipped into the qualifying round after a 4-1 loss to Australia in the first round of the 1993 tournament.


Citing Loan, Dinkins Bars Bond Firm
Mayor David N. Dinkins dismissed Fleet Securities yesterday as an official underwriter of city bonds, saying that a loan from the firm's sister bank to the Senate campaign committee of Comptroller Elizabeth Holtzman last year had created an "appearance of a conflict" that could threaten the city's reputation in the credit markets.
In a letter to Ms.
Holtzman, Mr.
Dinkins wrote: "I know we both agree that as public servants, we have a fundamental obligation to avoid not only conflicts but the appearance of conflicts. In this case, the appearance of a conflict in the elevation of Fleet Securities could post a threat to that reputation. In the final analysis, I believe we must avoid jeopardizing the public's confidence in our selection process."


RESULTS PLUS
TENNIS  Becker Is Ousted  Boris Becker, still awaiting his breakthrough on clay courts, was eliminated from the Italian Open yesterday, losing a third-set tie breaker to Andrei Chesnokov of Russia.
Chesnokov, one of the world's most tenacious clay-court players, beat the No. 3-seeded Becker by 6-2, 3-6, 7-6 (7-3).
An Italian Open finalist in 1990, Chesnokov advanced to the quarterfinals in Rome.
Jim Courier, the defending champion, overpowered Fabrice Santoro of France, 6-3, 6-3, and also reached the quarterfinals.
Fourth-seeded Goran Ivanisevic of Croatia made the quarterfinals by downing Marc Rosset of Switzerland by 6-4, 6-3.
Guillermo Perez-Roldan of Argentina, a clay-court specialist beaten in the Italian final in 1988, ousted eighth-seeded Andrei Medvedev of Ukraine, 6-4, 6-4.
The men's tour is implementing its new drug policy for the the first time during the Italian Open, and all players in the tournament were to be tested. (AP) Schultz Upsets Capriati: Brenda Schultz eliminated Jennifer Capriati from the German Open in Berlin, using her powerful serve to upset the fourth-seeded American by 6-2, 5-7, 6-4 in the third round.
The rest of the top-seeded players easily advanced to the quarterfinals, but third-seeded Mary Joe Fernandez was the only one of four Americans to win.
She beat Judith Wiesner of Austria by 6-2, 7-6.
Gabriela Sabatini of Argentina, the second seed, continued her strong showing, defeating 16th-seeded Sandra Cecchini of Italy, 6-0, 6-3. (AP)


China Trade: Cash or Care?; Clinton Must Endorse Money, Rights or Both
Seven months after the candidate Bill Clinton accused the Bush Administration of ignoring China's human rights abuses, President Clinton finds himself forced to decide if the United States should risk its access to China's booming economy for the sake of political freedom there.
On one side are those who say trade is a lever the President must use to force China to improve its record on human rights and abide by international rules on trade in weapons.
On the other are business executives appalled at the prospect of losing a major market.


Trade Agreement Will Cost Jobs and Revenue; The Cleanup Bonanza
To the Editor:
In "Free Trade's Huge Costs" (Op-Ed, May 2), Jerry Brown mentions the words "environment" and "environmental" half a dozen times without once hinting at the huge opportunities for United States suppliers of environmental technologies and services that the North America Free Trade Agreement represents.
After more than a decade of pollution-based economic growth, Mexico -- like most of Latin America -- plans to spend tens of billions of dollars on environmental cleanup.
This is a response to indigenous middle classes fed up with tainted air and water, and a consequence of the growing synergism between less wasteful (less polluting) manufacturing and international competitiveness.


Clinton Political Gunslingers Ride to Texas
President Clinton has asked his two top political strategists to help the flagging campaign of Senator Bob Krueger, amid Democratic fears that a loss in next month's special election would be a political blow to the White House and the party.
The strategists, Paul E. Begala and James Carville, were instrumental not only in Mr.
Clinton's victorious Presidential campaign last year but also in an earlier success in Pennsylvania, that of the appointed Democratic Senator, Harris Wofford.


GPA Bonds Rise on News Of G.E. Pact
The price of GPA Group bonds more than doubled early yesterday on the news of Wednesday's deal for the General Electric Company to help the troubled Irish aircraft leasing company avoid bankruptcy.
But skepticism about whether creditors would accept the deal helped push the bonds off their highs.
Prices for the company's most actively traded bonds, an 8 3/4 percent issue due in 1998, had hovered in the mid-$200 range Tuesday, but opened around $600 for each $1,000 yesterday morning, traders said.
According to Bloomberg Financial Markets, the bonds then dropped to $565 for each $1,000 by late in the day.


Equality With What?
To the Editor:
Re "Era of Female Combat Pilots Opens With Shrugs and Glee" (front page, April 29): The "jubilation" over the inclusion of women in flying combat roles, this "leap into the next century" for women's rights, is in order.
It is an overdue legal achievement worth celebrating, insofar as the piloting ability of women is concerned.
But one fundamental point seems to be missed.


Writer's Technique Put Under Harsh Spotlight at New Yorker Trial
Jeffery M. Masson's lawyer conducted what amounted to a journalism seminar in Federal court here today when he prodded Janet Malcolm to describe how she had prepared articles for The New Yorker magazine by selecting and arranging quotations and anecdotes.
Ms.
Malcolm's testimony in Mr.
Masson's libel lawsuit laid bare the techniques she used in reporting and writing an unflattering two-part profile, "The Annals of Scholarship," which ran in the prestigious magazine nearly a decade ago.


Art in Review
James Casebere
Michael Klein Inc.  594 Broadway (near Houston Street)  SoHo  Through May 29
The ghostly buildings in James Casebere's large photographs are like figures out of dreams or memories, specific but nebulous.
Mr.
Casebere makes the structures in his pictures himself, using cardboard, paper and other materials; he usually photographs the detail-less white buildings from low angles, as if they were architectural models or doll houses.


NATO Adrift? Allies Worry Over Bosnia Impasse
The Clinton Administration's impasse with the European allies on military steps in the Balkans and subsequent indecision have left senior NATO officials feeling leaderless at a time when the alliance is struggling to find a new purpose.
Having failed to persuade the Europeans of the need to arm Bosnian Muslims and bomb Serbian targets, President Clinton has now discarded that option but given American officials no guidance on what to plan for instead, NATO and American officials say.


Art in Review
William Claxton
Witkin Gallery  415 West Broadway (near Spring Street)  SoHo  Through May 22
You can almost hear the soaring trumpets and noodling pianos in William Claxton's moody jazz photographs.
Many of the pictures here were taken between 1952 and 1961 for Pacific Jazz Records, and their staged quality reveals their origin as album covers or publicity shots.
In a 1961 photograph, Donald Bird is seen playing his trumpet on a subway train, while the Stan Kenton Band is shown in a 1957 image on a beach at sunset.


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY  A FORTUNE BUILT ON POVERTY
Through a network of not-for-profit organizations, Ramon S. Velez has long dominated the antipoverty programs of the most downtrodden part of the South Bronx, America's symbol of urban poverty and powerlessness.
In no small part because of his social-service work, he is also a millionaire.
He has practically written the book on how to seize power and use it in an impoverished neighborhood, how to pull the interlocking levers of social services, politics and personal gain.
First of two articles, A1.
BADILLO DROPS OUT OF MAYORAL RACE
Herman Badillo dropped out of the New York City Democratic mayoral primary and Rudolph W. Giuliani, the Republican challenger, said he was seeking an alliance with Mr.
Badillo running for city comptroller instead.
A1.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
President Clinton's tax increase plan passed a big test in Congress, as the House Ways and Means Committee approved the main elements intact.  [ Page A1. ]  People of all income levels would face important changes under the tax proposal.  [ A18. ]  President Clinton has planned a new offensive to sell his budget.  [ A19. ]
Consumer prices jumped four-tenths of 1 percent in April, twice as fast as had been predicted.
The increase unsettled the stock and bond markets, dashed expectations for lower inflation this year and ended hopes for further Fed rate cuts.  [ D1. ]


Tipper Gore Appeals for Mental Health-Care Plan


Art in Review
Guillermo Kuitca
Sperone Westwater  142 Greene Street  SoHo  Through June 12
This latest exhibition of paintings of maps and schematized architectural plans by the talented young Argentine artist Guillermo Kuitca is striking for its diversity of touch and character.
Each of these works (some are nearly 10 feet tall) is different from the others.
In one especially beautiful painting, Mr.
Kuitca simulates with acrylic and oil the soft, blurred qualities of charcoal drawing; in another he paints in brilliant colors bounded by an uneven black grid; yet another map is a silkscreen on canvas as chillingly impersonal as the other maps are distinctly, often touchingly, personal.


Associated Natural Gas reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Auerbach O.K., but . . .
RED AUERBACH's cardiologist said yesterday that the Celtics president is in excellent condition after two procedures to clear blocked arteries, but there's a 50 percent chance Auerbach will need a heart-bypass operation in the next six months.
Dr.
ROMAN DeSANCTIS said that Auerbach, 75, could be released from Massachusetts General Hospital this weekend and that he expects the architect of the Celtics franchise to resume a normal life style, including playing racquetball and smoking his trademark cigars.


CHRONICLE
DAN RATHER has impeccable Texas credentials -- "I am a Texan by birth and by choice," he said yesterday -- so when he defends Waco, Tex., the people there have cause to be grateful.
So grateful, in fact, that the CBS Evening News anchorman was invited to address the Waco Chamber of Commerce on June 3.
The chamber's dinner was originally scheduled for April 19, but that was the day the Branch Davidian compound burned down, ending a 51-day standoff.
Mr.
Rather broadcast from Waco for three days that week.


Dibrell Brothers (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Power Built on Poverty: One Man's Odyssey
Through a network of nonprofit organizations, Ramon S. Velez has long dominated the antipoverty programs of the most downtrodden part of the South Bronx, America's symbol of urban poverty and powerlessness.
In no small part because of his social-service work, he is also a millionaire.


Art in Review
B. Wurtz 'Daily Life, 1970-1993'  Feature 484 Broome Street SoHo Through tomorrow
This crammed little show reviews nearly a quarter of a century of esthetic subversion by B. Wurtz, an artist born and educated in California, who has lived and exhibited in New York City since the mid-1980's.
Mr.
Wurtz's materials tend to be the discards of modern life; his free-ranging sensibility tends toward a hands-on Conceptualism that is visually clunky and, when necessary, uses the written word.
"Don't Look at Art. Look at the World" admonishes an assemblage that involves cloth rags, carpet samples and socks attached to a painter's palette, and this seems to be the underlying principle of his enterprise.


J. N. McBride, 85, Pioneering Builder Of Industrial Parks
J.
Nevins McBride, a pioneer in the development of suburban industrial and office parks, died on Wednesday at home in Franklin Lakes, N.J.
He was 85.
His son David said the cause was cancer.


Genesco Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Israeli Medalist Finds Fame Overpowering
Sometimes, it gets a bit crazy for Yael Arad, who is no ordinary Olympic silver medalist.
There are endorsements, demands for interviews and responsibilities involving her own fledgling foundation for athletes.
Recently, Arad found herself on the Dan Shilon Show, the Israeli equivalent of Phil Donahue, discussing world affairs with a panel that included a prostitute and a musician.


Market Place; In its contract talks with auto workers, G.M. has much to lose.
SINCE John F. Smith Jr. took command of the General Motors Corporation last November, investors and analysts have praised his restructuring skills.
G.M. stock, following earnings improvements in the last two quarters, has appreciated steadily.
From a low on Mr.
Smith's watch of $29.75 on Nov. 12, the stock closed yesterday at $40.25 a share, down $1, on the New York Stock Exchange.
The majority of analysts following G.M., under the assumption that cost-cutting will continue, are recommending the perennially lagging stock.
But that optimism could evaporate swiftly if the auto maker fails to win concessions in health care, job security and other labor costs during this summer's collective bargaining with the United Automobile Workers union.


CLINTON PROPOSAL FOR TAX INCREASES PASSES FIRST TEST
President Clinton's plan to raise the taxes of almost all Americans in order to lower the Federal budget deficit passed its first big test in Congress today.
The House Ways and Means Committee, the first committee to get a crack at the tax measures, made some changes around the edges of the President's proposals but approved the main elements intact.
The vote was 24 to 14, with all the Democrats in favor and all the Republicans opposed.


How to Reduce Some of the Trauma of Divorce
To the Editor:
"Divorce Lawyers Assailed in Study," your May 5 article on the report of a committee appointed by New York State's highest court, raises an important question.
Why are most people in a matrimonial dispute doomed to be mired in an obsolete system that ill serves their needs so much of the time?
There is no disagreement that the divorce experience is a major trauma in the lives of the couple and their children.
Reliance on the adversarial system for relief comes to us from the Judeo-Christian and English Common Law tradition that marriage is indissoluble except for exceptional, grievous circumstances.
Not so long ago, one had to "discover" one's spouse "in pari delicto" to establish grounds for divorce in a court.


A Return to the Hotel Pierre, For Plato and Pampering
I HAD always associated the Hotel Pierre, one of the world's most elegant hostelries, with Bobby Comfort, who masterminded the robbery of its safe-deposit boxes for something in the neighborhood of $10 million in cash and jewelry in the dark early morning of Jan. 2, 1972.
The first time I ever happened to be in the hotel, some 10 years after that front-page heist, it was Comfort who gave me a personal guided tour, for a book I was writing about him.
Recently, a little more than 10 years after Comfort's excursion with me, my wife and I took a room in the hotel for a weekend.
It was done purely to investigate the Pierre's pleasures, and not its vault.


Boy Lapses Into Coma After Dental Surgery
A 6-year-old Long Island boy who visited an oral surgeon's office to have a tooth pulled developed breathing and heart problems and lapsed into a coma while under anesthesia, officials said today.
The boy, Mark D. Bistany of Bethpage, was in critical condition today at North Shore University Hospital, where doctors placed him on life support and were trying to pull him out of the coma by playing his favorite music and providing other means of stimulation.
While doctors declined to comment on his prognosis, they said he had shown a slight improvement during his initial hours in the hospital.


Wordstar International (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Abroad at Home; He's Not Harry Truman
At a dinner the other evening where David McCullough got an award for his wonderful biography of Harry Truman, he spoke of Truman's qualities.
"He wasn't just decisive," Mr.
McCullough said.
"He did what he thought was right. He had the courage of his convictions."
Listening, I thought about what President Clinton has been saying and doing on Bosnia.
What would the world be like if Harry Truman had followed such a course when the Communists threatened Greece and Turkey after World War II?


Classical Music in Review
The King's Singers  Alice Tully Hall
Kitsch is to the King's Singers, evidently, what catnip is to cats.
For the second half of their program on Saturday evening, the six English singers offered one fluffy arrangement after another: love songs by composers ranging from Schubert to Jacques Brel, then pop songs by the likes of Hoagy Carmichael and Paul Simon.
A lot of this stuff goes a short way.
Typically, the first half was more "serious," at least on paper.
But in sacred works by Lassus and Willaert, the group's preening pianissimos and Rossinian crescendos said more about singers in love with their own sounds than about the lovely music.
Gesualdo and Monteverdi, refusing to be bullied in idiosyncratic madrigals, came across more vividly.


Excerpts From Clinton's News Conference in the Rose Garden
Following are excerpts from President Clinton's news conference yesterday in the Rose Garden at the White House, as transcribed by Reuters.
OPENING STATEMENT
Three months ago, I presented a plan to our country and to the Congress designed to address what I believe are the significant challenges of this time.
For more than 40 years our country was organized to stand up against Communism, to try to help develop the free world, and for most of that time we took our economic prosperity for granted.


Black Enterprise Names Cross Colours as No. 1
Three years ago, the apparel designer Carl Jones took a $200,000 bankroll from cashing out of a successful surf sportswear maker and financed Cross Colours, which makes a line of hip-hop clothing that mainstream merchants are clamoring for.
Mr.
Jones, an apparel designer who grew up in Watts, wanted to make clothes infused with black urban attitude and African accents that would appeal to resurgent black pride.
"It was just a thing in the air, an idea," he said, in an interview today from his Commerce, Calif., factory.


My Hopes, My Fears, My Disease
For four years, I have been torn about when and how to say publicly that I carry H.I.V., the virus that causes AIDS.
There were always too many compelling reasons not to say anything.
Every such excuse started with the word "fear" -- fear of employment discrimination, fear of the politics of AIDS, fear of becoming a pariah.
When I contemplated disclosure, I felt that my hope to continue contributing to society as a lawyer and human rights activist was threatened.
Would I be evaluated on my merits if I sought to be a judge, a law professor, a law firm member or a governmental appointee?


House Where 4 Died Is Remembered for Its Life


Corrections
An article yesterday about provisions of tax legislation approved by the House Ways and Means Committee misstated the tax treatment of certain tax-free bonds purchased for less than their face value.
The increase in value of such bonds as they approach maturity is usually free of taxes.
But under current law in some cases -- including those in which bonds were purchased for less than the original offering price -- part of the gain from the sale is taxed as a capital gain.
Under the proposed legislation, that part would be taxed as ordinary income.


Revocation of Bail Sought In Glen Ridge Abuse Case
Prosecutors today denounced the three former high school football players convicted in the Glen Ridge sex-assault case as threats to society and urged a New Jersey appeals court to order them jailed immediately.
"These convicted rapists are sexual predators who pose a danger to society," the prosecutors, Robert D. Laurino and Elizabeth Miller-Hall, said in a motion asking the appeals court to revoke the bail that lets the three remain free pending appeals.


Don't Make Asylum Seekers Hysteria Victims
To the Editor:
Concern about refugees is growing in the aftermath of the World Trade Center bombing, but criticisms of asylum procedures are misdirected.
The law allows the Immigration and Naturalization Service to detain those suspected of being criminals and national security risks to prevent entry into the United States.
The solution to the anomalous situations in the bombing case is not to change immigration laws, but better coordination among Federal agencies and better administration of laws by the immigration agency and State Department.
To change a law that does not need changing, Senator Alan Simpson and Representative Bill McCollum have introduced bills to turn back asylum applicants arriving at airports who lack travel documents.
These bills would preclude women and children from Bosnia who have been victims of rape, torture and ethnic cleansing from seeking refuge in the United States.
They would have life-and-death consequences for a Somali refugee who managed to escape from prison where he was being held without trial and repeatedly tortured.


Fujitsu Is Considering Resale of I.B.M. Clones
In another sign of the upheavals in Japan's once-sheltered personal computer market, Fujitsu Ltd. said today that it is considering buying I.B.M.-compatible machines from a Taiwan company to sell under its own name in Japan.
The possible move by Japan's second-largest personal computer company reflects a price war initiated in the fall by the Compaq Computer Corporation of Houston.
American computer companies are forcing Japanese companies to cut costs, even if it means buying products from clone makers in Taiwan rather than building them themselves.


NPM Healthcare reports earnings for Qtr to April 4


Even Nice Pets Can Harm Wildfowl
To the Editor:
I authorized the euthanasia of a wild mute swan by a veterinarian the other day.
The swan was a nesting female, sitting on two eggs.
She was mauled by a pit bull in Prospect Park.
Instinct dictated she stay by her nest.
The dog had ripped open and dislocated one hock joint and crushed the distal end of one wing.
The rangers took her to the vet.
I got involved because I'm one of the local people who take care of injured wildlife with the goal of returning it to the wild.
She would never fly again.
Surgery could be tried, but a swan is a heavy bird, and the hock requires a lot of flexibility; she would be at least arthritic.
The birds, originally from Europe, are displacing native waterfowl, so it would be illegal to release her.


Executive Changes
FOSTER WHEELER POWER SYSTEMS INC., Clinton, N.J., a unit of Foster Wheeler Corp., appointed Martin J. Karpenski president and chief operating officer.
PETROLEUM HEAT AND POWER CO., Stamford, Conn., appointed George P. Russell senior vice president for marketing.


Cellular Communications (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
6.50
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
3.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
2.88
2.97
3.87
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
2.93
2.90
3.58
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
05
3.01
3.68
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
5.64
5.62
6.95
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
6.94
6.95
7.81
TELEPHONE BONDS
7.90
7.87
8.75
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
5.86
5.86
6.63
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Amoco Canada Petroleum reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


World Income Group: Hot but Mind the Risk
The chief appeal of the 45 short-term world income funds, which invest mainly in government securities around the world, is their yield: 6.8 percent in March, 4 percentage points more than money market funds.
Because of their juicy yields, these funds sold well when they were started a few years ago.
They hold $14.5 billion in assets today, up from just $8.1 billion in 1990, and only a handful of funds sport three-year returns.


Bede Griffiths, 86, Catholic Monk Who Sought Ties to East, Is Dead
The Rev.
Bede Griffiths, a Roman Catholic monk and author who strove to bridge Christianity and the Hindu and Buddhist traditions of India, died on Thursday in the ashram he had headed since 1968 in southeastern India.
He was 86.
As early as 1954, in "The Golden String," an autobiography recounting his conversion to Catholicism and his entry into a Benedictine monastery, Father Griffiths had urged Christians to recognize "all that is valid and true in all the different religous traditions."


Delta Queen Steamboat (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Queens Party Leader Urges Stein to Quit Mayoral Race
The Queens Democratic Party leader, Representative Thomas J. Manton, endorsed Mayor David N. Dinkins for re-election yesterday and said he had asked his old friend, City Council President Andrew J. Stein, to withdraw from the mayoral race.
The actions by Mr.
Manton, a significant and long-time political supporter of Mr.
Stein, dealt a major blow to the mayoral hopes of the Council President, who has been trailing Mr.
Dinkins badly in virtually all polls for at least six months.


Old Woes, Olerud Sink Yankees
Yankees Manager Buck Showalter spent yesterday afternoon mulling his lineup and making decisions.
He had to replace Don Mattingly, who was officially placed on the disabled list with a strained rib cage before last night's game.
He had to replace center fielder Bernie Williams, who had been put on the d.l. with a similar problem the day before.
And he had to decide how to use Mike Humphreys and Gerald Williams, the two players called up from Class AAA Columbus to round out his roster.
It was a long afternoon.
Last night, though, it was old problems, rather than new ones, that haunted Showalter and his players in their game against the Toronto Blue Jays at Yankee Stadium.
Ice-cold Danny Tartabull struck out with two runners on base and the game tied to end a Yankees' rally in the eighth inning.
And reliever Rich Monteleone gave up a two-run homer to John Olerud in the top of the ninth to give the Blue Jays an 8-6 victory.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball American League  MILWAUKEE BREWERS -- Activated Robin Yount, outfielder, from the 15-day disabled list.
Optioned Troy O'Leary, outfielder, to New Orleans in the American Association.


Review/Dance; An 'Orpheus' of Balanchine and Stravinsky
The New York City Ballet's "Balanchine Celebration" continues on its chronological way.
The 1948 Balanchine-Stravinsky "Orpheus," a masterpiece of lyric theater last performed five years ago, returned on Wednesday night to the New York State Theater with Nilas Martins making a debut in the title role.
A more genuine revival on Thursday was "Bourree Fantasque," a whirlwind of kinetic wit that Balanchine choreographed to Chabrier's music in 1949.
American Ballet Theater staged this effervescent plotless work in 1981-82 with Balanchine's consent.
His own company had performed it through the 1950's, but a 1967 revival was short lived.


NEWS SUMMARY
International 2-5  U.S. HAS NUCLEAR TESTING PLAN
With a moratorium ending, President Clinton is reportedly close to approving a plan for the United States to resume nuclear tests, but he is said to be ready to pledge that this would be the final round.  1  SERBIA'S LAWMAKERS BACK PLAN
At a tumultuous meeting, three Serbian legislatures endorsed an international peace plan.
But Bosnian Serb leaders said they would ignore the resolution and proceed with a referendum this weekend.  1  CROATS TRY DAMAGE CONTROL
Bosnian Croats, to stem Western criticism, open a detention camp near Mostar for Bosnian Serbs to reporters and say that, except for those judged to be soldiers, the residents will be free to return home.  5  MEETING PLANNED ON U.N.
ROLE
The United Nations Security Council plans a rare meeting of foreign ministers to review progress toward peace in Bosnia and other trouble spots and take stock of its growing peacemaking role in the world.  5  U.N.
FAMILY AID TO CHINA IN DOUBT
Alarmed by indications of a harsh family planning crackdown, the United Nations Population Fund is considering withdrawing from China and ending its work in the most populous country in the world.  1  RUSSIA, NEIGHBORS PLAN PACT
In an agreement that was praised by President Yeltsin of Russia as a "turning point," 9 of the 15 former Soviet republics signed a declaration of their intent to form an economic union.  3  International body takes steps to limit whale hunting.  2  A standoff at a French nursery school ends after three days.  3  With a compromise, East German strike appears near an end.  5  Santiago Journal: Arms merchant to Iraq challenges the U.S.  4  National 6-9  TOWN FIGHTS TO KEEP DOCTOR
Residents of Sargent, Neb., consider Dr.
Bernardo Bilang a savior, despite questions about his medical procedures and a February arrest on bank fraud charges.  1  AVOIDING GAY BAN AMENDMENT
House Democrats have postponed a vote on the 1994 military budget to prevent Republicans from adding an amendment preserving the ban on homosexuals in the service.  7  CLINTON URGES HELP FROM FED
President Clinton tried to salvage his economic program by asking the Federal Reserve not to raise interest rates without more evidence of rising inflation.  9
New analysis: To the President, the economy is king.  9
Democratic Senators vowed to pass a tax bill in committee.  9  CAMPUS DIVIDED ON RACIAL SPEECH
Officials at the University of Pennsylvania are debating the limits of free speech in two incidents that have fanned racial tensions on campus this semester.  6  JURY GIVES RAPIST 40 YEARS
A Texas jury recommended that a man whose rape victim asked him to wear a condom be sentenced to 40 years in prison.  6  DIVERSE JURY TO HEAR LOZANO CASE
A racially diverse jury in Orlando will hear the re-trial of a Miami police officer, William Lozano, who was accused of killing two young black men.  6  REMEMBERING A YEAR OF REVOLT
Beliefs: May '68 in Paris remains a stirring example of the strength of the belief in a utopian society.  25  Five Amish children were killed by an unlicensed teen-aged driver.  6  Metro Digest 21  A CLINIC AND ONE MAN'S RISE
A nondescript medical clinic in the Bronx provides the backdrop for the story of how Ramon S. Velez, for a quarter-century, has been the antipoverty lord of the South Bronx.  1  NEW ALLIANCES IN MAYORAL RACE
The Queens Democratic Party leader, Representative Thomas J. Manton, endorsed Mayor Dinkins for re-election and said he had asked his old friend, City Council President Andrew J. Stein, to withdraw from the mayoral race.  1  SCHOOL CHALLENGES IN NEWARK
B32  Prairie Bayou's stablemate wins Black-Eyed Susan.32  Sports People 29  Obituaries 26  Bede Griffiths, a Roman Catholic monk and author.
Michael J. Merkin, paint innovator and philanthropist.
Editorials/Op-Ed 18-19  Editorials  A school system -- for the kids.
Few hits on human rights.
Cheating in college athletics.
Bidding for bonds is cleaner.
Letters  Russell Baker: Joining up for glory.
Peter Kostmayer: Campaign spending -- despised but addictive.
Melvin Jules Bukiet: Broadway book war -- a reader's guide.
Dennis deLeon: My hopes, my fears, my disease.


Employee Benefit Plans Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


NBC's New Fall Lineup: The Year of The Divorced
Roughly half of all marriages end in divorce, so perhaps it is appropriate that roughly half of NBC's new shows center on divorced people.
Yesterday the network, which has spent the current season in third place, announced its new schedule for the fall; it includes 10 new series, or 6 1/2 hours a week of new programming.
Broken marriages feature prominently.


Review/Theater; A Couple's Life, in One Act
Through his numerous one-act comedies, David Ives has proved that he is a master of verbal gymnastics, manipulating language to comment on the difficulties of communication.
While retaining his linguistic dexterity, Mr.
Ives has shifted dramatic ground in his new one-act, "Long Ago and Far Away."
The play (in the Ensemble Studio Theater's Marathon '93) begins on a note of domestic realism.
A married couple are packing to move from one New York City apartment to another.
That upward move brings the husband and wife into collision, as the air is filled with pent-up recrimination.
Gradually the conflict glides into surrealism.
Walls open up, time goes backward and the apartment itself becomes a principal character in a mysterious story.


Howell Industries reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Knicks Play 2 Overtimes and Come Away Just 1 Up
This time it was the Charlotte Hornets who made the biggest plays in the waning moments.
This time it was the Hornets who won a tense, emotional, playoff game that could have gone either way.
This time it was the Knicks who suffered a bitter defeat.
Outlasting New York in a double-overtime marathon that tested both teams and thrilled a capacity crowd tonight, the Hornets outlasted New York, 110-106, before 23,698 screaming fans at the Charlotte Coliseum who will be talking about this game for a long time.
The victory left the Knicks with a 2-1 lead in the four-of-seven-game series, with Game 4 to be played here Sunday afternoon.


Four Admit Guilt In Fraud Schemes
In a blow to the owners of an armored-car company who are accused of stealing $38 million, four people pleaded guilty today to charges stemming from the scheme.
Robert and Susanna Scaretta, the owners of Revere Armored Inc. in Bohemia, L.I., have denied taking any money.
But in Federal District Court in Uniondale this morning, two former employees of Revere and an accountant admitted that they had helped the Scarettas carry out their purported fraud.
And a former vice president at National Westminster Bank said the Scarettas had paid him thousands of dollars to insure that his bank would continue to do business with Revere.


Polishing a New York Diamond in the Rough
Manny Ramirez sat here in the visitors' dugout on a recent drizzly afternoon, fidgeting with a bat and uncomfortably fielding questions about his fledgling professional baseball career.
Why, he was asked, had the Cleveland Indians, who made him their top selection in the 1991 free-agent draft, shifted him from third base, where he starred at George Washington High School in upper Manhattan, to center field, which he played in his first two minor-league seasons, then to his new spot in right?


Agency Takes Step Toward Banning Whaling in Southern Ocean
The International Whaling Commission today took the first step toward declaring one quarter of the world's oceans off limits to whaling, even if the current ban on whaling ends.
The commission, concluding a chaotic and emotional annual meeting here, approved a resolution that "endorses the concept" of establishing a whale sanctuary in the Southern Ocean.
It did not specify the boundaries.


Loblolly Preakness Harbinger
For omens, consider Aztec Hill.
She is the stablemate to Prairie Bayou, the favorite for the Preakness Stakes, and she set an upbeat tone for Loblolly Stable today when she outran nine rivals and won the 69th Black-Eyed Susan Stakes, one of racing's classics for 3-year-old fillies.
Aztec Hill, trained by Tom Bohannan and ridden by Mike Smith, who will handle Prairie Bayou on Saturday, made a stirring charge late in the homestretch to win by half a length.
It was a tight finish with Travers City clinging to second place by a neck over Jacody.
The winner ran the mile and an eighth in 1:493/5 and paid $5.60 for $2 as the solid favorite.


U.S. Industry's Sluggish Pace
People have been worrying for years that America's industrial base, if not shrinking outright, has at the very least been expanding quite slowly.
Yesterday, in a routine monthly report on industrial production, the Federal Reserve reported that industrial capacity during the last five years has indeed been growing more slowly than previously thought -- at an average of just 1.7 percent a year, not 2.4 percent as Fed figures had previously shown.
That is half the pace of the early 1980's.


Wembley on Saturday For Wednesday's Harkes
JOHN HARKES is the only American ever to appear on English soccer's biggest stage.
Today, he returns to Wembley Stadium in London to play in one of the sport's biggest games -- the F.A.
Cup final.
Harkes, of Kearny, N.J., will take his place on the hallowed turf before 80,000 fans and a worldwide television audience as Sheffield Wednesday plays Premier League rival Arsenal in the title match of the Football Association's most prestigious tournament.


Pentagon Budget Vote Is Delayed Over Gay Issue
Fearing an embarrassing setback for President Clinton, House Democrats have postponed a vote on the 1994 military budget to prevent Republicans from attaching an amendment preserving the ban on homosexuals in the military, Congressional officials said today.
The House Armed Services Committee had been scheduled to begin considering the Pentagon's proposed $263 billion budget next week.
The panel's chairman, Representative Ronald V. Dellums of California, and the House Speaker, Thomas S. Foley of Washington State, agreed on Tuesday to wait until late June.
The budget is for the fiscal year that begins Oct. 1.


CHRONICLE
The name of the game at the Waldorf-Astoria on Thursday evening was autograph collecting, a sport that blase New York partygoers normally scorn.
But everywhere the 1,200 guests at the first National Baseball Hall of Fame dinner to be held outside of Cooperstown, N.Y., looked, there were recognizable faces from baseball's past glory days.


Ex-Soviet Nations Agree to Form Economic Union
Nine of the 15 former Soviet republics, including Russia, today signed a declaration of intent to form an economic union to try to restore cohesion to their ruptured relationships.
While the agreement is only a declaration of intent, it was praised by President Boris N. Yeltsin of Russia as a "turning point" in the Commonwealth of Independent States, the loose, 10-member group formed after the Soviet Union collapsed.


Nigeria Moves Toward Civilian Rule
To the Editor:
Your May 1 article on Nigeria misrepresents the political situation.
The Nigerian Government has no part in the campaign by Keith Atkin and the Association for a Better Nigeria, advocating President Ibrahim Babangida's stay in office after Aug. 27, the scheduled date for a civilian takeover.
The Government has stated its determination to transfer power to elected civilians and has disassociated itself from groups and individuals supporting continued military rule.


Plans to Revise School Board Are Stalled
Despite general agreement that New York City's schools need fixing, efforts in the State Legislature to restructure the system are being stalled by regional differences, partisan politics and an ideological dispute over who should have ultimate authority over the nation's largest school system.
The impasse comes even though the Legislature last year postponed school board elections for a year amid hopes of reaching a compromise.


French Toddlers Freed Unharmed; Gunman Shot
Six toddlers and their teacher were freed unharmed this morning after being held by a masked gunman for two days at their nursery school in this leafy suburb of Paris.
The fate of the gunman was not immediately known, although it was reported that he had been shot.
The police were reported to be looking for explosives inside the school.


Connecticut Water Service Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


William Randolph Hearst, Journalist, Dies at 85
William Randolph Hearst Jr., editor in chief of the Hearst newspapers and an heir to the publishing empire established by his father, died yesterday.
He was 85.
He died at his home in New York, said George Raine, the assistant city editor at the San Francisco Examiner, flagship newspaper of the Hearst chain.
Mr.
Raine declined to give a cause of death.


Bridge
A famous story by Robert Darvas concerns a professor of logic who taught himself bridge from a book.
The club secretary reluctantly permitted him to join a game, but aborted it when the professor's first move, as defender, was to lead from a king into an A-Q combination in dummy on his right.
The secretary was then embarrassed when the professor demonstrated that he had found the only winning defense.
The nearest parallel in real life may be Gregory Robbins, an 18-year-old senior at Trinity High School in Manhattan.
At the beginning of 1992 he played hearts, a game favored by President Clinton when relaxing.
He decided to try bridge, and read a series of books, starting with Alfred Sheinwold's "Five Weeks to Winning Bridge" and ending with Larry Cohen's "Law of Total Tricks."


Review/Music; 'Freischutz' in Concert: A Case for the Defense
Sir Colin Davis led the New York Philharmonic in an exuberant concert performance of "Der Freischutz" on Thursday night in an attempt to make a case for an opera that, in recent decades, has been a complete flop at both the City Opera and the Metropolitan.
The ambition is at once superfluous and misguided.
A musical case hardly has to be made for Weber's 1821 work: the overture is famous; the work is ripe with inventive melodies; "Leise, leise" has not wanted for aspirants.
There is a refreshing naive energy to Weber's music.


Oliver Tambo Memorial
A memorial service for Oliver R. Tambo, who helped to lead the fight against apartheid in South Africa, will be held at 2 P.M. tomorrow at the Cathedral of St.
John the Divine, on Amsterdam Avenue at 112th Street in Manhattan.
Mr.
Tambo, who was president of the African National Congress for 25 years, died three weeks ago.
Scheduled speakers include Mayor David N. Dinkins, Harry Belafonte, Theodore Sorensen and H. Carl McCall, the New York State Comptroller.


Berkshire Hathaway Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


OMI Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


A Recording Label Born in a Taxi
Driving a taxi in New York City does for most people's mental health what a market crash does for investors' psyches.
But one Wall Street exile turned his dilapidated cab into a combination psychologist's couch and power office.
A decade and a few thousand fares after he started weaving through traffic, the former Wall Street trader, Michael Covitt, has emerged as an independent record producer.
And so far, his budding music label has survived in the face of the consolidation that is reconfiguring the recording business.


Oshawa Group reports earnings for Qtr to April 17


Beliefs; From an uprising a quarter-century ago, a lesson of persistence in the utopian faith.
Paris 25 years ago, May 10, 1968.
It is an easy night to remember.
Venturing briefly into the no-man's land between student barricades and police blockades.
Deciding an escape plan after a nearby building caught fire: the baby will go in her backpack and the disposable diapers in a shopping bag; maybe take the guitar and, of course, the notes for the doctoral dissertation.


Observer; Joining Up For Glory
Here is another country-club problem.
They are always the same.
Someone political is found to be a member of or to have played golf at a racially segregated country club.
After the discovery, the fat is in the fire, as we used to say back when we still had cliches fit for children's ears.
This week's case involves Webster L. Hubbell, a Little Rock lawyer nominated to become Associate Attorney General.
The usual minuet is now in progress.


Europe's New Airline Rules Displease U.S.
The European Community has adopted measures limiting air fare cuts and access by United States carriers, in a move that could fuel a trans-Atlantic trade war, Government officials say.
The General Accounting Office, the research arm of Congress, reported this week that these measures include a prohibition against noncommunity airlines' introducing low fares on routes between community countries.


Bidding for Bonds Is Cleaner
Dubious dealings in two bond issues have suddenly intruded on the gubernatorial election race in New Jersey and the mayoral race in New York City.
Both cases demonstrate the unsavory influence political money can have in the business of underwriting state and city bonds.
Gov.
Jim Florio of New Jersey has been embarrassed by Federal investigations of a Turnpike Authority bond issue, and of the role of an investment firm half-owned by his closest aide.
Last week he ordered that underwriters for all future state issues be chosen by competitive bidding.
This week he proposed legislation to require competitive bidding for local and county bonds, too.


Attic Fire Kills Grandmother And 3 of Her Grandchildren
For as long as neighbors can remember, the big beige house where Louise Murphy lived had always brimmed with children.
The 60-year-old home health aide raised her five children in the house on Goldsmith Avenue.
Then there were grandchildren, eight in all, coming and going all the time.


Classical Music in Review
Masters of Persian Music Symphony Space
Among its many series devoted to folk and classical music from around the globe, the World Music Institute presented several concerts this season under the title "New Americans," featuring musicians who have recently moved to the United States.
The concept is interesting, because it throws some light on the great variety of immigrant traditions now taking root in the American musical world, traditions that may eventually join, or at least affect, the mainstream.
The final concert in this year's series offered a glimpse of the Persian classical style as performed by Mohammad Reza Lotfi, a player of the tar and setar, which are long-necked, plucked stringed instruments.
Mr.
Lotfi came to the United States in 1987 and established the Shayda Cultural and Artistic Center in Washington.
He was accompanied on the tonbak (a goblet-shaped drum) and the daf (a large round flat drum) by Houman Pourmehdi.


Croats Invite Inspection Of Jail Holding Muslims
At every window of the old Yugoslav Army jail, faces were pressed against the lattice of iron bars, children and women on the ground floor, men on the two stories above them.
As they stared fixedly into the humid afternoon, only the boldest would nod at visitors outside.
On the sidewalk behind the jail, Demir Ljubic, a young worker with the Bosnian Croats' humanitarian agency, looked up at the windows and apologized to a reporter.
"It's a bad image problem, these bars," he said.
"We'd pull them off if we could." A fellow Croat, Branko Colo, nodded.
"You see, it's just a building that we had to use."


Ending the Subsidies For Timber Barons
To the Editor:
The Forest Service's plan to phase out taxpayer-subsidized timber sales in our national forests (front page, April 30) is long overdue.
The timber companies contend the Government loses money by complying with environmental standards.
Would critics argue that we should revert to the days when we played erosion roulette with watersheds for half the West's drinking water supply?
Or not worry about the impact on fish and wildlife?
Moreover, the highest cost for taxpayers stems from bulldozing roads to remote forest areas, often up steep hillsides, a road system eight times the interstate highway system.


MOYNIHAN EXPECTS TAX BILL SUCCESS
Republicans will provide no votes for President Clinton's tax bill when the Senate Finance Committee considers the measure next month, but the committee chairman said Democrats would manage to produce a bill anyway.
"Don't worry, your taxes will be raised," the chairman, Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan, told reporters today with a laugh.
Mr.
Moynihan, a New York Democrat, and said that in the end all 11 Democrats on the committee would back the bill while all nine Republicans would oppose it.


Don't Make Asylum Seekers Hysteria Victims; Suspicious Policy Shift
To the Editor:
Having been interviewed at length for your April 25 front-page article on the asylum system, I was surprised by its one-sided reliance on Immigration and Naturalization Service officials and the Federation for American Immigration Reform, the anti-immigrant group.
*
You overstate the undocumented asylum seekers arriving at Kennedy International Airport.
At the present rate, 7,000 such applicants will arrive at Kennedy this year, 22 percent fewer than in fiscal year 1992.
These airport cases in no way add to the overburdened asylum system, as none of them are heard by the 150 asylum officers you mention.


2 Universities Lose Technology Grant Status
Criticizing their handling of grants to advance high-technology research, Columbia University and the Polytechnic University of New York yesterday lost their designations as state centers for advanced technology.
Instead, eight other universities in the state were awarded the status, making them eligible for grants of up to $1 million a year, Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo announced.


Don't Take That A Train! Ever! I Mean It, Son!
THERE are moments known to most parents when a child deserves a kick in the pants and a pat on the back at the same time.
The kid has done something foolish, even dangerous, but it is also cute, funny, clever.
You shout, you tremble, but you could break into laughter at any second.
In years to come what you will recall is not how the 6-year-old almost blew up the house but how serious she looked turning on the gas to bake Play-Doh cookies.
So let's start with the straight-faced pants kicking.


CHRONICLE
Awards selections can sometimes throw together remarkably incongruous groups of people.
Who would expect to see a group, for example, that includes BARRY COMMONER, the environmental scientist; AL HIRSCHFELD, the caricaturist; PHYLLIS DILLER, the comedian; BOB GIBSON, the pitcher, and MONA VAN DUYN, the nation's poet laureate?
They are among 10 people who will be inducted tomorrow into the St.
Louis Walk of Fame.
In their honor, brass stars and bronze plaques will be set into a sidewalk on Delmar Boulevard in the University City Loop area.


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY STEIN IS ASKED TO QUIT RACE
The Queens Democratic Party leader, Representative Thomas J. Manton, endorsed Mayor David N. Dinkins for re-election and said he had asked his old friend, City Council President Andrew J. Stein, to withdraw from the mayoral race.
The actions by Mr.
Manton, a significant and longtime political supporter of Mr.
Stein, dealt a major blow to the mayoral hopes of the Council President, who has been trailing Mr.
Dinkins badly in virtually all polls for at least six months.
Page 1.
A CLINIC'S HISTORY REVEALS BRONX EMPIRE
Behind a bland, forest-green medical center in Soundview, the Bronx, is a tempestuous and complicated story.
In part, it is a story of how, for years, a neighborhood was deprived of access to decent medical care.
It is also a story of the ubiquitous influence of a man who, for a quarter-century, has been the antipoverty lord of the South Bronx, Ramon S. Velez.
Second of two articles, page 1.
LAUNCHING A LABEL FROM A MEDALLION
A decade and a few thousand fares after switching from Wall Street trading to driving a New York taxi, the owner of a budding record label has found that a cab can be the perfect launching pad for making contacts and raising money for a new business.
And so far, the label has survived in the face of consolidation that is reconfiguring the recording business.
Page 35.
BAY RIDGE WARNED OF BACTERIA IN WATER
Residents of Bay Ridge, Brooklyn, should boil their tap water before drinking or cooking with it because routine testing has found bacteria that can cause nausea, cramps, diarrhea and other symptoms, city officials said.
Tests showed that the contamination was confined to Bay Ridge, in the area south of 86th Street and west of Fort Hamilton Parkway, said a spokesman for the New York City Department of Environmental Protection.
Page 22.
REGION SCHOOLS' TRIALS IN NEWARK
At Malcolm X Shabazz High School in Newark, almost all the students are coping with problems like caring for babies, dealing with incarcerated parents and surviving gang violence.
New Jersey education officials moved closer this week to seizing control of Shabazz and the rest of the Newark school system, fueling a bitter debate about how to educate poor students in the state's largest school system.
Page 1.
JAILING OF 3 IN GLEN RIDGE CASE URGED
Prosecutors denounced the three former high school football players convicted in the Glen Ridge sex-assault case as threats to society and urged a New Jersey appeals court to order them jailed immediately.
"These convicted rapists are sexual predators who pose a danger to society," the prosecutors said in a motion asking an appeals court to revoke the bail that allows the three former athletes to remain free pending appeals of their convictions.
Page 24.
2-YEAR-OLD KILLED BY NEIGHBOR'S DOG
A two-year-old child playing on a swing in a neighbor's backyard in Hicksville, L.I., was killed by a neighbor's dog, the police said.
The child was bitten repeatedly by the dog in the yard across the street from his own home on Terrell Lane in Hicksville.
The boy's mother was in the yard with her son but was unable to stop the attack.
Page 24.
About New York by Michael T. Kaufman 23


Derby Hero Slighted On the Preakness Line
The sign on the wall of the Stakes Barn trumpeted the message: "Stall 40 was the Pimlico home of these outstanding Preakness winners." Then it listed 11 celebrated race horses, starting with Carry Back in 1961 and Northern Dancer in 1964, peaking with Secretariat in 1973, Seattle Slew in 1977 and Affirmed and Spectacular Bid the next two years and concluding with Sunday Silence in 1989.
The horse now in Stall 40 stared through the webbing that guarded the open door.
He was Sea Hero, the star of the barn because he won the Kentucky Derby two weeks ago.
But in the strange logic of horse racing, winning the Derby still wasn't enough.


Business Digest
International
Trade Ministers from the United States, Europe, Japan and Canada made significant progress in concluding seven years of negotiations under the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade.
There was nearly complete agreement on a package of tariff cuts, including ones that could spur imports to Japan.  [ Page 35. ]


Hakeem for the Defense
HAKEEM OLAJUWON, the league leader in blocked shots for the third time in the last four seasons and the leader among centers in steals, yesterday won the National Basketball Association defensive player of the year award.
The 7-foot Olajuwon, who led the Houston Rockets to a franchise-record 55 victories and their first division title in seven seasons, received 73 of a possible 98 votes from a nationwide panel of sportswriters and broadcasters.


President's Brother Involved in Altercation
President Clinton's brother, Roger, and a New York Knicks fan were involved in an altercation at the playoff game Wednesday night at Madison Square Garden, after the two men exchanged words at the buzzer, a spokeswoman for the Garden said yesterday.
The fan, Devin Arkison, 28, a stockbroker from New Jersey, could not be reached yesterday and Mr.
Clinton minimized the incident, saying: "There was no fight. No nothing."


Jackpot Enterprises reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Results Plus
TENNIS Sampras and Courier Advance in Rome Pete Sampras, No. 1 in the world, and Jim Courier, the man ranked behind him, advanced to the semifinals by overpowering two clay-court specialists yesterday at the Italian Open in Rome.
Sampras routed unseeded Guillermo Perez-Roldan, 6-0, 6-2, in just over an hour in a match interrupted twice by rain.
Courier, the defending champion and playing in his first clay-court tournament of the year, never lost his serve in defeating seventh-seeded Sergi Bruguera, 6-3, 6-4.
Sixth-seeded Michael Chang saved two match points and went on to defeat Andrei Chesnokov, 6-3, 5-7, 7-5, in 3 hours 38 minutes, the year's longest three-set match on the tour.
Big-serving Goran Ivanisevic of Croatia, seeded fourth, downed Marcelo Filippini, 7-6 (7-4), 6-4, to also reach the semifinals.
In today's semifinals, Sampras will play Ivanisevic, and Courier will face Chang.
It's the first time in the tournament's 50-year history that three Americans have reached the semifinals.


Sports of The Times; Islanders Climbing Jacob's Ladder
LARRY MURPHY wasn't the first Penguin to come out of the locker room, but he was the first to speak.
Tom Barrasso, the Pittsburgh goalie walked into tomb-like silence of the locker room, past camera crews, reporters, gathered his clothes and walked away.
Jaromir Jagr, the Penguins' star right wing, flashed by the crowd with barely a glance left or right.


DVI Health Services reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Volek Redeems a Miserable Season
Pierre Turgeon returned heroically for the Islanders tonight, only 16 days after his separated shoulder was supposed to keep him out for the remainder of the playoffs.
But the biggest hero for the Islanders was David Volek, a player who, recently, has often had to sit and watch.
Volek became an instant celebrity on Long Island when his sudden-death overtime goal gave the Islanders a 4-3 overtime triumph over the Penguins and catapulted them into the Stanley Cup semifinals.


Airgas Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Adaptec Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


The Baron Of the Bronx -- Second of two articles.; In an Antipoverty Empire, A Clinic Is an Opportunity
Despite its fresh coat of paint, the large forest-green medical clinic at Westchester and Metcalf Avenues in the Soundview section of the Bronx echoes the blandness of its surroundings -- a row of private homes, some elevated train tracks, an empty supermarket.
On Monday mornings, when it is busiest, the clinic seems unremarkable, its large sitting area half-filled with dozens of people willing to wait hours rather than deal with Medicaid mills or hospital emergency rooms.


CLINTON EXPECTED TO ORDER RENEWAL OF NUCLEAR TESTS
With a Congressional moratorium on nuclear testing due to expire on July 1, President Clinton is expected to approve a plan that would allow underground blasts to resume by the end of the year, Administration officials said today.
But the officials said Mr.
Clinton was likely to emphasize that he intended to call a final halt to the testing in 1996.


Pavarotti Concert in the Park
Luciano Pavarotti, now fully recovered from his recent knee surgery, and looking only slightly trimmer than before he underwent a weight-loss program this winter, announced yesterday that he would sing a free concert at the Great Lawn in Central Park on June 26, accompanied by members of the New York Philharmonic.
This will be Mr.
Pavarotti's second attempt at a Central Park solo turn, although he has appeared there several times in Metropolitan Opera performances.
In June 1991 he tried to give a park concert with the Metropolitan Opera Orchestra, but was rained out after a few arias.
London Records had hoped to tape that performance for release on CD, but had to shelve its soggy tapes and record the tenor in Hyde Park, London, instead.


Independence Holding Co.  (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Long Drive Keeps Davies Ahead of Pack
Before there was a John Daly, there was Laura Davies.
Like Daly, the 29-year-old Englishwoman arrived on the golf scene by winning a major championship, in her case, the 1987 United States Women's Open.
Like Daly, she is a monstrously big hitter, actually longer off the tee relative to her competition.
And like Daly, Davies has suffered from long patches of erratic play since her spectacular debut.


BELGRADE MEETING BACKS PEACE PLAN
At a tumultuous meeting marked by insults, accusations and angry walkouts, three Serbian legislatures endorsed an international peace plan for Bosnia and Herzegovina today and urged the Bosnian Serbs to sign it.
But a boycott of the meeting by Serbs from both Bosnia and Croatia raised questions whether the endorsement would have any effect.
Bosnian Serb leaders, who have already rejected the plan three times, said they would ignore the resolution and proceed with a referendum this weekend that is expected to produce a resounding vote against the plan.


Whites Long Welcome At Black Colleges
To the Editor:
Your May 5 front-page article on white students attending historically black colleges and universities gives the impression that this is something new.
But predominantly black colleges in the North and in border states have enrolled white students for more than a century.
Those in the South were segregated by law, not choice, and always welcomed white students willing to cross the Jim Crow line to enroll in them.
Lincoln University of Pennsylvania, originally Ashmun Institute, founded in 1854 as America's first college for students of African descent, enrolled its first white students in the 1860's.
The class of 1868, the first to graduate after the university was renamed for the slain President, had six students, two of them white.


Rapist Who Agreed to Use Condom Gets 40 Years
A jury recommended today that Joel Rene Valdez be sentenced to 40 years in prison for rape in a case that centered on his victim's insistence that he use condoms to protect her from disease and pregnancy.
With the jury's decision, which was accepted immediately by the judge, Mr.
Valdez, 28, must serve at least 10 years before he is eligible for parole.
The same jury had convicted Mr.
Valdez of aggravated sexual assault the day before.


Landmarks Preservation Works for New York
To the Editor:
Some disgruntled applicants to New York City's Landmarks Preservation Commission are described in an April 28 news article.
But put in perspective, the Commission has almost 19,000 buildings in its purview, and the 10 preservationists on its staff annually issue approximately 4,000 permits for alterations to them.
Ninety percent of these permits are reviewed and granted in a few weeks and materialize as improvements to the city's most treasured buildings.
In the TriBeCa West Historic District, for example, in the first 18 months after it was designated May 7, 1991, 52 of the area's 220 buildings received permits for work.
That is, almost 25 percent of the buildings in the district underwent renovation and reinvestment, in an otherwise sluggish economic climate.


Santiago Journal; Is He 'Merchant of Death' or Scapegoat for U.S.?
He has been called the "merchant of death" and a "black widow spider" by United States officials, but he is known around town by diplomats and officials as Carlos, the man who amassed hundreds of millions of dollars by making lethal weapons and exporting them to Iraq.
For two years the United States has been investigating Carlos Cardoen Cornejo in connection with the illegal export of zirconium for use in cluster bombs for Iraq in the late 1980's.


Genuine Risk Nearing Labor
Three Chimneys Farm near Midway, Ky., reported yesterday that Genuine Risk was "comfortable, healthy and happy" but not yet a mother.
The 16-year-old mare, who won the Kentucky Derby in 1980, was "showing all the signs" of nearing the end of her term and delivering a foal for the first time after 13 years of misfortunes and miscarriages, officials at the farm said.


Horror's Stigma Still Clings to a Disbarred Lawyer
One winter morning 15 years ago, a 48-year-old lawyer named Robert T. Rowe simply snapped.
As his eldest son lay sleeping, Mr.
Rowe killed him with a baseball bat.
Then he killed his daughter, and then his second son, in the same grisly way.
When his wife returned from work, he bludgeoned her to death as well.
Unable to turn the bat on himself, Mr.
Rowe instead turned on the gas stove at his home in Mill Basin, Brooklyn.
He was saved from suicide only when neighbors smelled the fumes and called the police.


Liuski International (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Federal Realty Investment Trust Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Review/Rock; The Kinks, Old Hands, Remain on the Wild Side
Rock 'n' roll (as opposed to the more corporate Rock-and-Roll) has always deified the amateur, making inspiration the product of divine intervention more than hard work.
The Kinks, some 30 years after coming together as a group, performed at the Academy on Thursday night.
Here's what their lead singer and songwriter, Ray Davies, had to say after claiming that the induction of the band into the Rock-and-Roll Hall of Fame in 1990 had not affected it: "We're more untogether than ever. Let's hear it for imperfection!"
Sloppy, wild and mostly joyous, the Kinks mine amateurishness to the end of the vein; it may be just another rock routine, but the band pulls it off and makes it seem real.


No Headline
"I am Xan Wilson. In the past, I've been known as the condom rape victim. I am not the condom rape victim: I do not have the victim's mentality. I am a survivor of rape, which is a violent crime." -- ELIZABETH XAN WILSON, to jurors in Austin before her attacker was sentenced.  [ 6:1. ]


General Automation reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Vacationing on the Run: Getting Away From It All at the Last Minute
Profile: Grace and William Chen and their two daughters Cheryl, 7, and Crystal, 6, of Manhattan, like to vacation in the Caribbean, About six years ago they discovered that they could get inexpensive holidays if they willinf to forfeit long-range planning in exchange for some last minute gambles.
Mrs.
Chen signed up with Moment's Notice, one of a number of travel agencies that specialize in discounted, short-natice vacations. (Mr. Chen, a product manager at a garment manufacturer, can take vacation without giving his boss more than a month's notice.) For an annual fee, she can call a hot line 30 days before her planned travel date to find out what type of last-minute bargains are avaliable.
There tend to be fewer trips to exotic places than for more common vacation spots and bargains are rarely avaliable during high holiday season.
If nothing interests her, she calls the travelk agent directly, requesting firsta and second-choice destinations along with dates of travel and total budget.
Then she waits


INSIDE
Clinton Tries to Focus Attention on Economy
At a Rose Garden news conference in which he concentrated on economic issues, the President said the Federal Reserve Board should avoid raising interest rates to stem inflation.
Article and news analysis, page 9.
Economic Pact for Russia
Backed by President Boris N. Yeltsin of Russia, 9 of the 15 former Soviet republics signed a declaration of intent for an economic union.
Page 3.
Islanders Upset Penguins
The Islanders eliminated the defending champion Pittsburgh Penguins in overtime in the National Hockey League playoffs.
Page 27.


This Time, Race Goes to the Swiftest
The battle raged for 58 minutes, and maybe the single most important moment came when Anthony Mason lost a footrace he didn't know he was in to the smallest man on the floor, Muggsy Bogues.
For all its vertical elements, even basketball sometimes is reduced to how fast the feet can move.
And nobody moves faster than Bogues.


Hamilton Wants In
It turns out that SCOTT HAMILTON was on the list of pro skaters who requested reinstatement and a possible chance to qualify for the 1994 Winter Olympics in Lillehammer, Norway.
Hamilton applied to the United States Figure Skating Association before the April 1 deadline, but he asked that his application not be made public.
He indicated in a statement yesterday that he was not "making a big push for the Olympics."


In Clinton Plan, More People May Fall Under the Alternative Minimum Tax
The well-to-do are well aware that their income taxes are likely to go up under the Clinton Administration's tax proposal, which was adopted with relatively few changes on Thursday by the House Ways and Means Committee.
But many people have yet to figure out how changes in one part of the law -- the alternative minimum tax provisions -- will affect them.
The provisions are meant to prevent wealthy taxpayers from sheltering too much of their income


A U.N. Agency May Leave China Over Coercive Population Control
Alarmed by indications of a harsh family planning crackdown in the Chinese countryside, the United Nations Population Fund is considering withdrawing from China and ending its work in the most populous country in the world.
The fund's withdrawal from China would end a fierce decadelong controversy about the role of the United Nations in China's one-child family planning program.


Monica Healea, 93, Physicist and Artist
Dr.
Monica Healea, physics professor emeritus and former chairman of the physics department at Vassar College, died on Tuesday at a nursing home in Rhinebeck, N.Y.
She was 93.
Dr.
Healea, who was born in Uhrichsville, Ohio, was a resident of Pleasant Valley, N.Y., until nine years ago.
She earned her B.A. and M.A. degrees at Bryn Mawr College and held a Ph.D. from Harvard University.
She joined the Vassar faculty in 1933 and retired in 1962.


Clinton Asks Reserve Board Not to Raise Interest Rates
Seeking to salvage his troubled economic program, President Clinton urged the Federal Reserve Board today not to raise interest rates, at least until there is "more evidence" of rising inflation.
Mr.
Clinton's comments came in answer to a question about Federal Reserve policy at a news conference in the White House Rose Garden, where he defended his leadership style and asserted that he had taken on tougher challenges than his two immediate predecessors.


Trade Pact Group Forms; Its Legality Is Questioned
Mickey Kantor, the United States trade representative, has organized a coalition of state and local officials to support the North American Free Trade Agreement, prompting a Democratic Congressman to call for an investigation of whether the group violates Federal law.
The group, which Mr.
Kantor announced on Wednesday, includes the Governors of Colorado, Massachusetts, Texas and Wisconsin and its aim, according to a statement issued by Mr.
Kantor, is to "work to generate support" for the trade agreement.


Classical Music in Review
Music Today  Merkin Concert Hall
The Music Today Ensemble, Merkin Concert Hall's resident new-music group, closed its season on Wednesday evening with a program fully devoted to chamber works by the German avant-gardist Karlheinz Stockhausen.
Mr.
Stockhausen's works can be illuminating and inventive or drearily introspective, depending on which pieces a performer chooses.
Neil Balm and Jonathan Haas, the directors of Music Today, seem to know their way around the composer's repertory, and they put together a program of works that were generally light-spirited, theatrical and unfamiliar.
Mr.
Balm opened the concert with a suave, colorful account of "Eingang und Formel" ("Entrance and Formula"), a solo trumpet piece from the opera "Donnerstag aus Licht" ("Thursday's Light").
Brief as it is, the piece ranges in style from abstract atonality to a kind of smoky, 1950's variety of club jazz, yet seems a coherent, cohesive statement.


Q &amp; A
Finding Net Worth Q. How can I calculate my net worth?
MARK JACKLER, Scotch Plains, N.J.
A.
Net worth represents the difference between an individual's or a family's assets and liabilities - and can be easily calculated.
The most common assets are cash, securities, real estate and personal property.
Other assets include the cash value of life insurance, a vested interest in retirement plans and loans to others.


Review/Television; The Conquest of the West As the Conquered Saw It
What is it about the American Indian that brings out the pretentiousness of documentary makers?
"How the West Was Lost," an often moving six-part series told from the point of view of the peoples who were decimated as successive waves of invaders, colonizers and settlers swept across their lands, is marred by arty effects and a determination to present the Indians not just as victims of greed, cruelty and ignorance but also as spiritually superior to their conquerors.
Sunday's opening hour, about the assault on the Navajo in the 1860's by troops commanded by Gen.
James H. Carleton and led by his protege, Kit Carson, draws effectively on archival photographs of Indians and cavalry. (Congratulations to the series researcher, Jodi Archambault.)


Corrections
An article in Science Times on May 4 about rare green icebergs misstated the basis for their color.
The icebergs form when blocks break off Antarctic ice shelves and capsize, bringing into view frozen sea water that makes up the bottom part of the iceberg.
The frozen sea water has a green appearance -- not yellow -- because it contains dissolved yellowish-brown organic material.
Pure ice appears blue, and the presence of the organic material shifts the color to green.


Accord on L.I. Would Shield Pine Barrens From Builders
In a remarkable turnabout after years of conflict, developers, environmental groups and local officials in Suffolk County have tentatively agreed on a plan to preserve about half the 100,000 acres of Pine Barrens on eastern Long Island.
"This is really an unprecedented coming together," said Richard L. Amper Jr., the executive director of the Long Island Pine Barrens Society, a preservation group involved in the talks.
"For the first time, there's a willingness to preserve vast areas."


Miltope Group Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Schoolchildren Rally Against Drugs on Lower East Side


Classical Music in Review
Bryant Park Young Performers Series  Bryant Park
Last year the Bryant Park Restoration Corporation spent $8.9 million refurbishing the park, which is bounded by the New York Public Library and Avenue of the Americas between 41st and 42d Streets, with the idea of reclaiming it as a pleasant place to spend an afternoon.
Among the lures was a lunchtime concert series devoted mostly to young performers and composers from New York City's schools, sometimes in collaboration with more established young musicians and even an occasional star.
The second Bryant Park Young Performers Series got under way on Monday afternoon, with the baritone Sherrill Milnes as the star draw.
Mr.
Milnes, accompanied by Daniel Sutton, a pianist from the Juilliard School, walked effortlessly through an aria from Giordano's "Andrea Chenier," an arrangement of "Shenandoah" and Vittorio Giannini's "Tell Me, O Blue Blue Sky," giving a blustery account of the "Champagne Aria" from "Don Giovanni."


A Bid to Free Olympia Unit From Canada
Citibank, the biggest creditor of the American unit of Olympia &amp; York Developments Ltd., the Canadian developer, asked a Federal bankruptcy judge yesterday to bar Canadian influence over the management of the American operation.
In a motion filed in Federal Bankruptcy Court in Manhattan, Citibank asked that John Zuccotti, head of Olympia &amp; York USA, be put in sole control of the company and its assets, a Citibank official said.


It's 718 Tomorrow
The Bronx joins the 718 area code this Sunday after a transition period that began July 1, 1992.
During the transition period, callers could dial either the 718 or 212 area code and still reach the Bronx, but beginning at 12:01 A.M.
Sunday they must use the 718 area code only.


A School System -- For the Kids
If New Yorkers needed further proof that the city school system requires a drastic overhaul, they now have it in the election of Carol Gresser as president of the Board of Education.
Ms.
Gresser, from Queens, represents the narrow interests that have dominated the board for the last year.
She also cast the deciding vote in the 4-to-3 decision to fire Schools Chancellor Joseph Fernandez.
Her elevation, and this month's poor turnout in local school board elections, suggest larger problems.
The ideal of decentralization has given way to the reality of a system poisoned by divided authority, stifling bureaucracy and a territorial obsession among board members with politics and patronage.


Neighbor's 121-Pound Dog Kills a 2-Year-Old Boy in Hicksville
A 2-year-old child playing on a swing in a neighbor's backyard in Hicksville, L.I., was killed by the neighbor's dog yesterday, the police said.
The child, William Sheppard, was bitten repeatedly by the dog, said Detective Jerry Nevola of the Nassau County police.
The boy's mother, Jill Sheppard, 22, was in the yard with her son but was unable to stop the attack until it was too late.


A Patchwork Lineup Unravels on the Mets
The defeats keep coming, in all misshapes and sizes.
Any attempt to rank them this season has amounted to a joyless, even masochistic, enterprise.
The Mets, though, might have ended the exercise tonight, for it would require a rare, even morbid, imagination to conceive a defeat more grisly than the 8-7 loss to the Expos at Olympic Stadium.
A 3-0 lead in the first was a 5-3 deficit by the time the second inning started.
The Expos scored their five runs in the first on all of one hit, and that wasn't even a home run.


A King-Size Lawsuit
A minority owner of the Sacramento Kings has filed suit against his partner for allegedly misappropriating $22 million in partnership funds.


Newark Students, Both Good and Bad, Make Do
Every morning at Malcolm X Shabazz High School, before Shakespeare or algebra, all 1,215 students form four jagged lines to be patted down for weapons in this South Side neighborhood of vacant lots and ramshackle buildings.
At the end of the day, scholars and troublemakers alike file out to a street guarded by four police officers and blocked off on either end to deter fights and to stop students in stolen cars from zipping by.
In the hours between, both teachers and students concede that they mostly make do.


Dying Nebraska Town Finds New Hope in Outcast Doctor
In the America of shopping malls, cul-de-sacs and home-delivered pizza, Dr.
Bernardo G. Bilang would hardly be the first choice of a family looking for a doctor.
As a result of questionable medical procedures, he has been forced to surrender his right to practice in one state and has agreed never again to deliver babies in another.
And in February he was arrested on Federal bank fraud charges.


Gerrity Oil &amp; Gas (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Plenty of New Offerings, But Read the Fine Print
CAN you be tempted with a rebate on your next G.M. or Ford automobile?
Or some cash tossed into a retirement savings plan for every purchase you make?
Or maybe by the chance for a sizable discount on the origination charges when you next apply for a mortgage?
The opportunity to halve the interest charges on your current credit card balance?
A way to add frequent flier miles?


Envirotest Systems Corp.  (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Improbable. Impossible. Incredible. Islanders.
They are still a long shot and still an underdog.
But as one of the teams now in hockey's Final Four, the Islanders (the Islanders?) have a realistic, legitimate chance to win the Stanley Cup.
"Why not?" said Glenn Healy, the goalie. "Who else can do it?"


Icahn Bids $1.18 Billion Cash For Control of Bankrupt E-II
Continuing his efforts to acquire E-II Holdings Inc., Carl C. Icahn offered yesterday to pay $1.18 billion in cash for the bankrupt holding company, which owns Culligan water purification systems, Samsonite luggage and the maker of Botany 500 men's suits.
The billionaire financier said in a letter to E-II's board yesterday that he had more than enough capital to complete the deal within two weeks of its acceptance because he had recently refinanced one of his holdings.


Lowe's Cos.  reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


30 Congresswomen Want Health Plan To Cover Abortion
Thirty women in the House of Representatives called on the Clinton Administration today to include abortion services in the benefits package guaranteed under its health-care plan.
"We understand that this is likely to become a major battle within the health-care reform debate," the women, mostly Democrats, said in a letter sent to Hillary Rodham Clinton, the chairwoman of the President's Task Force on Health Care Reform.
"We stand ready to work with you to insure the votes for coverage of abortion services. But Administration support will be crucial."


An Old Rivalry Is Retread
Goodyear, the tire company that has had the Indianapolis 500 to itself since 1975, will be getting some competition.
Bridgestone, the Japanese tire company that bought Firestone, Goodyear's last competitor at the Indianapolis 500, announced yesteray that it would return to the world's most famous auto race in 1995.


A Campus Case: Speech or Harassment?
Amid preparations for Monday's commencement exercises, University of Pennsylvania officials spent much of today dealing with the racial tension that has plagued the campus over the last semester.
The university's Judicial Inquiry Office held a closed hearing today to determine whether a white student who had called some black students "water buffalo" had violated the university's policy forbidding racial harassment.
The policy prohibits racial epithets meant to "inflict direct injury" on people.


Alcohol's Benefits
To the Editor:
Re "Study Finds 2 Drinks a Day Keep Heart Fit" (news item, May 3): The conclusions of Dr.
J.
Michael Gizano's clinical study have been suggested in other research trials as well.
However, it is imperative that the millions of postmenopausal women who have had endometriosis, growth of tissue, as on the ovaries or in the peritoneal cavity, be alerted to other clinical findings.
Dr.
Judith Gavalier of the University of Pittsburgh has demonstrated that as few as three to six drinks a week can stimulate metabolic reactions that increase estrogen levels in postmenopausal women.


MDC Holdings Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Mixed Jury Picked to Try Policeman
After a yearlong odyssey that five times bounced the case from one Florida city to another, the effort to find a racially and ethnically balanced jury in the retrial of a Miami policeman accused of killing two young black men was rewarded today with the seating of a panel here that includes white, Hispanic and black members.
The racial composition of the jury that will try William Lozano, a 33-year-old Colombian-born police officer who was convicted in 1989 of two counts of manslaughter, has been the focal point of the racially explosive case since the original verdict was overturned two years ago.
A new trial was ordered by an appeals court, which ruled that Mr.
Lozano's right to a fair trial had been violated because the original Miami jury feared that racial violence might break out if it acquitted him.


COMPANY BRIEFS
CARDIS CORP., Buena Park, Calif., sold its Northern California operations to Auto Parts Wholesalers Inc. and seeks a buyer for the remainder of its operations to pay off creditors.
FOURTH FINANCIAL CORP., Wichita, Kan., purchased Guaranty Bancorporation, and merged Guaranty's subsidiary Guaranty Bank and Trust Company of Tulsa, Okla., with its own Bank IV Oklahoma.


Corrections
Picture captions with the Chronicle column yesterday were reversed in some copies.
The man shown was Dan Rather; the woman was Evelyn Lauder.


Cheating in College Athletics
It's scarcely news that college athletics is corrupt.
What's stunning is that Dick Schultz, the reform-minded executive director of the National Collegiate Athletic Association, has resigned because of a scandal specific to him.
The case involves illicit loans to athletes at the University of Virginia a decade ago, when Mr.
Schultz was athletic director there.
Mr.
Schultz denies knowledge of the loans, some of which were as small as $50.
But this week an N.C.A.A. investigator concluded that Mr.
Schultz "had actual knowledge" of at least some of the transactions.


Poor Economic News Trims the Dow Further
Facing another round of disquieting economic news, the stock market struggled yesterday to erase Thursday's sharp losses.
But the Dow Jones industrial average, which fell 34.32 points on Thursday, still lost another 4.98 points, closing at 3,443.01.
For the week, however, the Dow index closed up 5.82 points.


Few Hits on Human Rights
Candidate Bill Clinton talked tough about human rights, promising a harder line on abuses in China, Haiti and Bosnia.
As President, he's fielded an excellent team to devise and carry out policy.
Yet the results so far are mixed: tough on some issues, tentative on others -- mainly China.
It's good news, for example, that the Clinton team seeks to make noise at the United Nations about flagrant abusers.
His proposals for a new post of U.N.
High Commissioner for Human Rights and for a special envoy to focus on abuses against women are useful ideas.
China, Iran and Pakistan may oppose U.N. human rights monitors, but the U.S. speaks for more of the world in favoring them.
And Mr.
Clinton deserves full credit for joining in U.N. criticism of Indonesia's abuses in East Timor.


SECURITY COUNCIL SETS RARE SESSION
The Security Council plans a rare meeting of members' Foreign Ministers here next Friday to review progress toward peace in Bosnia and other trouble spots and take stock of the United Nations' growing peacemaking role in the world, diplomats announced today.
The meeting of the Council's 15 foreign minister was called by Russia, this month's President, and will be led by its Foreign Minister, Andrei V. Kozyrev, said Russia's United Nations representative, Yuli M. Vorontsov.


Nationwide Cellular Service Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


High Bacteria Levels Found in Bay Ridge Water
Residents of Bay Ridge, Brooklyn, should boil their tap water before drinking or cooking with it because routine testing has found bacteria that can cause nausea, cramps, diarrhea and other symptoms, city officials said yesterday.
Tests showed that the contamination was confined to Bay Ridge, in the area south of 86th Street and west of Fort Hamilton Parkway, said Ian Michaels, a spokesman for the New York City Department of Environmental Protection.


Corrections
An article on April 28 about President Clinton's appointment of 47 doctors, nurses and other medical experts to assess his health plan included an erroneous specialty identification issued by the White House for one physician, Dr.
Stanley Yarnell.
He is a physiatrist, a specialist in physical medicine and rehabilitation, not a psychiatrist.


Tariff Cuts Advance in New Talks
Trade ministers from the United States, the European Community, Japan and Canada breathed new life into moribund global trade talks today.
As part of what the ministers described as significant progress here, the United States and the European Community were in nearly complete agreement on a package of tariff cuts, including a significant series of cuts offered by Japan that could spur imports to Japan and even more business between the world's two largest trading entities.


Land Mines in Stocks A Reason to Diversify
IF I just knew where I was going to die, the old saying goes, I would be sure never to go there.
Investors in I.B.M., Merck, Wal-Mart, Philip Morris and a host of other former favorites might wish for the same sort of foresight.
Some strategists say that avoiding death-trap stocks during the rest of the decade will be more crucial than picking the next Microsoft.
During the 1980's, the stock market's annual returns averaged about 18 percent, with the highest rewards often going to those investors who chased the hottest stocks no matter how costly.
By most measures, stocks in general are now expensive.
In the 1990's, many analysts say, the returns will be in the single digits, with even the most widely held issues subject to violent selloffs.


Review/Dance; Some Mythical Women at Their Own Round Table
Twenty-one years have passed since the premiere of Meredith Monk's "Education of the Girlchild." But some things never change.
The crowd outside the Joyce Theater on Tuesday night waited patiently for the doors to open just as Ms.
Monk's first audiences once waited on rainy sidewalks outside performance lofts downtown.
Inside the theater, a woman once more sat quietly alone onstage, already in her own world as the audience filed in.
Ms.
Monk continued to work on the piece after its premiere, and it was performed in more or less its present state in 1973.
Now a full-evening work, it has been revived at the Joyce with its original leads.
The music and choreography are by Ms.
Monk, as is the nonlinear scenario, which is drawn from her continuing speculation on the legends of male groups like the Knights of the Round Table, reworked into a group of strong women.


Circling Back to Square One: Fixing the Economy
If there was any doubt left about President Clinton's determination to refocus attention on the economy, he dispelled it at his news conference today by twice dismissing questions about homosexuals in the military with terse one-liners that could not possibly make the evening news.
"You know what my position is; I have nothing else to say about it," the President said at one point in a clipped voice.


Boeing and Air Force Discuss Air Transport Jets
The Boeing Company said today that it was discussing with the Air Force offering military versions of its 767 and 747 jetliners for air transport use.
It said it had proposed a fleet of either 33 747's or 58 767's for $4 billion to $5 billion to replace the Air Force's aging fleet of C-141 transports, made by the Lockheed Aircraft Corporation about 30 years ago.


Barrett Resources Corp.  (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Michael J. Merkin, Paint Innovator, 99, And Philanthropist
Michael J. Merkin, a leader in the paint industry, a banker and a philanthropist, died on Thursday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 99.
He died of natural causes, the family said.


Saving at the Office: New Choices Near
William R. Mitchell, an administrator at the Public Service Electric and Gas Company in Newark, has been a participant in his corporation's 401(k) savings plan since it began about 12 years ago.
"It's an excellent vehicle for saving," he said.
"I'm quite pleased at how it's going to help for supplementing my retirement benefits."


Earning Some Extra Frequent Flier Miles Without Actually Getting on a Plane
You've managed to accumulate, say, 18,000 miles on Continental Airlines' frequent flier program.
That puts you only 2,000 miles short of the 20,000 miles needed to qualify for a round-trip coach fare anywhere in the continental United States -- an agonizingly close call.
But don't assume you must take another flight to qualify for the free trip.
"If you're just a few miles short of your goal there are several ways to make up the difference," said Randy Petersen, editor of Insider Flyer magazine, a monthly consumer publication based in Colorado Springs for members of frequent flier programs.


Travels With Roger
AROUND the press, First Brother and Aspiring Rock Star Roger Clinton is like a happy puppy in a houseful of admirers with petting disorders.
And like a happy puppy, he's an accident waiting to happen.
Far less guarded around journalists than his brother, Bill, the fun-loving, former cocaine dealer was downtown last Tuesday night for a press preview before his 11:30 gig at the Palace, the new club at the old M.K. site on lower Fifth Avenue.
Members of the not-necessarily-elite media, some of whom had been running with him all day like bulls in Pamplona, took notes with every swivel of his pelvis and shake of his shaggy hair.


In the Region: Long Island; Recent Sales
Glen Cove  $290,000
5 Hickory Drive  3-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 20-year-old ranch; dining room, eat-in kitchen, family room, fireplace, basement; taxes $6,800.
Islip Terrace  $135,000
9 Irving Place  4-bedroom, 2-bath, 42-year-old Cape Cod; dining room, finished basement, 1-car garage; taxes $4,000.
Manhasset Hills  $300,000
15 Ash Place  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 36-year-old split level; dining room, 1-car garage; taxes $6,200.
Manorville  $153,000
11 Eileen Lane  3-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 6-year-old colonial; dining room, eat-in kitchen, den, 2-car garage, 1 acre; taxes $4,800.
Rocky Point  $143,500
7 Somerset Road  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 5-year-old Cape Cod; dining room, eat-in kitchen, deck, 1-car garage; taxes $4,400.
Sea Cliff  $163,000
131 16th Avenue  4-bedroom, 2-bath, 70-year-old colonial; dining area, fireplace, finished basement; taxes $1,700.
OTHER AREAS White Plains, N.Y.  $247,000
76 Holland Avenue  5-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 62-year-old Tudor; entry hall, sun room, skylights, modern kitchen, finished basement; taxes $3,700.
Hamden, Conn.  $170,000
1743 Whitney Avenue  4-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 149-year-old colonial; eat-in kitchen, fireplace, built-in shelves, 0.75 acre; taxes $4,250.
Bernardsville, N.J.  $650,000
1 Pine Hollow Road  5-bedroom, 4-bath, 2-half-bath, 5-year-old colonial; pantry, whirlpool, security system; taxes $10,713.


'Messiah' Reborn: His Name Shall Be Called . . . 'Mangaza'
Where Sam Shabalala grew up, in the Zulu laborers' quarters of a white man's cattle farm in rural Natal province, choral music meant the sinuous male harmonies known as mbube.
After chores, he would add his tenor to the voices of the other herdboys in the a cappella courtship songs now familiar to Americans from the music of Ladysmith Black Mambazo.
His mother sang hymns at the missionary church, and his father squeezed folk tunes from a concertina.
But none of this foretold the musical leap across time and culture that Mr.
Shabalala completed recently on the stage of the Pietermaritzburg City Hall, in the capital of Natal.
There, before an audience that included the king of the Zulu nation, a 140-voice black choir and a white symphony orchestra performed Mr.
Shabalala's Zulu translation of Georg Frideric Handel's Baroque masterpiece "Messiah." Mr.
Shabalala and others associated with his work believe that the three-hour oratorio is the first classical work of such scale to be translated into Zulu, and possibly into any African language.


Another Playwright Confronts an Angel And the Apocalypse
It's New York City on a very bad day: Apples are extinct.
Men get pregnant.
A bank runs a secret torture center for people who have exceeded their credit card limit.
Neo-Nazi skinheads roam the streets torching the homeless.
This darkly absurd and yet eerily familiar world is the setting for "Marisol," Jose Rivera's phantasma of the present that opens on Thursday at the Joseph Papp Public Theater.
The Puerto Rico-born writer has recast the classic story of a hero's journey for an over-the-edge urban America.
The title character, a Latina yuppie (Cordelia Gonzalez), may even be a bit autobiographical.
"Marisol is, like me, a consummate assimilationist," says the 38-year-old writer.
"I live with a constant sense of melancholy for what I have denied."


Q and A
Parking Space in a Co-op  Question: I am a tenant in a Yonkers co-op.
What are my rights regarding parking spots?
The co-op owner in charge of parking spaces appears to be ignoring my request for a parking space.
Do co-op owners have priorities when a parking spot becomes available? . . .
Seymour Daks, Yonkers Answer: Maybe.
According to Stuart Saft, chairman of the Council of New York Cooperatives, a renter who has a parking spot when a building is converted has the right to maintain the spot.
But, he added, if a spot becomes available after the conversion it is up to the board of directors to decide how it will allocate the spaces, and it can do it any way it wants as long as it is done in a prudent, businesslike manner.


Maria Manuche, Michael Allen
Maria M. Manuche, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Mike Manuche of New York, was married yesterday to Michael J. Allen, a son of Mrs.
Joseph P. Allen of Bronxville, N.Y., and the late Mr.
Allen.
The Rev.
Dr.
Kenneth Jones officiated at the Fifth Avenue Presbyterian Church in New York.
The Rev.
John Halborg, a Roman Catholic priest, took part in the ceremony.
Mrs.
Allen, 32, is a senior associate with the Corcoran Group, a New York real estate firm.
She graduated from Barnard College.
Her father, the former owner of Mike Manuche's Restaurant in New York, is the executive director of the Nabisco Dinah Shore Golf Tournament in Palm Springs, Calif.
Her mother, Martha Wright Manuche, who is retired, was an actress in New York.


AN ARMY OF THE FAITHFUL
I was impressed at the masterful use of pictures in Robert Sullivan's article "An Army of the Faithful" (April 25): On the cover, the classic, well-fed, Rush Limbaugh look, with both suspenders and belt assuring security.
Inside, the picture of Darrell Fuller, another well-fed member, manning the Christian Coalition's ultimate weapons -- the telephone and the Rolodex -- with a bust of their guru, Ronald Reagan, on his desk, the flag in a prominent position and, on the wall, a picture of two warplanes guarding against those who may have doubts.
With pictures like these, who needs words? JAMES TAYLOR Ann Arbor, Mich.


Latin America's Dark Side
To the Editor:
"A New Rush to Latin America" (April 11) addressed the economic situation and prospects for the southern hemisphere from an exclusively northern perspective.
The effects of the free market were discussed only in the context of the increasing strategic importance of Latin America in the United States business agenda.


The Blizzard
To the Editor: United Airlines' claims to have provided the services detailed in your chart bear no reality to my experience at Washington's Dulles Airport on March 14.
During the eight hours I was stranded that Sunday, not only was I offered none of the "hotel vouchers, assistance in obtaining hotel discount rates, meal vouchers, or use of United telephones" that you cite, but I was treated both rudely and dismissively by the (admittedly) overwhelmed United staff.
Their solution to my plight -- two flights that I was booked on were canceled, though my luggage was inexplicably put on another flight to Los Angeles, leaving me with no clothes or toiletries -- was simply to tell me to go back to the hotel in the city I had earlier checked out of and try to fly out again the next day.


Playland's Big Thrill Still the People Chase
PLAYLAND opened for its 65th season on May 8 on a perfect day for people watchers.
Parents, grandparents, teen-agers and toddlers flocked to rides like the Spider, the Sea Dragon and the Derby Racer as well as to Kiddyland, where for two hours children rode free as part of the opening-day celebration.
The crowd -- which county officials clocked at 7,756 -- was as mixed as may ever be found in the county, a multiculturalist's dream.


Residential Resales
Closings in the week ended May 1  MANHATTAN  Greenwich Village  $325,000
30 Fifth Avenue (10th St.)  2-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 1,200-sq.-ft. prewar co-op; 24-hr. doorman, dining area, 11-ft. ceilings, 2 exposures; maintenance $925, 43% tax-deductible (Broker: Betty D. Fox)  Greenwich Village  $375,000
43 West 13th Street  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 2,000-sq.-ft. co-op in a loft building; elevator, 14-ft. ceilings, south exposure; maintenance $1,650, 50% tax-deductible (Brokers: Delson/Ginsberg Real Estate-D.J. Knight)  Sutton Place  $1.15 million
4 River View Terrace  4-bedroom, 3 1/2-bath, one-family, 3-story town house in need of extensive renovation; dining room, 2 kitchens, English basement, rear garden, 16.8- by 75-ft. lot; taxes $16,000 (Broker: Corcoran Group)  Upper West Side  $215,000
140 Riverside Drive (86th St.)  1-bedroom, 1-bath, 1,100-sq.-ft. prewar co-op; 24-hr. doorman, concierge, dining area, 2 exposures; maintenance $975, 50% tax-deductible (Broker: Halstead Property Co.)  West Side  $330,000
28 West 69th Street  2-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 1,650-sq.-ft. prewar co-op; elevator, dining room, renovated kitchen, parquet floors, 2 exposures; maintenance $1,430, 50% tax-deductible (Broker: Klara Madlin Real Estate)  BRONX  Riverdale  $42,500
3840 Greystone Avenue  (Greystone Park)  1-bedroom, 1-bath, 700-sq.-ft. postwar co-op; dining area, hardwood floors, 3 exposures; maintenance $418, 60% tax-deductible (Broker: Trebach Realty)  Wakefield  $200,000
4352 Matilda Avenue  2-family detached stucco house; 3 bedrooms, 1 bath, dining room, eat-in kitchen in each unit; 1 bedroom, 1-bathhospitality suite in finished basement, 2-car garage, 30- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $1,600 (Broker: Marland Real Estate)  BROOKLYN  Clinton Hill  $375,500
245 Washington Avenue  4-family, 5-story brownstone; 3 bedrooms, 2 baths, dining room in primary unit; 1 bedroom, 1 bath in others; 1-car garage, 20- by 200-ft. lot; taxes $2,035 (Broker: Brooklyn Properties of 7th Avenue)  Fort Greene  $290,000
163 DeKalb Avenue  2-family, 4-story brownstone; 5 bedrooms, 2 baths, double parlor, marble mantels, parquet floors, deck off dining room in primary triplex unit; 1 bedroom, 1 bath, dining area in garden simplex; 21- by 94-ft. lot; taxes $2,200 (Broker: Eva M. Daniels Realty)  Park Slope  $137,000
357 6th Avenue  2-bedroom, 1-bath, 1,100-sq.-ft. co-op in a brownstone; dining alcove, 10-ft. ceilings, bay window in living room; maintenance $350, 45% tax-deductible (Broker: Warren Lewis Real Estate)  QUEENS  Corona  $225,000
112-10 39th Avenue  4-family detached brick house; 1 bedroom, 1 bath, dining room, eat-in kitchen in each unit; finished basement, 2-car garage, 30- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $8,000 (Broker: Kremer Real Estate)  Forest Hills  $430,000
112-47 68th Drive  5-bedroom, 3-bath, detached one-family brick house; dining room, den, fireplace, 1-car garage, 69- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $3,024 (Broker: F.H. Realty Executives)  STATEN ISLAND  New Dorp  $170,000
25 4th Street  2-family detached brick house; 2 bedrooms, dining room in primary unit; 1 bedroom in other; eat-in kitchen, 1 bath in each; 50- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $1,680 (Broker: Salmon Real Estate)  Sunset Hill  $163,500
624 Davis Avenue  2-bedroom, 1-bath, one-family detached colonial; dining room, finished basement, 1-car garage, 47- by 90-ft. lot; taxes $1,600 (Broker: Kingsley Real Estate)


'Biggest Pool'
To the Editor:
I was surprised to read that the AquaCenter is to be the biggest pool in the city.
McCarren Pool in the Greenpoint section of Brooklyn -- measuring 330 by 165 feet, much bigger than the AquaCenter's 170 by 60 feet -- has been closed for a decade despite promises by the city that it will be fixed and reopened.
In fact, all 10 pools opened by Robert Moses in 1936, all open and functioning except for McCarren, are bigger than the AquaCenter.
TED GLICK  Brooklyn The writer is a member of the Independent Friends of McCarren Park.


Giuliani Is Endorsed by New York Liberal Party
Calling Rudolph W. Giuliani the best antidote to the clubhouse mentality pervading City Hall, New York's Liberal Party yesterday picked him as its candidate for mayor, providing him with its line on the ballot and political benefits that may far exceed the party's 26,800 voters registered citywide.
Mr.
Giuliani, a Republican, was quick to flourish the endorsement as proof of his claim to be running as a nonideological fusion candidate in the tradition of John V. Lindsay and Fiorello H. La Guardia.


Victor Gotbaum Is Said To Be School Unit Choice
Mayor David N. Dinkins has chosen a former labor leader, Victor H. Gotbaum, to fill the remaining seat on the fractious New York City Board of Education, a person close to the selection process said yesterday.
Mr.
Gotbaum, a former president of District Council 37, the largest municipal workers' union in the nation, would bring a combination of liberalism, pragmatism and a talent for mediation to the board, which has been divided for more than a year over the social agenda promoted by the Schools Chancellor, Joseph A. Fernandez, with the support of the Mayor.
A conservative majority on the board voted in February not to renew Mr.
Fernandez's contract.


Focus: Philadelphia; Zoning Downtown to Channel Parking
CITY planners have turned the spotlight on the downtown parking situation with new regulations aimed at encouraging lots and garages in some areas and discouraging them elsewhere.
They have made it harder for developers to utilize a favorite method of drawing income from land being held for future development.
This, in turn, may discourage the demolition of uneconomic old buildings specifically to create parking.


Louise Hall, Eric Larsen
Joan F. Hall of Fair Haven, N.J., and Peter C. Hall of Rumson, N.J., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Louise McDonough Hall, to Eric Andrew Larsen, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Lawrence Larsen Jr. of West Milford, N.J.
An August wedding is planned.
Miss Hall and her fiance, both 26, graduated from Saint Lawrence University.
She is an assistant director of human resources at Oregon Garden Products, a wholesaler in Hillsborough, Ore.
Her father is a former member of the American and New York stock exchanges.
Her mother is an account representative for Metlife Financial Services in Tinton Falls, N.J.


Who Opposes Olympus And Who Would Pay Mr. Ferguson wrote a letter that contains a number of misstatements.   1. The Olympus Corporation has a rental contract with Roger Tilles in Woodbury that extends to July 1995 and intends to remain there. The research and development and light manufacturing plus repairs cannot be placed in the new 234,000-square-foot office building at the Long Island Developmental Center.


Amy E. Meek, John Mayo Jr.
Amy Elizabeth Meek, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Thomas B. Meek Jr. of Newtown, Conn., was married yesterday to John Randall Mayo Jr., the son of Mr.
Mayo of Brewster, Mass., and Betty Faye Wentworth of Orleans, Mass.
The Rev.
George M. Crocker performed the Episcopal ceremony at St.
Paul's Church in Brookfield, Conn.


Venice's Isle of the Dead
ALTHOUGH Venice rings, chatters, hums and even sings with life -- its church bells, murmuring pedestrians, churning motorboats and caroling gondoliers are only part of an underlying melody -- it is also a city that compels a visitor to think about death.
Looming over the dark, sometimes rank canals, crumbling buildings stand silently with shuttered windows.
Empty campielli -- paved squares -- echo eerily during long quiet off-season afternoons.
Walking on the Lido, readers who have never opened its pages may think of Thomas Mann's "Death in Venice."
Inside many churches, black shriveled relics and even whole corpses of saints lie under glass.
In museums, paintings of the Crucifixion, Deposition and assorted martyrs evoke death and decay in mesmerizing detail.
Even the gloriously celebratory Sala del Maggior Consiglio, the assembly hall in the Doge's Palace, is dominated by a huge "Paradiso" by Tintoretto, whose heaven is filled with more resurrected bodies than might be possibly fit into the cavernous hall.
Death hovers almost companionably over Venice, as if it were one of the masked carnival-goers whose inscrutable pictured faces peer out of almost every shop window.


Katherine Snow, Adam C. Smith
Katherine Victoria Snow and Adam Covington Smith, newspaper reporters, were married in Raleigh, N.C., yesterday.
The Rev.
Dr.
William C. Simpson, a Methodist minister, officiated at the Edenton Street United Methodist Church.
Dr.
Albert Edwards, a Presbyterian minister, took part in the ceremony.
Mrs.
Smith, 25, until recently worked at The Charlotte (N.C.) Business Journal and next month is to join The Tampa Bay (Fla.) Business Journal.
She graduated from the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill.
She is a daughter of A. C. and Nancy Snow of Raleigh, where the bride's father, the former editor of The Raleigh Times, now defunct, is a columnist for The News and Observer.
Her mother is an assistant professor of speech communication at North Carolina State University there.


When the Home Team Has Several Homes
It is becoming increasingly difficult to define "home team" when it comes to high school sporting events in Connecticut towns.
Those that cannot put up the number of athletes they need to field a soccer or football team are joining forces and putting together a cooperative team.


Wind Blows, and Crowd Gathers in the McDonald's
Swirling afternoon winds played havoc with the leaders in the third round of the McDonald's Championship here this afternoon, bunching the field for the final round.
The leader is long-hitting Laura Davies of England, who struggled to a two-over-par 73 over the DuPont Country Club course for a 54-hole total of five-under-par 208.
One stroke behind were three golfers: Laurie Merton, Gail Graham of Canada and 19-year-old Akiko Fukushima of Japan.


Karen Gitten, Michael Gobler
Mr. and Mrs.
Martin Gitten of Morganville, N.J., have announced the engagement of their daughter Karen Lisa Gitten to Michael Roy Gobler, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Jack Gobler of Wynnewood, Pa.
A November wedding is planned.
Miss Gitten is an account coordinator at Hill &amp; Knowlton, a public relations agency, in Waltham, Mass.
She graduated from Brandeis University.
Her father is the assistant director of public information for Consolidated Edison in New York.
Her mother, Arlene Gitten, owns a calligraphy business in Morganville.


What People Want When Taxes Rise: Their Money's Worth
IN his quest to persuade Congress and the country to swallow a nearly $250 billion tax increase over the next five years, President Clinton could do worse than to listen to Darry Sragow.
He's walked the walk.
Now California's deputy insurance commissioner, Mr.
Sragow was recently chief aide to the chairman of the state's Board of Equalization, which oversees the most politically volatile property tax system in America.
More to the point, he is a Democratic campaign strategist of some skill, a man who recently placed his stethoscope to the heart of public opinion in focus groups.


Kimberly Latham, Jeffrey Bullwinkel
Kimberly Blake Latham, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John R. Latham 3d of Locust Valley, L.I., was married yesterday to Jeffrey George Bullwinkel, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
George A. Bullwinkel Jr. of Westport, Conn.
The Rev.
George Keith performed the Episcopal ceremony at Calvary Church in New York.
Ms.
Latham, 28, is keeping her name.
She is a design assistant for Spatial Environmental Elements, an architecture and retail-furniture concern in New York, and a freelance writer.
She graduated from Duke University, as did her husband.


Martha Hester, Philip Stafford
Martha Alison Hester, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
James McNaughton Hester of Princeton, N.J., was married yesterday to Philip Overton Stafford, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Overton E. Stafford of Dalton, Ga.
Dr.
Ernest Gordon, the former dean of the Princeton University Chapel, performed the Presbyterian ceremony at the Miller Chapel at Princeton Theological Seminary.
Mrs.
Stafford, 32, is the general manager of the Cleaver Company, a retail and catering company in New York.
She graduated from Denison University.
Her father, the former president of New York University and of the New York Botanical Garden, is the president of the Harry Frank Guggenheim Foundation in New York.
He was also the first rector of the United Nations University in Tokyo.


Jeffrey H. Skatoff, Marjorie J. Just
Dr. and Mrs.
Harold A. Just of Westwood, Mass., have announced the engagement of their daughter Marjorie Jennifer Just to Jeffrey Howard Skatoff, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Lawrence B. Skatoff of Wilmette, Ill.
A July wedding is planned.
Ms.
Just, 24, is a law student at George Washington University.
She graduated cum laude from Duke University.
Her father is a surgeon at Norwood (Mass.) Hospital.
Her mother, Marion R. Just, is a professor of political science at Wellesley College.


Gardens of Earthly Delight
THE DAY I WENT TO SAN Marino to visit the Huntington gardens was one of those clear ones Southern Californians try not to wait for, when the outline of every freeway daisy stands out sharp enough to break your heart, and the promise of more such days to come fills the air with giddy, unwarranted hope.
The camellias and coral trees were wildly in bloom; the San Gabriel Mountains -- Mounts Wilson and Baldy -- visible and bossy to the north.
Stiff royal palms stalked the Montebello hills like sugar-spun cake ornaments; magnolia blooms shimmered like water drops under the bright knife of the midmorning sun.
I had the illusion that I was worlds and time away from the jangled, pushy heart of Los Angeles, instead of just 25 minutes northeast of downtown.
Turning into the Huntington -- its full name is the Huntington Library, Art Collections and Botanical Gardens -- I followed an ordinary entrance drive to an ordinary parking lot: concrete, cars, the usual.
I paused in the orientation center to pick up a guidebook, then stepped out onto a veranda overlooking the rolling, green grounds.
I stood there, feeling transported and very calm.


Town Vote Is Divided Ethnically
In this rich corner of eastern Bosnia, where Serbs and Muslims live uneasily together, voters cast their referendum ballots today strictly along religious and ethnic lines.
In dozens of interviews, without exception, Muslims said they had voted in favor of the international peace plan, while every Serb interviewed voted against it.
The plan would partition Bosnia into 10 semiautonomous provinces governed by various ethnic groups.


Jennifer Berg, Mads Asprem
Jennifer Helene Berg, a daughter of Bernice Berg of Golden Valley, Minn., and the late Dr.
Jacob Berg, and Mads Michael Asprem, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Anders S. Asprem of Levanger, Norway, have announced plans to marry next winter.
Ms.
Berg is a principal of Morgan Stanley's equity derivatives group in London.
She graduated cum laude from Williams College and received a master's degree in public and private management from Yale University.
Her father, a clinical psychologist, was an industrial consultant in Minneapolis.


House of Horrors


BROWSING THE WORLD'S LARGEST STORES: Tokyo bureau; East Meets West In a Stylish Depaato Store
IF JAPAN'S MANY overstocked, overstaffed and oddly eccentric "depaatos," few rival Seibu for an afternoon's adventure in browsing.
There are not many buildings in the world where you can nosh on bagels and sushi in the basement, move upstairs to purchase rice paper Japanese lanterns and finish things off by investing in shares on Tokyo's stock exchange.
In Tokyo, there is not one Seibu, but three -- not counting several in the city's outskirts -- and the best part is that none of them is the same.


Crime
When "an upper-crust WASP broad" -- as a character puts it in Robert B. Parker's PAPER DOLL (Putnam, $19.95) -- is bludgeoned to death with a 16-ounce hammer, right outside her town house in Boston's elegant Louisburg Square, what else could it be but a vicious act of random violence?
The cops would be happy to let it go at that; but the victim's husband, who pals around with a powerful senator and is used to the privileges that money and class can buy, hires Spenser to dredge the gutters for her killer.
Spenser is brilliantly Spenserish when the scene shifts to the dusty little town in South Carolina where the victim was born and where she kept her secrets buried.
Talking tough but behaving himself like a gentleman with the guarded characters he encounters in this unsociable setting, he strokes old dogs and stirs old ghosts until his good manners earn him some truthful answers.


Helping Families Avoid Plight of Homelessness
THE early-morning sunlight streams into the dining room of the modest home where Naomi Washington has lived for more than 30 years.
A vase with pink tulips is carefully arranged on the dining table, offering a suggestion of spring.
In the living room, where large recliners flank a sectional sofa, mirrors reflect matching bookcases that contain encyclopedias.
In this white, six-bedroom house in the Fairview section of Greenburgh, children's riding toys share driveway space with the family car, evidence of Mrs.
Washington's three great-grandchildren, who share her home with their grandmother, Joyce Pegram, the eldest of Mrs.
Washington's five daughters.


Philadelphia: Where the Wild and Crazy Things Are
Jim Fregosi sat at his desk last Monday, trying not to bask too obviously in the early-season feats of his Philadelphia Phillies.
With a victory that night, Fregosi knew, the Phillies could establish their best start ever, with 23 victories in 30 games.
But this was in Philadelphia, so at that point, a veteran scribe, who has forgotten more about Phillies' history than any current member of the tribe ever knew, asked an obvious Philadelphia question.
Did Fregosi know, the writer asked, what happened to the last Philadelphia manager whose team had won 21 of his first 28 games?


A Celebration of Military Might in Brooklyn


The Indelicate Art of Telling Adults How to Have Sex
ARESURGENCE of clubs where people meet for sex has prompted New York City to train inspectors to visit the places, trying to prevent the spread of AIDS.
Imagine what you will, a sex policeman's lot is not a happy one.


'My Italy Story,' a Tale Of a Man's Ancestors
MANY people yearn to take a genealogical journey to their pasts, perhaps to a faraway homeland to find surviving ancestors and to lift the shrouds of their heritage.
If they can't, wouldn't it be a vicarious pleasure to hear all about someone who did?


A Reader's Guide to the Balkans
To the Editor:
To understand the Balkans, Robert D. Kaplan avers ("A Reader's Guide to the Balkans," April 18), one must read books, and when it comes to the Balkans the best books to read are "old and frequently eccentric." This notion, and the depressingly deterministic theory of history that Mr.
Kaplan sketches, insure that his admirable goal -- to provide a guide to the maddening complexities of the Balkans -- will produce a list too unbalanced to enlighten the American public about the disasters behind today's headlines.


Marnie Cullen, J. G. Grasso
Mr. and Mrs.
John W. Cullen 3d of Baltimore have announced the engagement of their daughter, Mary Elizabeth Cullen, to J. G. Grasso, a son of Mrs.
Anthony F. Grasso Jr. of St.
Louis and the late Mr.
Grasso.
A September wedding is planned.
Miss Cullen, who is 28, is known as Marnie.
She is a computer-graphics consultant in New York.
She graduated from the Art Institute of Boston.
Her father is a partner of Grotech Capital Partners, a securities investment firm in Baltimore.


Bountiful Platters and Moderate Prices
IL TULIPANO of Huntington has bid farewell to its traditional ways and become Trattoria Tulipano, a family style Italian restaurant.
It is not just another Long Island restaurant that has jumped on the family dining bandwagon.
Rather, it is the paradigm of the genre with a renowned chef and experienced owners.
The savvy restaurateurs also operate two of the Island's top Italian restaurants, Navona in Great Neck and Stresa in Manhasset.


On Beyond Grandpa
BLUE CLAWS Written and illustrated by Walter Lyon Krudop.
Unpaged.
New York: Atheneum. $14.95. (Ages 6 to 8) YOUR DAD WAS JUST LIKE YOU Written and illustrated by Dolores Johnson.
Unpaged.
New York: Macmillan Publishing Company.
TOM Written and illustrated by Tomie dePaola.
Unpaged.
New York: G.P.
Putnam's Sons. $14.95. (Ages 5 to 8) GRANDFATHER'S LOVESONG By Reeve Lindbergh.
Illustrated by Rachel Isadora. 31 pp.
New York: Viking. $14.99. (Ages 3 and up)


Sound Bytes; Compaq's Completely Portable Executive
Lorie Strong is vice president, portable software marketing, for the Compaq Computer Corporation.
She is responsible for all of Compaq's portable computers, from concept to retirement, as well as planning all aspects of the operating system, diagnostic, networking and software for Compaq's desktop computer systems.
She has directed the introductions of many Compaq products, including the flagship Deskpro series.
She also has corporate responsibility for primary market research.
Before joining Compaq in 1984, she was a product planner for A.T.&amp; T.
Question: Compaq has a tight relationship with Microsoft, especially in research on ease of use.
Do you think we're going to see Windows as the interface for TV sets, telephones and other household information devices?
And will Compaq be making the hardware?


Patricia McKeogh, W. E. Bandon 3d
Mrs.
Robert P. McKeogh of Williamsburg, Va., has announced the engagement of her daughter Patricia Linden McKeogh to William Edward Bandon 3d, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Bandon of Somers, N.Y.
A September wedding is planned.
Ms.
McKeogh is an associate at the New York law firm of Cadwalader, Wickersham &amp; Taft.
She graduated cum laude from Tufts University and received a law degree from Cornell University.
Her father, the late Dr.
McKeogh, was an obstetrician and gynecologist who was the Commissioner of Public Health of Quincy, Mass., and of Williamsburg and James City County, Va.


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
AMY FISHER My Story. By Amy Fisher with Sheila Weller. Pocket Books, $22.


There's a Right Way to Address a Stork
BURTON AND STANLEY By Frank O'Rourke.
Illustrated by Jonathan Allen. 53 pp.
Boston: David R. Godine. $15.95. (Ages 8 to 12)


Philadelphia Trying to Channel Parking
City planners have turned the spotlight on the downtown parking situation with new regulations aimed at encouraging lots and garages in some areas and discouraging them elsewhere.
They have made it harder for developers to utilize a favorite method of drawing income from land being held for future development.
This, in turn, may discourage the demolition of uneconomic old buildings specifically to create parking.


Marnie Brewster, Asa E. Phillips 3d
Margaret McCampbell Brewster, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Walter W. Brewster of Glyndon, Md., was married there yesterday to Asa Emory Phillips 3d, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Phillips Jr. of Brookline, Mass.
The Rev.
Lloyd Aiken performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at Sacred Heart Church.
Mrs.
Phillips, who is 37 and is known as Marnie, is a hospital-contract analyst for the Harvard Community Health Plan in Brookline.
She graduated from Middlebury College and received an M.B.A. degree from Babson College.
Her father is an investment banker at Alex.
Brown &amp; Sons in Baltimore.


TODAY'S SECTIONS
Special Today: The Sophisticated Traveler/Magazine Part 2 Special Today: Summer Arts Calendar/Section 2A


At Yale Rep, 'The Baltimore Waltz'
IT is reassuring to reacquaint oneself with Paula Vogel's "Baltimore Waltz," which appears sturdier at the Yale Rep than in last year's premiere production Off Broadway.
And, let's face it, a reaffirmation of the playwright's capacity for coherence can't hurt after one has muddled through her new effort, "And Baby Makes Seven," now Off Broadway.
Not that "The Baltimore Waltz" is all worked out to crystalline perfection.
But it is a piece of original design, fresh imagination and extraordinary empathy that touches the heart.


Of Hems and Haws: The Insiders' Guide to 'Dave'
In the new political comedy "Dave," the film makers have clearly gone to a lot of trouble to ape the look and tribal customs of the capital.
But the true measure of their success is found in Sigourney Weaver's wardrobe as First Lady.
Proving that even great beauties can be dimmed by Washington style, Ms.
Weaver is trapped by verisimilitude into wearing outfits of transcendent blandness.
Her skirts hover between knee and midcalf at that peculiar length favored by professional Washington women that has never been fashionable anywhere, anytime in history.


The Future Is Calling
Communications miracles have transformed the telephone into almost everything.
It's the people, who still can't quite figure out how to make Call Waiting work every time, that are stuck in the Stone Age.
--------------------
Magazine, section 6.


BROWSING THE WORLD'S LARGEST STORES: Metropolitan desk; Macy's: Escape From New York
IT'S ENOUGH TO walk through Macy's and let its materialistic spirit waft about you like Hearst's ghost of San Simeon, the manque castle crammed with stuff out on the other coast.
The difference is Macy's stuff is for sale -- from the nearly five acres of plump furniture up on the ninth floor, where classical music heightens the pedestrian's sense of pleasant hallucination, of wandering from bauble to bagatelle, on down to the authentic New York shell steaks, no less plump, always available in the Ottomanelli family butcher shop in the Cellar.


Stuff Misty for Me And Other Tales of Growing Up
AT the desk across from me sits a fine, curmudgeonly fellow who can -- and does -- recite the entire text of Margaret Wise Brown's "Goodnight Moon" at unlikely intervals.
"In the great green room," he begins, "There was a telephone / And a red balloon." Two decades after he lulled his toddlers to sleep with the book, he can call it all back.
As he recites, the words that dug deep ruts in his memory gain traction in my own.
I drive backward in time, not very far, to moments when small boys, bundled in diapers or towels, warmly filled my lap after their baths.
Fingers, still small then, point and bang at the pages of the same book.


Data Bank/May 16, 1993


Living Legend
The sitarist and composer Ravi Shankar presents a program of classical Indian ragas at Carnegie Hall on Friday evening at 8.
He will be assisted on sitar by Kartik Seshadri and accompanied on tablas by Zakir Hussain and Swapan Chaudhuri. (Jack Vartoogian)


The Candidates on the Issues
On June 8, Republicans in New Jersey will select a challenger to Gov.
Jim Florio in the November general election.
Here is a look at the candidates by Jerry Gray of The Times's Trenton bureau.
James H. Wallwork Former State Senator, 62, of Far Hills Says he would bring to government the lessons he learned as a conservative businessman....
Former owner and partner of Wallwork Brothers, Inc. of West Caldwell, N.J., a refrigeration, heating and air- conditioning wholesale distributor....
Member of the State Assembly from 1963 to 1965 and of the State Senate from 1967 to 1981....
This is his second run for the G.O.P. gubernatorial nomination.
Strengths: Appeals to conservatives; has specific plans.
Weaknesses: Name recognition low, late start, not enough money.
Christine Todd Whitman 46, of Tewksbury.
A moderate Republican who has campaigned as an outsider from Trenton politics who will shake up the old system....
This is her first race for a statewide office....
Served on the Somerset County Board of Chosen Freeholders and as president of the State Board of Public Utilities.
In 1990 she almost upset Bill Bradley in a race for the United States Senate.
Strength: Strong organization Weakness: Inexperience in government.
Cary Edwards Former Attorney General, 48, of Oakland.
A moderate Republican in the style of his former boss and political mentor, Governor Kean, Mr.
Edwards has centered his campaign on the fight against crime and his experience in state government, which includes service as a State Representative and as Attorney General....Finished second in the 1989 gubernatorial primary; managed New Jersey office of the law firm of Mudge-Rose Guthrie Alexander &amp; Ferdon; Took a leave to run.
Strengths: Experience, strong grasp of the issues.
Weaknesses: Late start, vague message, low name recognition.
ABORTION Each candidate supports a woman's right to choose.
Wallwork: Opposes governmental financing.
Whitman: No additional comment.
Edwards: No additional comment.
TAXES All dislike the $2.8 billion tax increase that Mr.
Florio pushed through the Legislature.
They are divided over how to dismantle it.
Wallwork: Favors repealing the entire package.
Proposes to do so by cutting four percent ($550 million) from the state's annual budget in his first four years in office.
Whitman: Has backed off early statements that indicated she would repeal all the taxes immediately.
Now says cutting the taxes will be a "goal" of her administration, but has not been specific about how she would do this.
Edwards: Wants the Republican-controlled Legislature to immediately reduce the income tax and to make other tax changes beginning with the 1994 budget proposals now under discussion.
Says he would push for an elected state auditor to help him identify waste and overstaffing in state government and would use those cuts to offset repeal of the taxes.
EDUCATION Reform and financing of the state's public school system will be one of the major problems facing the Governor.
Wallwork: Believes New Jersey already spends enough money on public schools but that much of it is wasted.
Says he would want the public to decide through ballot referenda on programs that would allow public money to be spent to send children to private schools.
Mr.
Wallwork's daughter attended both public and private schools when she was growing up.
Whitman: Supports a pilot program of vouchers that would allow parents to use public funds to send their children to private or parochial schools if they desired.
Mrs.
Whitman's two children, a 15-year-old daughter and a 14-year-old son, have always attended private schools.
Edwards: Proposes replacing centralized state control of education with community-designed schools for each of the state's 611 school districts to replace the centralized control by the state.
Favors what he calls charter schools, which would allow each school district to tailor its curriculum.
Opposes spending public funds on vouchers and other programs to send children to private or parochial schools.
Mr.
Edwards' youngest daughter, a 16-year-old, attends public school, as did his other daughter, who is now an adult.
Each of the daughters attended at least one year of private school.
CRIME The candidates all support the death penalty.
Each favors boot camps for juvenile offenders.
Wallwork: Would convert Fort Dix and Fort McGuire into penal institutions for juveniles and first-time offenders run by former military personnel.
Says the prime way to combat crime is to create jobs.
Whitman: Advocates amending state laws to permit a jury to learn about the effect of a murder on the victim's family and to consider the defendant's criminal record; increasing criminal penalties for child abuse; establishing an automobile theft prevention authority.
Edwards: Proposes establishing "Gun-Free School Zones," putting 4,000 more police officers on the streets, setting mandatory sentences for crimes against senior citizens and creating a firearms strike force to get illegal guns off the street.


More Than 200 Die in Thailand Toy Factory Fire


Moving to the Rhythm of the Season; Russians in the Rockies
When the Bolshoi Ballet Academy of Moscow visited Vail in 1989 for a brief engagement, a special friendship developed between the Coloradans and the Russians.
As a result, the Vail Valley Foundation invited Sophia N. Golovkina, the academy director, to establish a satellite ballet school there.
A year later, the Moscow-Vail exchange program was launched.
It was an immediate success: The academy's summer series at Vail was soon expanded from four to six weeks; next year, eight American students will continue training in Russia on full scholarships.
The academy dates back to 1763, when it was an orphanage that taught children to dance, sing and act.
Miss Golovkina, who is 78, has been its director for more than 30 years; from the late 1930's to the 1950's, she had been a leading ballerina with the Bolshoi Ballet.
Her recent star pupils include Natalya Bessmertnova and Nadezhda Grachova.
In August, Miss Grachova will travel to the Rocky Mountains with her Bolshoi dance partner Aleksandr Vetrov, along with teachers and other soloists from Russia.
They will share the stage of the Gerald R. Ford Amphitheater, on Gore Creek, with 20 international students from the Bolshoi Ballet Academy at Vail in four performances (Aug. 14, 15, 20, 21).
On closing night of the festival (Aug. 22), the Bolshoi couple will be joined by Darci Kistler and Damian Woetzel of the New York City Ballet, Agnes Letestu and Jose Martinez of the Paris Opera Ballet, and principal dancers from the Stuttgart and San Francisco companies in a gala evening of pas de deux.
The following is a selective list of summer dance festivals and events.
It is national in scope but concentrates on the Northeast.
Arizona
FLAGSTAFF FESTIVAL OF THE ARTS Flagstaff, July 1-Aug. 8.
Dance events at Ardrey Auditorium include Gina Darlington and Friends, Maureen Price's Plateau Performers (July 1); "Native American Cultural Weekend," traditional dance and music (July 23-24); the Movement Source, a multimedia all-women troupe (July 30); also, at Wheeler Park, "Mexican Fiesta," with mariachi and ballet folklorico (July 25). (800-266-7740)
California
CALIFORNIA STATE SUMMER ARTS Arcata, July 5-Aug. 1.
At the Van Duzer Theater at Humboldt State University, "Collaborations: Dance, Music, Video" will offer workshops and lecture-demonstrations as well as concerts by Peter Pucci, Momix, Keith Clifton, Nancy Lamp and others. (707-826-5401)
JAPAN/ AMERICA THEATER Los Angeles, through Aug. 7.
Music, performance art and dance programs will be presented at the 800-seat auditorium.
Among scheduled concerts are Rudy Perez's "First Impression" (June 11-12); the Obon Project, traditional Japanese dance (June 13), and the Los Angeles Chamber Ballet's Outreach Program for high school students (July 26-27). (213-628-2725)
JOFFREY BALLET San Francisco, July 7-17.
Gerald Arpino, artistic director, will present his bicoastal company in three different programs, with the San Francisco Symphony at the War Memorial Opera House. (415-431-5400)
ORANGE COUNTY PERFORMING ARTS CENTER Costa Mesa.
"Tommy Tune Tonight!" (July 13-14); Joffrey Ballet in "Billboards," created by four choreographers and set to music by Prince (July 27-29); the White Oak Dance Project, with Mikhail Baryshnikov (Aug. 5-7). (714-556-2787)
PACIFIC/REGIONAL DANCE AMERICA Modesto, Wed.-Sat.
Master classes, workshops and performances will be offered by more than 20 companies, with the Bravo!
Repertory Dance Theater as host. (209-576-8957)
SACRED DANCE GUILD FESTIVAL Berkeley, July 19-30.
On the campus of the Pacific School, "A Week of Dance/Carla De Sola" (July 19-23) and "Festival of Dance and Spirituality," with Scott Galuteria, Jamie McHugh, Phil Porter and others (July 26-30). (800-999-0528)
SAN FRANCISCO ETHNIC DANCE FESTIVAL Palace of Fine Arts, June 11-26.
Weekend performances by more than 600 international musicians and dancers, including Gamelan Sekar Jaya of Bali, Chuna McIntyre, Yu'pik Eskimo music and dance, Na Lei Hula I Ka Weiku of Hawaii; plus, the Westwind International Folk Dance Ensemble will perform a Palestinian wedding dance. (415-474-3914)
STERN GROVE FESTIVAL San Francisco, June 20-Aug. 22.
A free 10-week series of classical music, jazz and pop concerts and dance, Sunday afternoons at the Sigmund Stern Grove, will offer "Fabulous Feet: A Celebration of Footwork in Dance," with Rhapsody in Taps and Theater Flamenco (July 18); World Dance and Music: India, with Chitresh Das and Ali Akbar Khan (Aug. 1); San Francisco Ballet (Aug. 8), and the Lewitzky Dance Company with the Kronos Quartet (Aug. 15). (415-252-6252)
Colorado
THE ASPEN DANCE CONNECTIONS Aspen, June 18-19.
"Flying Rhythms," featuring new works by local choreographers and a commissioned work by Geulah Abrahams, guest artist, at the Wheeler Opera House. (303-925-2750)
THE BOLSHOI BALLET ACADEMY OF MOSCOW Vail, Aug. 14-22.
Dancers and teachers from Russia and the United States will present master classes under the direction of Sophia N. Golovkina.
Concerts at the Gerald R. Ford Theater will feature Nadezhda Grachova and Aleksandr Vetrov (Aug. 14-15, 20-22); "An International Evening of Dance" with Darci Kistler and Damian Woetzel of the New York City Ballet, Beatriz de Almeida and Stephen Greenston of the Stuttgart Ballet, Agnes Letestu and Jose Martinez of the Paris Opera Ballet and others (Aug. 22). (303-290-8497)
COLORADO DANCE FESTIVAL Boulder, July 5-31.
Informal demonstrations, workshops, lectures and films at the University of Colorado; performances will be presented by Contraband (July 8-11), Stephen Petronio Company (July 16-17), Eiko and Koma (July 22-24), Rachel Rosenthal (July 27-28), GhettOriginal Productions Dance Company, a hip-hop group from New York (July 31), and others. (303-442-7666)
DANCEASPEN SUMMER FESTIVAL Aspen, July 1-Aug. 21.
Workshops, lecture-demonstrations and concerts at the new Festival Theater by Martine Van Hamel's New Amsterdam Ballet, featuring Marianna Tcherkassky, Gary Chryst and Amanda McKerrow (July 1-3); Lines Contemporary Ballet (July 8-10); Mark Morris Dance Group (July 15-17); Contraband (July 19-20); Pilobolus Dance Theater (July 22-24); Eiko and Koma (July 26-27); Rachel Rosenthal (July 30-31); Ballet West in "Sleeping Beauty" (Aug. 5-7); Hubbard Street Dance Chicago (Aug. 12-14, 19-21). (800-933-3820)
NAROPA INSTITUTE Boulder, June 14-July 31.
Workshops and classes in theater, music, visual arts, writing/poetry and dance, at various locations.
Among the concerts will be "Summer Solstice Celebration" (June 19); Ralph Lemon (July 2); Steve Clorfeine, Laura Simms and Lee Worley (July 9); "African Music and Dance," with Obo Addy (July 17); Ruth Zaporah, Nancy Stark Smith and David Godsey (July 30). (303-444-0202)
Connecticut
NUTMEG SUMMER DANCE FESTIVAL Torrington, Aug. 13-15.
Repertory works and works-in-progress, along with a showcase of new works by Sharon Dante, Scott Thyberg and others. (203-482-4413)
STAMFORD CENTER FOR THE ARTS A series of music and dance performances will include the Ballet Hispanico (Sat.) and Alvin Ailey American Dance Theater (June 2). (203-323-2131)
District of Columbia
DANCE PLACE Through Aug. 11.
Master classes, workshops and performances by regional dancer-choreographers and musicians: "Rap/Tap Festival" (Sat.-May 23); Dance Africa, D.C. (June 5-6, 12-13); D.C.
Contemporary Dance Theater (June 19-20); "Hot Feet Festival" (June 26-27); Quiescence (July 10-11); Claudia Brand (July 17-18). (202-269-1600)
THE JOHN F. KENNEDY CENTER FOR THE PERFORMING ARTS Opera House, through June 6.
Dance presentations will be by Gregory Hines, with Savion Glover (Fri.) and the Joffrey Ballet in repertory works (June 1-6). (202-467-4600)
SRI LANKAN FESTIVAL The Smithsonian Institution, Freer Gallery, May 27-June 3.
As part of the Smithsonian's exhibition and concerts of Sri Lankan culture, dancers and musicians from the capital city of Colombo will perform at the Meyer Auditorium (May 27, 29, 31, June 3). (202-357-3200)
Florida
FLORIDA DANCE FESTIVAL Tampa, June 20-27.
Workshops, classes and performances at the University of South Florida, with the Anita Feldman Tap Ensemble and the Pat Traney Company. (305-237-3413)
Illinois
RAVINIA FESTIVAL Highland Park, June 11-Sept. 6.
Among the more than 100 events at the 3,500-seat Pavilion will be performances by the Hubbard Street Dance Chicago (Sept. 1-4). (312-728-4642)
Indiana
FIREFLY FESTIVAL South Bend, June 19-Aug. 7.
Dance offerings will include the Ohio Ballet in open rehearsal and concert (St. Patrick's County Park, June 26) and a master class and lecture-demonstrations (Colfax Cultural Center, June 27). (219-288-3472)
Maine
BATES DANCE FESTIVAL Lewiston, July 31-Aug. 21.
Seminars, classes, films and performances will be offered at Bates College.
Among the concerts at the Schaeffer Theater will be Paula Josa-Jones/Performance Works (July 30-31); Stephan Koplowitz and Company (Aug. 6); Bebe Miller and Company (Aug. 12-13); Festival Faculty Gala (Aug. 24); Paula Josa-Jones/Environmental Performance Project (Aug. 20). (207-786-6077)
DANCE PORTLAND: A FESTIVAL OF MAINE DANCE Aug. 21, 25-29.
The Portland Performing Arts Center will present the Maine State Ballet, Ram Island Dance Company, Casco Bay Movers, Berg Jones and Sarvis, Perennial Effects Dance Collective and Portland Ballet Company in new works by Lisa de Ribere, Daniel McCusker and Linda MacArthur Miele; also, "Choreographer's Showcase" will feature works-in-progress by regional artists (Aug. 21). (207-761-0591)
Maryland
EVA ANDERSON DANCE THEATER Baltimore, June 12-13.
The regional contemporary troupe will perform at the Baltimore Museum of Art. (410-396-6314)
WILDE LAKE HIGH SCHOOL Columbia, June 13-26.
The dance series will open with Kinetics Dance Company (June 13) and continue with "An Evening of Ballet," featuring Amanda McKerrow and John Gardner and other dancers (June 20); Momix (June 25-26). (410-715-3044)
Massachusetts
DONALD BYRD/THE GROUP Boston, July 8-10.
Free performances at the Hatch Shell, on the Charles River Esplanade.
BOSTON BALLET Boston, Wang Center for the Performing Arts, June 3-20.
Choo-San Goh's staging of "Romeo and Juliet." (617-931-2000)
DANCE UMBRELLA Dorchester, June 24-26.
"The Jazz Tap/Hip-Hop Festival" will feature Savion Glover and Jimmy Slyde, along with hip-hop groups from London, New York and Boston. (617-492-7578)
HARVARD SUMMER DANCE Cambridge, June 28-Aug. 6.
Lectures, workshops, master classes, films and performances by students and faculty members; guest artists will include the Margaret Jenkins Dance Company, the Paul Dresher Ensemble and Rinde Eckert (July 29-31). (617-495-5535)
JACOB'S PILLOW DANCE FESTIVAL Lee, June 19-Aug. 29.
At the Ted Shawn Theater: Gala (June 19); Philadanco (June 24-26); Jazz Tap Ensemble (June 29-July 3); Merce Cunningham Dance Company (July 6-10); Paul Taylor Dance Company (July 13-17); Mark Morris Dance Group (July 20-24); Garth Fagan Dance (July 27-31); Hubbard Street Dance Chicago (Aug. 3-7); Bill T. Jones/Arnie Zane Dance Company (Aug. 10-14); Ballet British Columbia (Aug. 17-21); Dayton Contemporary Dance Company (Aug. 24-28). (413-243-0745)
The Studio/Theater.
June 11-Aug. 29.
At the 150-seat space: Cie Herve-Gil, from Paris (June 11-13); Sarah Skaggs (June 18, 20); Ralph Lemon Company (June 25-27); World Music and Dance Festival (July 2-4); Susan Marshall Company (July 9-11); Danny Grossman Dance Company (July 16-18); Margaret Jenkins Dance Company (July 22-25); Stephan Koplowitz with dancers (July 30-Aug. 1); Danny Buraczeski, Victoria Marks and Timothy Buckley (Aug. 6-8); "Solo Flights" (Aug. 13-15); Eiko and Koma (Aug. 20-22); Mal Pelo, from Barcelona (Aug. 27-29).
Inside/Out Series.
A free summerlong program of works-in-progress by artists-in-residence performed at the outdoor stage; films, discussions and exhibits at smaller studios on the Pillow grounds.
MARK MORRIS DANCE GROUP Emerson Majestic Theater, Boston, June 1-12.
Two separate programs of world premieres and repertory works. (617-492-7578)
SECOND ANNUAL KO FESTIVAL OF PERFORMANCE Amherst, July 16-Aug. 8.
Weekend performances by Linda Humes; a tribute to African-American women; Joan Evans, dance and puppetry, and "The KO Show," a vaudeville revue. (413-253-5128)
WINDHOVER PERFORMING ARTS CENTER Rockport, July 22-24.
Dancers and choreographers of the Dance North Alliance of Massachusetts. (508-546-3611)
Michigan
ANN ARBOR SUMMER FESTIVAL June 19-July 11.
Dance events on the University of Michigan campus include "Get Parallel" by Peter Sparling and Whitley Setrakian (June 22); Ohio Ballet (June 25); Joseph Holmes Chicago Dance Theater (June 30). (313-747-2278)
INTERLOCHEN ARTS FESTIVAL Interlochen, June 19-Sept. 4.
This international music camp offers choreography and dance master classes, along with open rehearsals and weekend performances by artist-faculty members; also, concerts at the Kresge Auditorium by the Ohio Ballet (June 29) and the Urban Bush Women (July 27-28). (616-276-6230)
JOFFREY BALLET Fox Theater, Detroit, June 24-27.
Repertory works by Gerald Arpino, Frederick Ashton, Robert Joffrey and others; with the Detroit Symphony Orchestra. (313-396-7600)
New Jersey
GARDEN STATE BALLET Various locations, through May 23.
"A Midsummer Night's Dream," choreographed by the director, Peter Anastos.
Count Basie Theater, Red Bank (today and Mon.); Montclair High School (May 23). (800-472-25538)
NEW JERSEY BALLET Ocean City, Music Pier, Aug. 3, 5, 7.
With the Ocean City Pops Orchestra. (609-391-6111)
PAPER MILL PLAYHOUSE Millburn, July 28-29.
Ballet Trocadero de Monte Carlo (July 28); New Jersey Ballet (July 29). (201-376-4343)
RUTGERS SUMMERFEST New Brunswick, June 10-Aug. 26.
Dance events include "Western Women," a new evening-length work by the ODC/Dance of San Francisco (June 10-12); Nikolais and Murray Louis Dance, a retrospective program (June 17-19, 24-26). (908-932-7511)
New Mexico
DANCE AMERICAS Albuquerque, Espanola and Santa Fe, June 14-July 9.
Members of two contemporary Mexican dance companies will present master classes and workshops; also, at several locations, performances by Adriana Castanos and David Baron of Antares (June 25-26); Compania Jorge Dominguez (July 2-3). (505-277-4402)
FESTIVAL FLAMENCO Albuquerque, June 6-20.
Flamenco dancers and musicians from Spain and the United States will offer workshops; performances will be presented at the University of New Mexico Rodney Theater (June 17-19). (505-842-8620)
FIRST INTERNATIONAL WORKSHOP PERFORMANCE Santa Fe, July 18-Aug. 5.
Lectures and workshops, under the direction of Luk de Lairess of Belgium, with the guest teachers Irina Kolpakova and Vladilen Semyonov of the Kirov Ballet, Tamara King, Christiane Marchant and others; performances at the Nizhoni's Open Air Theater. (505-989-5761)
NEW MEXICO DANCE UMBRELLA Various locations, July 16-17.
Regional companies will perform at the University of New Mexico at Albuquerque (July 16) and at Santa Fe College (July 17). (505-989-7561)
New York
New York City
ALVIN AILEY AMERICAN DANCE CENTER 211 W. 61st St., June 11, Aug. 19-20.
Judith Jamison, artistic director, will present the company in studio performances open to the public. (212-767-0940)
AMERICAN BALLET THEATER Metropolitan Opera House, through June 12.
The company's first New York season under its new director, Kevin McKenzie, continues with Kenneth MacMillan's "Manon," Christian Holder's dance-drama "Les Liaisons Dangereuses," revivals of David Blair's staging of "Swan Lake," Lar Lubovitch's "Concerto Six Twenty-Two" and Glen Tetley's "Voluntaries." Also, "A Tribute to Agnes de Mille" will feature "The Informer," "Three Virgins and a Devil" and "Rodeo" (June 7). (212-362-6000)
CELEBRATE BROOKLYN Prospect Park Bandshell, July 3-Aug. 29.
The annual performance series will include Dance Brazil (July 16), Matthew Nash Music and Dance (July 24) and Bill T. Jones/Arnie Zane Dance Company (Aug. 11). (718-855-7882)
CENTRAL PARK SUMMERSTAGE Rumsey Playfield, June 19-Aug. 1.
Free opera, music, comedy, dance and performance-art programs will be presented: Jennifer Muller Danceworks (July 2); Bill T. Jones (July 9); Virunga, Samite of Uganda (July 11); David Cale (July 16); Dance Brazil, Willie Ninja (July 23); Africa Fete: Boukman Eksperyans, Angelique Kidjo, Baaba Maal (July 25); Ralph Lemon, Everett Dance Theater (July 30). (212-360-2777)
DANCE THEATER WORKSHOP 219 W. 19th St., through June 27.
This showcase for contemporary companies continues its season with "Toenails of Steel: A Celebration of Choreographic and Performance Art Works by Men of Color," in two different programs (May 27-30); David Alan Harris (June 3-6); Jodi Kaplan (June 8); Joan Miller's Dance Players (June 11-13); Nicholas Rodriguez and Dance Compass (June 17-20) and Danceware (June 24-27). (212-691-6500)
DANCEAFRICA Brooklyn Academy of Music, May 23-30.
The director Chuck Davis will present 20 African-American and Caribbean companies in master classes, seminars, open rehearsals and outdoor events; concerts will be presented in the Opera House (May 28-30). (718-636-4100)
DANCES FOR WAVE HILL The Bronx, July 14-31.
Elise Bernhardt's Dancing in the Streets will produce site-specific works at Wave Hill by the choreographers Irene Hultman, Sara Pearson, Reggie Wilson, Muna Tseng, Joanna Shaw and Sham Mosher. (212-549-3200)
DANSPACE PROJECT St.
Mark's Church-in-the-Bowery, through June 27.
Modern dance will be performed by John Jasperse and Company (May 27-30); Mark De Garmo and Dancers (June 3-6); Phoebe Neville and Dancers (June 10-13); Terese Anne Joseph/ Dances From Isadora Duncan (June 17-20); Stephanie Silvia: North/South Dance (June 24-27). (212-674-8194)
DISNEY'S SYMPHONIC FANTASY Metropolitan Opera House, July 6-18.
Fifty singers and dancers will portray popular Disney animated characters in musical numbers, choreographed by John Addis, John Charron and Sylvia Hase-Floch; directed by Keri Keaney and accompanied by the American Symphony Orchestra. (212-362-6000)
DOWNTOWN DANCE FESTIVAL South Street Seaport, Aug. 28-30.
The Battery Dance Company presents "Tradewinds," with the Jhaveri Sisters Manipuri Dance Ensemble, Nrityashree and C. V. Chandrasekhar Troupe. (212-732-7678)
11th INTERNATIONAL OFFESTIVAL Various locations, through June 12.
A contemporary performing-arts series presents Paul Rajeckas and Neil Intraub at St.
Mark's Church-in-the-Bowery (through Sat.); workshops, open to the public, at the Houseman Theater (June 2); Stefan and Bettina Poetzsch at the Merce Cunningham Studio (June 4-6). (212-307-6000)
FELD BALLETS/NY Joyce Theater, Aug. 9-21.
Eliot Feld will present an annual summer preview season featuring works in progress and revivals of his ballets. (212-242-0800)
FIORELLO FESTIVAL: ASIAN CONTEMPORARY DANCE LaGuardia High School of Music, Art and Performing Arts, July 2-24.
Professional companies and dance students will participate in master classes, workshops and seminars; performances will include "Zen Dance: Lotus VI," a world premiere by Sun Ock Lee of Korea (July 2-3); Harupin-Ha Butoh Dance Company, from Japan (July 9-10); Zuni Icosahedron, from Hong Kong (July 16-17); Bangarra Dance Theater Australia, contemporary and traditional Aboriginal dances (July 23-24). (212-496-0700)
LINCOLN CENTER OUT-OF-DOORS Aug. 3-29.
LA MAMA E.T.C. 74A East Fourth St., through June 13.
The experimental arts center will present "The Empire of Half Truths," a performance-art piece by Gerald Thomas, with a cast of 11 from Brazil (Thur.-May 30); Arena Teatro of Alcantrilla from Spain in "Extrarradios," a movement-theater work by Esteve Graset (June 3-6); Stan Baker and Louie Fleck's "Haunted Taxi Ride" (June 3-12). (212-475-7710)
NEW YORK INTERNATIONAL BALLET COMPETITION Alice Tully Hall, June 7-28.
Forty-eight young dancers from 22 countries will compete, with performances open to the public (June 22-28).
A panel of judges will include Maya Plisetskaya, Serge Golovine, Yoko Morishita and Cynthia Gregory. (212-875-5050)
NEW YORK CITY BALLET New York State Theater, through June 27.
Ten years after the death of George Balanchine, the choreographer and founder of New York City Ballet, the company presents the "Balanchine Celebration," performing 73 ballets in chronological order.
Among those new to the repertory are "Glinka Pas de Trois" (Tues.), "Valse-Fantaisie (1953)" (Wed.), "Sylvia Pas de Deux" (Fri.) and "Bourree Fantasque" (May 23); plus, revivals of "Liebeslieder Walzer" (May 23, 25, June 2), "Harlequinade" (May 29, June 1), "Jewels" (June 3, 5, 9), "Tzigane" (June 15, 20), "Union Jack" (June 16, 22, 26), "Le Bourgeois Gentilhomme" (June 22, 24, 26) and his last major ballet, the 1981 "Mozartiana" (June 24, 26). (212-870-5570)
ALWIN NIKOLAIS RETROSPECTIVE Joyce Theater, July 19-31.
The Nikolais and Murray Louis Dance Company will devote its two-week season to works from 1956 to 1985 by the late Alwin Nikolais, in four separate programs. (212-242-0800)
1993 ALTOGETHER DIFFERENT Joyce Theater, June 7-19.
Eight contemporary companies will share a season: David Dorfman Dance with Shapiro and Smith (June 7, 10, 15); Brenda Daniels Dance Company with Gina Gibney Dance (June 8, 12, 17); Martita Goshen's Earthworks with Zvi Gotheiner and Dancers (June 9, 14, 18); Robin Becker and Company with Ton Simons and Dancers (June 11, 18-19). (212-242-0800)
PERFORMANCE SPACE 122 First Ave. at Ninth St., through June 27.
A series of presentations by experimental artists continues with Kurt Fulton/Iris Rose (through May 30); Bill Young and Dancers (May 27-June 6); Purgatorio Ink (June 3-27); "Comedy Crash," with Alien Comic, Carmelita Tropicana and others (June 8); Sanghi Wagner (June 10-13); "Firewall Music Festival," poetry, visual art and dance at various locations (June 14-19); Ron Athey (June 24-27). (212-477-5288)
PERFORMING ARTS OF ASIA FESTIVAL Bruno Walter Auditorium, Lincoln Center, through June 18.
The New York Public Library for the Performing Arts will present a series of dance and film by Asians: Saeko Ichinohe and Company (Wed.); Pichaya, Bharata Natyam (Thur.); Anahid Sofian and Dancers (May 24); Indonesian dance films (June 17); Shahara Devi (June 18). (212-870-1721)
PILOBOLUS DANCE THEATER Joyce Theater, June 21-July 17.
Among this season's highlights will be an untitled new work, two New York premieres, and revivals like the 1980 "Solo From the Empty Suitor." (212-242-0800)
SERIOUS FUN!
Alice Tully Hall, July 8-31.
This year's festival of works by experimental artists will open with Diamanda Galas in a world premiere, followed by La La La Human Steps, a Canadian dance company, featuring Louise Lecavalier, the Susan Marshall Dance Company, Merian Soto and Pepon Osorio, La Compagnie Marie Chouinard, "Megadance" and others. (212-875-5050)
TAP EXTRAVAGANZA '93 Haft Auditorium, Fashion Institute of Technology, May 30.
The masters of ceremony are Peg Leg Bates and Harold Nicholas, with the Copasetics, the Original Hoofers, American Tap Dance Orchestra, Manhattan Tap, Sandman Sims, Dianne Walker and others. (212-279-4200)
THALIA SPANISH THEATER Sunnyside, Queens, through June 25.
"Tango and Folklore Argentino 1993," performed by Pedro and Laura Escudero with their dancers. (718-729-3880)
WHITNEY BIENNIAL PERFORMANCE/ THEATER PROJECT Museum at Philip Morris, through June 2.
A free concert series closes with Mac Wellman and Jan Leslie Harding, to music by David Van Tieghem (May 26); John Kelly in a work-in-progress "Cocteau and Barbette" (June 2). (212-878-2550)
THE WORLD FINANCIAL CENTER Battery Park City, through June 12.
Visual arts, installations and performance-art works are presented free indoors and on the plaza; also, "Busker's Fair" will include the Alice Farley Dance Theater (June 8-10); "Ben and Jerry's Traveling Show Bus," acrobatics and juggling (June 11-12). (212-945-0505)
New York State
LIMON DANCE COMPANY Purchase, July 26-Aug. 13.
Members of the troupe will offer master classes and choreography workshops; new dances, as well as revivals of works by Jose Limon, will be presented at the Dance Theater of the State University of New York (July 30-31). (212-777-3353; 914-251-6800)
NEW YORK RENAISSANCE FESTIVAL Sterling Forest, July 31-Sept. 19.
Weekend performances and demonstrations of English country and court dances, along with other 16th-century styles. (914-351-5171)
SARATOGA PERFORMING ARTS CENTER Saratoga Springs, July 6-24.
The New York City Ballet continues its "Balanchine Celebration" at its summer home and will present an all-Balanchine season there.
The program offers 24 ballets, from 1947 to 1977, and includes five ballets new to its repertory: "Bourree Fantasque," "Glinka Pas de Trois," "Haieff Divertimento," "Minkus Pas de Trois," "Sylvia Pas de Deux" and "Valse-Fantaisie (1953)." (518-587-3330)
SUMMERSCAPE ARTS FESTIVAL Huntington, June 25-Aug. 23.
Performances to be presented at the Heckscher Park's outdoor Chapin Rainbow Stage, on Route 25A.
Dance events include performances by the Circle of Dance Repertory Company (July 9); Eglevsky Ballet (July 22); New York Dance Theater (July 27); Pilobolus Dance Theater (Aug. 1); Long Island Dance Company (Aug. 6); Philadance (Aug. 15); Huntington Ballet Theater (Aug. 18), and Sol y Sombra Spanish Dance Company, featuring Jose Molina (Aug. 20). (516-271-8442)
North Carolina
AMERICAN DANCE FESTIVAL Durham, June 10-July 24.
North Dakota
MID-STATES REGIONAL BALLET FESTIVAL Fargo, Thur.-May 23.
On the campus of North Dakota State University, master classes and workshops will be offered by dancers from 12 Midwestern companies, plus the guest teachers Michael Smuin, Dennis Nahat, members of the Erick Hawkins Dance Company and others; also, performances at the Festival Concert Hall (Thur.-Sat.). (701-280-0004)
Ohio
CAIN PARK FESTIVAL Cleveland Heights, June 13-July 23.
The summer dance series will begin at the Evans Amphitheater with "Evening of Ethnic Dance," featuring the Hungarian Scout Folk Ensemble, the Fairmount Spanish Dancers, Dance Afrika Dance and others (June 13); Contra Dancing (June 15, 22, 19, July 6); Big Band Dance (June 26); International Folk Dances (July 13, 20); Lar Lubovitch Dance Company (July 16); Joseph Konicki's "Suite Cinderella," with Cynthia Graham, Peter DiBonaventura and members of the Cleveland Ballet (July 23). (216-371-3000)
Oregon
BRITT FESTIVALS Jacksonville, June 18-Sept. 5.
A series of classical-music, pop and dance groups includes the Parsons Dance Company and the Urban Bush Women (Aug. 27-30). (800-882-7488)
Pennsylvania
ANNENBERG CENTER Philadelphia.
"Dance Celebration '93" continues with Momix in new works (Thur.-Sat.) and Philadanco (June 4-6). (215-387-8200)
CENTRAL PENNSYLVANIA YOUTH BALLET Carlisle, June 23-26.
Mixed programs of 25 ballets performed by company members and students at the Dickinson College, Mathers Theater. (717-249-8723)
INTERNATIONAL FESTIVAL OF NEW MIME Philadelphia, Aug. 1-7.
The Movement Theater International presents "Etienne Decroux: His Legacy, His Art and His Work," with performances by Le Theatre de L'ange Fou (Aug. 1, 5-6), Eugenio Barba's "Castle of Hostlebro" (Aug. 2-3), Griftheatre of Holland (Aug. 2-7), Daniel Stein and Dulcinea Langfelder (Aug. 4-5), the Adaptors (Aug. 4, 6) and others. (215-382-0600)
INTERNATIONAL SUMMERDANCE '93 Pittsburgh, June 21-July 31.
Workshops, classes and weekly studio performances at Point Park College (July 10, 17, 24); "Summerdance Final Concert" at the Pittsburgh Playhouse (July 31). (412-392-3456)
PENNSYLVANIA BALLET Philadelphia.
June 5-20.
The company returns to the Academy of Music in two programs: world premiere of "The New Berlin," the artistic director Christopher d'Amboise's tribute to Irving Berlin; also, Balanchine's "Square Dance" (June 5-12); Balanchine's "Coppelia" (June 16-20). (215-551-7000)
South Carolina
SPOLETO FESTIVAL, U.S.A.
Charleston, May 28-June 13.
Among this season's dance and performance-art events at various locations are Tedd Robinson and his Canadian troupe (May 29-31); Martha Graham Dance Company (May 30-June 1); Joseph Holmes Chicago Dance Theater (June 4-6); Nikolais and Murray Louis Dance (June 4, 6-7); Joe Goode Performance Group (June 11-12).
Also scheduled are "Conversation With Ginger Rogers" (June 1) and "Conversation With Murray Louis" (June 2). (800-255-4659)
Texas
HOUSTON BALLET Houston, Thur.-June 13, Aug. 6-15.
The company will give three separate programs at the Wortham Theater Center: "Romeo and Juliet," staged by Ben Stevenson, the artistic director (Thur.-May 30); Barry Moreland's "Prodigal Son (in Ragtime)," set to the music of Scott Joplin (June 3-13); Mr.
Stevenson's production of "Coppelia" (Aug. 6-15). (800-828-2787)
Utah
FESTIVAL OF THE AMERICAN WEST Logan, July 27-Aug. 4.
A historical pageant will showcase 19th-century life along a recreated frontier street on the campus of the Utah State University.
Dance groups will include the Burch Mann's American Folk Ballet, the Wisdom Indian Dancers and more than 200 other performers from the region. (801-750-1143)
UTAH ARTS FESTIVAL Salt Lake City, June 23-27.
All-day free events will be offered at the Triad Center, including performances by the Repertory Dance Theater, Ballet West, Ririe-Woodbury Dance Company, Zvi Gotheiner and Kinetic Cafe. (801-322-2428)
Virginia
WOLF TRAP FARM Vienna, May 29-Sept. 11.
The annual summer series will include dance presentations at the Filene Center: Washington Irish Folk Festival (May 30); Stars of the American Ballet (July 13); Pittsburgh Ballet Theater (July 20-21); Hubbard Street Dance Chicago (July 28-29), and "Dancelebration," featuring Paul Taylor Dance Company, Dance Theater of Harlem and Lar Lubovitch Dance Company (Aug. 23). (703-255-1916)
Washington
BROADWAY PERFORMANCE HALL Seattle, June 3-26.
Concerts by contemporary dance groups include Wade Madsen (June 3-6) and Jeff Bickford Dance (June 24-26). (206-323-2623)
BUMBERSHOOT: THE SEATTLE ARTS FESTIVAL Seattle, Sept. 3-6.
A variety of activities in music, theater, visual arts and dance will be offered at the Seattle Center, including the Grand Kabuki Theater. (206-682-4386)
NORTHWEST FOLKLIFE FESTIVAL Seattle, May 28-31.
Regional folk and ethnic music and dance troupes will perform on the Seattle Center's 19 stages. (206-684-7300)
PACIFIC NORTHWEST BALLET Seattle, Tues.-Sat., Aug. 14-15.
Repertory works will be performed at the Opera House (Tues.-Sat.) and at the Chateau Ste.
Michelle (Aug. 14-15). (206-441-2422)


Cholera in Rio
To the Editor: I read with great interest the article entitled "Rio de Janeiro Battles Cholera" (Travel Advisory, April 4).
However, I believe that the account greatly understated the risks to travelers to Rio de Janeiro as well as other areas of South and Central America.
As an environmental and infectious disease epidemiologist and a consultant to cruise ships on several forms of diseases common among travelers, as well as someone who has traveled to and observed first hand conditions in Rio de Janeiro, I believe the risk to travelers is significant, particularly when one considers a vast portions of the City of Rio de Janeiro lack appropriate sewage disposal.


'Forever in the Shadow of Hitler?'
To the Editor:
In his review of "Forever in the Shadow of Hitler?" (April 18), V. R. Berghahn makes three statements concerning my person.
All three of them are wrong:
1.
I am not the owner of the publishing house that printed the German original of "Forever in the Shadow of Hitler?" The publishing house is owned by my father.


Don't Obscure Seles's Plight
To the Sports Editor:
There's something cold in the tone of "A Life in the Fast Lane Takes Terrifying Turn" (The Times, May 2).
Why mention silly things about Monica Seles, like changing hair color, when everyone's worst fear -- not just in tennis or other sporting events, but in our society -- has just been realized?


Lotus, Remember the Rest of Africa
To the Editor:
It was with a twinge of envy that I read "Helping Lotus Do the Right Thing in South Africa" (May 2) about social investments in post-apartheid South Africa by Lotus, Microsoft and Wordperfect.


Jennifer Whyman, David N. Greene
Mr. and Mrs.
Frank S. Whyman of Fair Haven, N.J., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Jennifer Ann Whyman, to David Nelson Greene, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Joseph L. Greene of Purchase, N.Y.
An August wedding is planned.
Ms.
Whyman, 31, is a partner in Einhorn &amp; Company, a specialist firm on the New York Stock Exchange, which was founded by her maternal grandfather, the late Benjamin Einhorn, who was also a governor of the exchange.
Her father is Einhorn's managing partner.
She graduated from Mount Holyoke College and received an M.B.A. from the University of Miami.
Her mother, Susan Whyman, is a doctoral candidate in British history at Princeton University.


Omaha
Omaha, perched on the sensuous, curving bluffs of the Missouri River, has attained a rare urban equilibrium: it is neither too large nor too small.
True, its suburbs are sprawling shamelessly west, out onto the prairie.
But visitors who hew to the heart of the city -- its downtown, which is coming back after a period of neglect, and its lovely old central-city neighborhoods -- find the perfect tourist equation: plenty to see, do and eat, with few impediments.
During the 19th century, the area that is now Omaha lay along the route of several famous exploratory expeditions up the Missouri River: Lewis and Clark between 1804 and 1806; Prince Maximilian of Wied, whose entourage included the Swiss artist Karl Bodmer, in 1833, and John James Audubon in 1843.
This month marks the 150th anniversary of Audubon's visit to Bellevue, a ferry crossing and trading post that among various nodes of development ultimately coalesced into Omaha.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, a review of two biographies of Sam Houston on April 25 misstated the date of Texas's declaration of independence from Mexico.
It was March 2, 1836.


Sports of the Times; When Second Best Is Not Near the Best
Pretend it's the last day of the 1994 baseball season.
The Philadelphia Phillies, who have already clinched first place in the National League East, are playing the Montreal Expos, who are tied with the St.
Louis Cardinals for the second-place berth in the new wild-card playoffs.
Instead of using the Phillies' ace right-hander, Curt Schilling, Manager Jim Fregosi starts a rookie.


Sampras Is Toppled By Ivanisevic in Rome
Goran Ivanisevic of Croatia came to Rome hoping to win a couple of matches.
Instead, he may leave with his first Italian Open title.
Today, the fourth-seeded Ivanisevic defeated top-seeded Pete Sampras, 7-6 (7-4,) 6-2, in the semifinals.
The Croatian left-hander will meet the second-seeded player and defending champion, Jim Courier, in the final.


LET GEORGE BE GEORGE
We believe that everyone is entitled to his opinion, but Murray Chass's Endpaper "Let George Be George" (Life and Times, March 28) was based on such innuendo and appeared so personal (he even questions George Steinbrenner's sincerity in hiring Reggie Jackson for a front-office position) that we are truly surprised you published this commentary.


Whole-Wheat Taste in a Whole New Light
WHOLE wheat has all the attributes of nutritional correctness.
It is rich in vitamins and high in fiber.
On the debit side of the culinary ledger, however, it has a flavor that is far more aggressive and rustic than refined white flour and its texture is rougher and heavier.
Fortunately, whole wheat is available in various forms.
Flour, pasta and whole-wheat berries that can be cooked like beans are some of them.
And there are a number of ways these whole-wheat ingredients can be combined successfully and extremely palatably in recipes.


Toddlers Rescued


In Westport, 'The Hermit of Yalta'
CHEKHOV on a podium?
Well, not exactly.
"The Hermit of Yalta," produced by the Fairfield County Stage Company at the Westport Playhouse, has the trappings of a play: six actors who move around, sound effects from foghorns and steamboats to guitar transcriptions of Villa Lobos and Russian folk songs, a handsome all-purpose set design and no scripts in sight.
And yet Jerome Kilty's mostly epistolary account, in rather strange flashback of some 20 years in the 44-year life of the good doctor, the weary man and the exalted writer, is a didactic variation of the "And then he wrote" school of biography.


Learning to Camp in 4 Easy Epiphanies
CAN somebody who's been sitting at a desk for 18 years walk half a mile with a canoe on her head?
Once you've perfected the two-hour lunch, is it possible to look forward to a Fig Newton?
"Want to go camping?" I ask my family.


Aimee Voute, Murray Lord
Aimee Marie Voute, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Arthur J. Voute Jr. of South Salem, N.Y., was married yesterday to Murray Eric Lindsay Lord, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Lindsay A. C. Lord of Stewart Island, New Zealand.
The Rev.
John Cregan officiated at St.
Mary's Roman Catholic Church in Ridgefield, Conn.
Mrs.
Lord graduated from St.
Lawrence University.
She is a first mate for the Lord Group Inc., a yacht chartering company in Fort Lauderdale, Fla.
Her husband is the company's founder and president.


Campaigning With Jim Wallwork
IT was 8 o'clock on a recent Wednesday morning, and a tall, gray-haired, round-shouldered man was shaking hands with men and women in the ballroom of the Sheraton Hotel in Hasbrouck Heights.
"Hi, I'm Jim Wallwork, running for governor," he said as he greeted members of the Commerce and Industry Association of New Jersey who had gathered to meet three Republicans vying for the party's nomination for governor in the June 8 primary.


Magadan Offers Lesson on Mets
To the Sports Editor:
While the Mets flail around with a team batting average of around .235, it is important to note that, going into the weekend, the former Met Dave Magadan of the Florida Marlins was batting .310, with an on-base average of .441.


Diligence Yields Six Restaurant Finds
THE strong attraction of dry land is causing a decline in Venice's population, from a historic high of some 200,000 residents to a current low of 70,000, many of them elderly.
At the same time, the lure of Venice for day-trippers continues to be irresistible.
As a result, one might expect the city's food scene to be grim.
The groups of day-trippers eat mass-produced lunches and return to their own countries never having tasted Venetian food.
The wealthy pay through the nose for what they believe to be the best.
And the establishments where aging locals can enjoy a cheap, honest fish dinner and the companionship of their peers have fewer and fewer customers and are dying off themselves.


'Nothing to Do With Art'
To the Editor:
Michael Kimmelman's negative appraisal of the Whitney Biennial doesn't go far enough.
This vulgar collection of junk is an insult to museumgoers.
Bundles of newspapers lying on the floor in three places with labels nearby finally kindled my irritation to the point that I demanded my admission money back.
I had been sold a ticket to an art show.
This exhibition had nothing to do with art.


Deborah Baker, Neil Wassner
Deborah Petch Baker, a vice president of Chemical Bank, was married yesterday to Neil Allen Wassner, a principal in the investment banking firm of Wassner Mattingly &amp; Company.
Both work in New York.
Kathleen Corey, the Town Clerk of South Salem, N.Y., officiated at the bride's residence there.
Ms.
Baker is keeping her name.
She graduated from William Smith College and received an M.B.A. from the University of Rhode Island.
She is the daughter of John and Lorna Petch of Pound Ridge, N.Y.
Her previous marriage ended in divorce.


Possible Backfire?
To the Editor:
I left the Whitney Biennial feeling as if I had been pummeled with a politically correct sledgehammer.
The danger with the Biennial is that it may close more minds to potentially valid and well-made new art than open them.
ELIZABETH GUEST Lebanon, N. J.


Bach Meets Be-bop at Marathon
ANYONE who thinks the County Center is only for stamp conventions and dog shows might want to drop by here next Sunday from noon to 6 P.M. when "Marathon III: Bach, Beethoven and Be-bop" will be in full swing.
This third annual celebration of performing arts in Westchester, presented free by the county's Office of Cultural Affairs and the Department of Parks, Recreation and Conservation, will feature 33 local orchestral, opera, dance, jazz and choral groups as well as an arts bazaar, art workshops and a children's perform-athon.


Albany and Other Directions
RIDING THE YELLOW TROLLEY CAR Selected Nonfiction.
By William Kennedy.
Illustrated. 494 pp.
New York: Viking. $25.


Whose Government?
Bill Clinton got an unexpected dividend when he hit the road last week to rescue his economic plan.
Whenever he segued from budget and tax proposals to the evils of influence-peddling and the need for political reform, the crowd loved it.
Therein lies a reality check for lawmakers, especially those who remain in deep denial.
This week, the Senate begins battle over campaign financing reform.
Some legislators profess indifference.
"My constituents don't care about this stuff," one House member said the other day.


First Blood
BULL RUN By Paul Fleischman.
Illustrated by David Frampton. 104 pp.
New York: A Laura Geringer Book/ HarperCollins Publishers. $14. (Ages 10 and up)


After a Wedding, a Death in the Family
When Iona College agreed to consolidate with Elizabeth Seton College four years ago, both institutions were pleased with the prospects of an academic marriage in the Roman Catholic tradition.
For Iona, a four-year college in New Rochelle founded by the Congregation of Christian Brothers, it meant an expansion of its programs in Westchester County.
For Elizabeth Seton, a financially troubled two-year college established by the Sisters of Charity, it promised survival into the next century.


Needed: More Research On Women's Health
The National Institutes of Health's recently announced medical study on postmenopausal women to be conducted at the New Jersey Medical School among other sites nationwide ("A Medical Study on Older Women," April 4) is long overdue.
As the chairwoman for the Medical Society of New Jersey's Committee on Women in Medicine, I am working with other individuals and organizations to develop a statewide agenda to advocate improvements in access, disease prevention and research for women's health.
We have found research to be severely lacking for many groups of females aside from the postmenopausal women on whom the N.I.H. study is focusing.


A la Carte; Putting Food (and Some Chosen Words, Too) in the Mouths of Diners
THE Peter Luger Steakhouse in Great Neck is the most popular restaurant on Long Island.
But Mirabelle in St.
James, the Mill River Inn in Oyster Bay and Starr Boggs in Westhampton Beach have the best food.
At least, that is what the numerical ratings in the soon-to-be-released 1993 Zagat Tristate Restaurant Survey indicate.
The diners-turned-reviewers who contributed to the guide also voted Navona of Great Neck as the Island's best Italian restaurant and saluted David's Grill of Montauk, Ross's Northfork of Southhold, Mirko's of Water Mill and Riverbay of Williston Park for their seafood.


Fortunes in Iraqi Bills Gone Overnight
Walid Abu Bakir still goes to work, although he isn't sure why.
All the usual things are in place -- the two telephones on his desk, the calculator he uses to tally figures and the neatly stacked piles of green Iraqi dinars that sit on the shelf in front of him.


With Shots, It's Not Only About Costs, but Stories
SITTING in a mobile medical van, Zina Turner recently listed the reasons her children had not received their immunizations.
But the problem that has received the greatest emphasis from President Clinton -- the cost of the vaccines -- was not on Ms.
Turner's list.
One reason, she said, involved the children's father, against whom she has filed a child abuse complaint.
If she leaves home to take her two youngest children to the clinic, she said, he may come and hurt the four older ones.


Focus: Philadelphia; Zoning Downtown to Channel Parking
CITY planners have turned the spotlight on the downtown parking situation with new regulations aimed at encouraging lots and garages in some areas and discouraging them elsewhere.
They have made it harder for developers to utilize a favorite method of drawing income from land being held for future development.
This, in turn, may discourage the demolition of uneconomic old buildings specifically to create parking.


Mayoral Candidates Look Past the Primary
For years, the maxim of New York's fractious but politically dominant Democrats as they faced make-or-break primaries was N.D.C., which really stood for the national New Democratic Coalition but came to mean "November doesn't count." In this year's mayoral election, however, most politicians are already acting as if November is the only thing that counts.
To be sure, Mayor David N. Dinkins still faces a Democratic primary challenge from his long-time nemesis, City Council President Andrew J. Stein, and from Roy Innis, the chairman of the Congress of Racial Equality, though he holds a roughly 30-point lead over Mr.
Stein in all the polls and Mr.
Innis has only single-digit support.


For Sagging Fences, Braces and Turnbuckles
Common residential-fence woes include sagging gates, wobbly posts and loose chain-link fencing.
All are rather easy to repair by using the right methods and tools.
A simple way to repair most sagging wood gates is to make a brace with steel cable and a turnbuckle, which when tightened raises the gate's lower corner farthest from the hinge post.
Start by measuring the distance between diagonal corners on the gate and buy a length of eighth-inch-diameter galvanized-metal cable about two feet longer than the measurement.
Also buy a four- or six-inch-long metal turnbuckle, four U-bolt cable clamps and two eyescrews large enough to accept the cable.


Focus: Philadelphia; Zoning Downtown to Channel Parking
CITY planners have turned the spotlight on the downtown parking situation with new regulations aimed at encouraging lots and garages in some areas and discouraging them elsewhere.
They have made it harder for developers to utilize a favorite method of drawing income from land being held for future development.
This, in turn, may discourage the demolition of uneconomic old buildings specifically to create parking.


Whole-Wheat Taste in a Whole New Light
WHOLE wheat has all the attributes of nutritional correctness.
It is rich in vitamins and high in fiber.
On the debit side of the culinary ledger, however, it has a flavor that is far more aggressive and rustic than refined white flour and its texture is rougher and heavier.
Fortunately, whole wheat is available in various forms.
Flour, pasta and whole-wheat berries that can be cooked like beans are some of them.
And there are a number of ways these whole-wheat ingredients can be combined successfully and extremely palatably in recipes.


Beauty in the New Age
"Essence of Beauty," said Carre Otis, tapping one drop out of a slender vial.
"Add Royal Jelly, Super Essence, some Shen for balance," and she stirred, smiled, then handed a murkish brown concoction across the counter top.
It tasted like dirt.
"It helps you focus," she said as a distraction.
"It enhances your creativity. Your ability to express emotions. Oh, um, it also gives you peace of mind."


Linda Kristiansen, Thomas DiLenge
Mr. and Mrs.
Arthur Kristiansen of Shrewsbury, N.J., have announced the engagement of their daughter Linda A. Kristiansen to Thomas DiLenge, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Thomas DiLenge of Yorktown Heights, N.Y.
An October wedding is planned.


Teresa Samaha, Robert Lewis 2d
Mr. and Mrs.
Victor S. Samaha of New York have announced September wedding plans for their daughter, Teresa Ann Samaha, and Robert Wesley Lewis 2d, a son of Mr.
Lewis Sr. of Hampton, N.J., and Catherine B. Lewis of Pompano Beach, Fla.
Miss Samaha, 26, and her fiance graduated from Gettysburg College.
She is a sales assistant at Seagram Chateau and Estate Wines Company in New York.
Her father is a director of finance and administration, in Lake Success, L.I., of the House of Seagram, a subsidiary of Joseph E. Seagram &amp; Sons Inc.
Her mother, Joyce Samaha, teaches sixth grade at Visitation Academy in Brooklyn.


China Is Trying to Curb 'Warlord' Businessman
Inside his guarded compound, protected by armed police and by the pistol he carried, Wang Zhiqiang was about as close to a warlord as China has seen in recent years.
The 39-year-old Mr.
Wang allegedly kidnapped and tortured his critics, and ran a private courtroom and jail to punish those who tried to investigate him.
He drove around in a police car with flashing lights, and received a string of fancy honors and fancy Government titles.


POSTINGS: Italianate Town House; Banco di Napoli Buys Landmark
When bank executives look at mansions, they usually think "mortgage." Rarely do they look and think "headquarters."
But that was the reaction that Lucio Passarello, first vice president of Banco Di Napoli, had to 4 East 54th Street, the five-story, double-width town house that the industrialist William H. Moore had built as his primary residence almost a century ago.
The 454-year-old Italian bank just agreed to buy the landmarked building as its permanent New York headquarters for $12.8 million.


The Italian Restaurant Beat Goes On
THE latest Italian restaurant to open is Boccaccio, a newcomer in a small hillside shopping complex on the main road (Route 37) in New Fairfield.
Following a recent pattern, the medium-to-large dining room for nonsmokers (as well as the smaller area to the right of the entrance for smokers) is sponge-painted a soft golden yellow, with fragments of frescoed landscapes here and there.
Tables are generously spaced, with white butcher paper over white tablecloths.
To one side is a black, upended motorcycle, a hard-edge touch totally out of synch with the romantic wall scenes.
The dining areas spark memories of Prezzo in New Canaan, and it turns out that both Italian restaurants (as well as Portofino in Wilton) share the same ownership.
Like Prezzo's, the menu fits right in with current Italian restaurant style.
It combines several pasta dishes, classic entrees like saltimbocca romana, current trendy starters like funghi alla griglia (hugely delicious grilled portobello mushrooms in an herb aioli), and both traditional and specialty pizzas from a wood-fired oven.
In short, something for most 90's palates.


Bosnia Safe Havens Plan Makes Sense; The Stupidity of Bombs
To the Editor:
Like all people of good will, I decry the slaughter in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
As a third-generation American Jew who worked in United States Army Special Services in World War II, I am well aware of the horrors of "ethnic cleansing."


Riding High (or Upside Down)
A new generation of roller coasters -- Batman the Ride, Top Gun and Days of Thunder -- reflects Hollywood's grip on the popular imagination.
After a successful debut last year at Six Flags Great America in Gurnee, Ill., Batman the Ride opened last month at Six Flags Great Adventure in Jackson, N.J.
Riders are held in by shoulder and belt harnesses.
The ride starts with a 105-foot climb, then flips passengers head over heels as it rockets at 50 m.p.h. over 2,700 feet of track.
A combination ticket, covering all rides, is $30.74 (including New Jersey tax); children under 54 inches, $21.20; adults 55 and older, $15.90; children 3 and younger are free.
Call (908) 928-1821.


Wall Street; What Won't Wash About Wraps
"ARE there any regulators in the room?" The scene was a New York conference of brokerage industry compliance executives, and the answer to the moderator's question was no.
So members of the group got to talking pretty candidly earlier this month about the inside workings of an industry mother lode: the wrap account.
Wrap accounts come in several shapes and sizes, but all are variations on the same theme: investors with $100,000 or more hand their money over to a brokerage house, which helps them choose from a list of big-time money managers who would otherwise thumb their noses at such small amounts.


From Alwin Nikolais, The 'Unique Gesture'
When Alwin Nikolais died just over a week ago, he left behind a galaxy of choreographic images that were among the most offbeat -- and memorable -- in dance.
Disembodied heads, dancers united with fantastical props, movements melting into mesmerizing swirls of light -- all reflected his belief that modern dance must be rooted in what he liked to call the "unique gesture." Here is a sampling of Nikolais imagery.


U.N. IS IN ARREARS ON PEACE EFFORTS
With United Nations peacekeeping costs expected to rise by more than a third this year to $3.7 billion, the failure of member countries to pay their share is raising doubts about the organization's ability to finance future operations or adequately sustain peace efforts under way now in Somalia and the former Yugoslavia.
Officials here say governments of many developing countries are angry because the United Nations has failed to reimburse them fully for the cost of the troops they send on peacekeeping missions.
In some cases those countries are withdrawing forces or refusing to take part in new operations.


Backing Holtzman's Foe, Ferraro Gets On With Life
Geraldine A. Ferraro insists she is not bitter about her one-point loss in the Democratic primary for the Senate last year after a fierce tag-team attack from City Comptroller Elizabeth Holtzman and State Attorney General Robert Abrams.
But she does take two pills a day for an ulcer now and she calls "one Liz and the other Bobby."
Ms.
Ferraro and many supporters have found a pragmatic outlet for their indigestion: backing her old friend Assemblyman Alan G. Hevesi of Queens in his challenge to Ms.
Holtzman in this year's Democratic primary for comptroller.
On Thursday, Ms.
Ferraro and Letty Cottin Pogrebin, a co-founder of Ms. magazine, will lead a group of New York women in a breakfast salute to Mr.
Hevesi at the Grand Hyatt Hotel in Manhattan.


The Conundrum of See-Through
THE mystery of the black holes in the universe is solved.
They must be filled with that pervasive fashion substance that vanishes into thin air on the streets: sheer chiffon.
For three years, high-fashion designers have been transparently in love with see-through fabrics.
Models on the runway reveal lightly veiled breasts, midriffs, thighs, legs -- and then turn to show the bare derriere.
Although this sheer story started with the avant-garde, now even the fashion establishment is making indecent proposals.
For spring, Bill Blass showed the ultimate uptown evening dress: pin-striped chiffon, sheer at the rear, to be worn over nothing but a thong.


Japan Asks: Who Dispatched Us to This Hell, Anyway?
CAPTAIN SHIKAUCHI of the Japanese Self-Defense Forces knew what to do back in February when the United Nations convoy he was leading was attacked by a vicious band of Khmer Rouge rebels along Cambodia's border with Thailand.
As the dubious hero of a popular adult comic book called "P.K.O." (for "Peace Keeping Operation"), he dutifully radioed to Phnom Penh for instructions.
Then, waving aside objections from a pesky Japanese television reporter who reminded him that Japan's Constitution renounces war, he ordered his troops to return the fire, killing hundreds of his attackers.
"We are simply obeying the orders of the people, and of the United Nations," the muscular cartoon captain declared to the cameras after the firefight was over.
Anyway, he demanded to know as he stood in the Cambodian jungle, "Who dispatched us to this hell?"


Who Opposes Olympus And Who Would Pay
Bruce E. Ferguson's letter  [ "Olympus and Financial Ramifications," May 2 ]  omits crucial information which prevents your readers from understanding who supports the "Olympus project," who wouldn't, and why.
This is not surprising, because the major omission directly involves his own agency, the Suffolk County Industrial Development Agency.


Get a Life!
GOVERNMENT BY all-nighters is getting tired," Newsweek wrote in its Conventional Wisdom Watch, the sprightliest section of the magazine. It advised the youthful Clinton White House staff, "Go to sleep and get a life."
An all-nighter, which only a generation ago described a leisurely arrangement with a prostitute, has changed its meaning to "a nightlong session of studying, or cramming, for an examination." More to the newsworthy point, however, is the growing use of the imperative expression Get a life!


E. J. Anscombe and Matthew Valeika
Elizabeth Jane Anscombe, the daughter of Prof. and Mrs.
Francis Anscombe of New Haven, was married there yesterday to Matthew Valeika, a son of Valerie Valeika of Munster, Ind., and the late Kazys Valeika.
The Rev.
Peter Rodgers performed the ceremony at St.
John's Episcopal Church.
Mrs.
Valeika graduated cum laude from Yale University, where she is a doctoral candidate in art history.
Her father founded the statistics department at Yale and was the first chairman of that department.
He retired from Yale as a professor of statistics.


Puerto Rico
To the Editor: I am writing to give you feedback on the Joyuda Beach, which was listed in the Q &amp; A (Feb. 21) with other paradors, or country inns, in Puerto Rico.
I stayed there on March 26 and 27.
The beachfront was filthy and littered with beer bottles; there were absolutely no amenities -- no hangers, no bath towels, no maid service until 5:30 on weekends.
The parador was very unaccommodating.
ROBIN FRIED New York, N.Y.
Juan Carlos Tamayo, manager of the Joyuda Beach Parador, responds: We are a family business in a small town on the west coast of Puerto Rico and work hard to offer the best to our guests and satisfy their needs.
So it really worries us that after all the effort we still do not get 100 percent satisfaction.
Nevertheless, in many letters from satisfied guests we have experienced great feedback from all over the country.
The crystal clear water and the tranquillity of the area are major attractions.


Marie France and Illegal Immigrants
Barely six weeks in office, France's new conservative Government has begun carrying out its campaign pledge to crack down on illegal immigration.
The question now is: How far it will go to stem -- or perhaps even reverse -- the tide of Arabs and Africans still entering the country?
Its first measure was in a sense symbolic.
In the future, instead of obtaining French citizenship automatically at age 18, French-born children of foreigners must now request it between the ages of 16 and 21 to demonstrate that they really want to be French.


BEST SELLERS: May 16, 1993
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Fiction
1
1
40
THE BRIDGES OF MADISON COUNTY, by Robert James Waller. (Warner, $14.95.) A photographer and a lonely farmer's wife in Iowa.
2
2
9
THE CLIENT, by John Grisham. (Doubleday, $23.50.) A deadly secret presents serious problems for an 11-year-old boy.
3
5
2
I'LL BE SEEING YOU, by Mary Higgins Clark. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $23.) A television news reporter has mystifying experiences when she covers a story in a hospital.
4
3
4
THE LAST COMMAND, by Timothy Zahn. (Spectra/Bantam, $21.95.) The final volume of a "Star Wars" trilogy.
5
6
2
GAI-JIN, by James Clavell. (Delacorte, $27.50.) Cordial relationships and terrorism between the Japanese and foreigners in Yokohama in 1862, shortly after that city was opened to the West.
6
7
3
A SEASON IN PURGATORY, by Dominick Dunne. (Crown, $22.) The political and social machinations of a wealthy Irish Catholic family.
7
4
5
"J" IS FOR JUDGMENT, by Sue Grafton. (Holt, $21.95.) Kinsey Millhone investigates the case of a man who apparently committed suicide -- but may have returned to life to reap benefits.
8
8
5
LIKE WATER FOR CHOCOLATE, by Laura Esquivel. (Doubleday, $17.50.) Frustration, love, hope -- and recipes -- sampled by a woman coming of age on a Mexican ranch.
9
9
2
ANGEL, by Barbara Taylor Bradford. (Random House, $23.) The reunion of four people, all successful in glamorous jobs, is transformed by the appearance of two celebrated men.
10
10
3
PERFECT, by Judith McNaught. (Pocket, $22.) A model young woman is abducted by a onetime award-winning film maker.
11
14
2
WHISPERS, by Belva Plain. (Delacorte, $22.95.) The realities that lie below the surface of an outwardly happy family.
12
126
OH, THE PLACES YOU'LL GO! by Dr.
Seuss. (Random House, $12.95.) The problems of finding your way through life; in verse and pictures.
13
13
3
CHARMS FOR THE EASY LIFE, by Kaye Gibbons. (Putnam, $19.95.) The fortunes of three indomitable North Carolina women.
14
11
7
AMERICAN STAR, by Jackie Collins. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $23.) The romance of two teen-agers, one who grows up to be a movie star, the other a model.
15
3
WHERE THERE'S SMOKE, by Sandra Brown. (Warner, $19.95.) A physician moves to a Texas town and tries to live down her bad reputation.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Nonfiction
1
1
40
WOMEN WHO RUN WITH THE WOLVES, by Clarissa Pinkola Estes. (Ballantine, $20.) A Jungian analyst reinterprets myths and folk tales to enable women to understand their psyches.
2
3
35
THE WAY THINGS OUGHT TO BE, by Rush H. Limbaugh 3d. (Pocket, $22.) Anecdotes and opinions offered by the talk show host.
3
2
13
HEALING AND THE MIND, by Bill Moyers. (Doubleday, $25.) The relationship of sickness to thoughts and emotions.
4
6
26
BANKRUPTCY 1995, by Harry E. Figgie Jr. with Gerald J. Swanson. (Little, Brown, $19.95.) The collapse of America under Government debt.
5
10
4
THINKING OUT LOUD, by Anna Quindlen. (Random House, $22.) Essays on current topics by the New York Times columnist.
6 *
11
2
CONDUCT UNBECOMING, by Randy Shilts. (St. Martin's, $27.95.) The roles that gay men and lesbians have played in our armed forces.
7
4
22
CARE OF THE SOUL, by Thomas Moore. (HarperCollins, $22.50.) Spirituality in daily life.
8
9
4
AMY FISHER: My Story, by Amy Fisher with Sheila Weller. (Pocket, $22.) The memoirs of the Long Island teen-ager who is now serving time for shooting the wife of a man she says was her lover.
9
5
5
A WORLD WAITING TO BE BORN, by M. Scott Peck. (Bantam, $22.95.) A call for people to make civility part of their lives.
10
7
3
REMEMBERING DENNY, by Calvin Trillin. (Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux, $19.) A memoir of a bright young man of the 1950's who committed suicide two years ago.
11
1
THE REAL ANITA HILL, by David Brock. (Free Press, $24.95.) A journalist's account of the relationship between the law professor and Clarence Thomas, whom she testified against during his Senate confirmation hearings.
12 *
13
34
THE TE OF PIGLET, by Benjamin Hoff. (Dutton, $16.) Taoism and an A. A. Milne character.
13 *
1
EMBRACED BY THE LIGHT, by Betty J. Eadie with Curtis Taylor. (Gold Leaf Press, $14.95.) The experiences of a woman who came close to death but survived.
14
12
9
PREPARING FOR THE TWENTY-FIRST CENTURY, by Paul Kennedy. (Random House, $25.) A historian assays social and political forces.
15
1
CULTURE OF COMPLAINT, by Robert Hughes. (New York Public Library/Oxford University, $19.95.) Essays critical of current cultural and political trends in America.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous
1
3
3
A WOMAN'S WORTH, by Marianne Williamson. (Random House, $17.) Advice about beauty, age, relationships, sex, children and careers.
2
1
9
BEATING THE STREET, by Peter Lynch with John Rothchild. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $23.) Advice about investing in stocks and mutual funds.
3
2
44
HARVEY PENICK'S LITTLE RED BOOK, by Harvey Penick with Bud Shrake. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $19.) Anecdotes and tips about playing golf from a legendary teacher.
4
4
5
MEN ARE FROM MARS, WOMEN ARE FROM VENUS, by John Gray. (HarperCollins, $20.) Ways to improve communication between the sexes.
5
61
HOW TO SATISFY A WOMAN EVERY TIME, by Naura Hayden. (Bibli O'Phile/Dutton, $15.95.) Sexual counsel for married couples.
These listings are based on computer-processed sales figures from 3,050 bookstores and from representative wholesalers with more than 28,000 other retail outlets, including variety stores and supermarkets.
The figures are statistically adjusted to represent sales in all such outlets across the United States.
Rankings reflect sales for the week ending May 1. *An asterisk before a book's title indicates that its sales, weighted to reflect the book-selling industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
LP indicates that a book is available in large print.
And Bear in Mind
(Editors' choices of other recent books of particular interest)
ROAD SCHOLAR: Coast to Coast Late in the Century, by Andrei Codrescu. (Hyperion, $19.95.) Mr.
Codrescu, a poet better known as an essayist on National Public Radio, mounts a red '68 Caddy for a journey in essay writing, a countertravelogue that visits lots of spots important in the less orthodox history of America.
A SUITABLE BOY, by Vikram Seth. (HarperCollins, $30.) A multitude of characters and events throng the 1,349 pages of this vast novel that strives to re-create the life of post-British India.
I KILLED HEMINGWAY, by William McCranor Henderson. (Thomas Dunne/St. Martin's, $18.95.) A 93-year-old eccentric claims to have murdered Hemingway (the rat published the old man's work as his own!) in this complex, amusing, palpably symbolic novel, concerned with issues from Oedipal to spiritual.
CHIMNEY ROCK, by Charlie Smith. (Holt, $22.50.) Mr.
Smith's novel appropriates the language and vision of Southern Gothic to the dwellers in a nasty, dusty Hollywood through a narrator who represents a complete absence of ethical consciousness.
THE STORIES AND RECOLLECTIONS OF UMBERTO SABA, by Umberto Saba. (Sheep Meadow Press, $22.50.) Melancholy short stories and sketches of Jewish life in Trieste by an Italian writer, much esteemed in his own country, who died in 1957.
DR.
HAGGARD'S DISEASE, by Patrick McGrath. (Poseidon, $20.) In the (appropriate) guise of a Gothic horror tale, Mr.
McGrath produces a myth of the creator sacrificed to his creation.
AT THE HAND OF MAN: Peril and Hope for Africa's Wildlife, by Raymond Bonner. (Knopf, $24.) Mr.
Bonner inspects nearly every relevant argument about conservation in Africa and finds that there will be none, without support by intelligent exploitation.


Corrections
An answer in the Q &amp; A column last week about restrictions on travel to Libya misstated the area code for the State Department's Citizens' Emergency Center.
Its number is (202) 647-5225.


MTV Taking Summer House On Long Island
MTV is growing up and summering in the Hamptons.
The network has rented a huge beachfront house on Long Island's East End.
From June 7 until the end of August, VJ's like Duff, John Norris (below) and Kennedy will tape their spots there.
MTV's dance show "The Grind" will be shot at the beach.
And viewer contests will offer winners a vacation at the house.


Q and A
Whale Watching
Q.
My family wants to go whale spotting this summer.
Can you direct me to places along the Atlantic coast offering trips? -- Robert P. Postal, Lewistown, Pa.


U.S. Forces in Europe Train for Possible Role in Bosnia
Quietly and with great misgivings, the United States military in Europe is training for the kinds of operations it could be called upon to perform in the Balkans.
Air Force fighter-bomber pilots at Ramstein Air Base have been practicing bombing and missile-firing runs against field guns at the Army's training range at Grafenwohr, in northern Bavaria, in case President Clinton orders them into action against Serbian nationalist military targets in Bosnia and Herzegovina.


BROWSING THE WORLD'S LARGEST STORES: London bureau; London's Regal Marketplace
THE BUILDING looms above London's fashionable Knightsbridge like the prow of some great Edwardian ocean liner, its curved, six-story frame outlined by 11,500 light bulbs and topped by towers and snapping flags.
This is Harrods, but to describe it as a department store, even as one of the world's great department stores, does not do justice to either its legend or its reality.
Inside certain inner chambers -- like the Egyptian Hall, with its faux stone-block ceiling and pillars of carved hieroglyphics, ca. 1990, or the Old Map and Print Room on the fourth floor -- Harrods feels more like a museum than a store, a kind of permanent exhibition of retailing as grand theater.
Sales displays often bear cautionary tags warning visitors not to touch, and in many places there are even signs, as in the Louvre, explicitly forbidding photography (a prohibition necessary, store officials explain, to maintain a certain sense of retailing decorum).


MAY 9-15: Colombian Plot Charged; Three Indicted in the Murder Of a Crusading Journalist
After 14 months of doggedly pursuing the killers of the crusading Spanish-language journalist Manuel de Dios Unanue, Federal law enforcement officials last week indicted three young men who they said had been acting on the orders of drug lords in Colombia.
The awesome reach of the Colombian drug traffickers was underscored by the disclosure that two accused of the plot were also suspects in an earlier slaying of two Baltimore businessmen.


This Week's Numbers
Last
Consensus
Period
Estimates
(I.D.E.A. Inc.)
Tuesday
April housing starts, millions, annual rate
1.13
1.20
April building permits, millions, annual rate
1.05
1.14
Wednesday
Mar. trade deficit, change, billions of dollars
-7.2
-7.5
Thursday
Weekly jobless claims, thousands
339
340
Friday
April budget statement, billions of dollars
-44.6
10.0
Tuesday: Second Danish vote on European unity  Wednesday: Bundesbank council meeting Federal Open Market Committee meeting


High Notes


Zayak's Biggest Jump: A Leap Into the Past
The way she remembers it, Elaine Zayak never missed a jump.
She watches the old videos, the ones from 1981 and 1982, and sees the double axels and triple loops flow from her body like sweet, soft ballet.
"It came so easily then," she said. "So naturally."


Troubled Teens
OUT OF CONTROL By Norma Fox Mazer. 218 pp.
New York: Morrow Junior Books. $14. (Ages 12 and up) THE RING OF TRUTH By Susan Beth Pfeffer. 180 pp.
New York: Bantam Books. $15.95. (Ages 12 and up)


Finding One's Way In Contemporary And Native America
If nothing else, the Whitney Biannual confirms that disaffection has become as much an art medium as the erotic.
The evidence has long been obvious, in Westchester as well, and it happens that mild examples of each are to be found now, within a short distance of each other.
One, "Bridging Two Worlds," is a show by American Indians at the Pelham Art Center.
The other is a selection of photographs taken by Michael Gesinger on view at Noel Fine Art in Bronxville.
One of the Pelham show's curators is Elizabeth Colleary; the other, Lloyd Oxendine of Lumbee descent, directs the American Indian Community House Gallery and Museum in Manhattan.
Together, they have chosen seven artists from tribes as far apart as the Tlingit in Alaska and the Quechua of the Andean region.
But because most have attended art schools -- Mr.
Oxendine, who is also in the lineup, obtained his degrees from Columbia University -- it would take a keener eye than mine to sift out tribal characteristics.


Suzanne Rosendahl and Bruce Stein
Iris Rosendahl of Tenafly, N.J., and Leonard Rosendahl of New York have announced the engagement of their daughter, Suzanne Sophia Rosendahl, to Bruce C. Stein, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Herbert Stein of New Rochelle, N.Y.
A June wedding is planned.


IN SHORT: FICTION
LIVING IN LITTLE ROCK WITH MISS LITTLE ROCK By Jack Butler. Knopf, $25.


A Baton Benefit
The conducting debut of Sony's president raises money for Lincoln Center, May 12.


If You're Thinking of Living in: Blauvelt
"I'VE been here for 22 years and I still feel like a newcomer," said Eileen Larkin, a Councilwoman who represents the hamlet of Blauvelt in Rockland County.
"There are so many people who have been here for generations. Unless you're a member of one of the founding families, you feel like you just arrived."
And Kimball Parker, whose family moved to Blauvelt in 1954, just before the construction boom of the 50's and 60's, shares that view.


SUNDAY VIEW: Visions of Heaven -- and of Hell; Angels in Americs -- An Epic, All Right, But It's the Details And Future That Count
Not until the very end of "Millennium Approaches," Part 1 of Tony Kushner's "Angels in America," do we see an actual angel -- crashing through a bedroom ceiling, as it happens, and sending chunks of plaster raining down on a young man dying of AIDS.
Her majestic wings are spread wide and high.
The billows of her blindingly white gown could have been styled by Bernini.
From the impassive expression on her face, however, there's no knowing if she's come on a mission of vengeance or mercy, retribution or deliverance.


FEWER JOBS FILLED AS FACTORIES RELY ON OVERTIME PAY
In another sign of how hard it is to create jobs, American manufacturers are paying record amounts of overtime and factory workers are putting in more extra hours than ever before.
By relying on so much overtime, companies have avoided hiring and jobs in manufacturing have continued to disappear.
For decades, overtime encouraged hiring.
Companies found it cheaper to hire a new worker rather than assign more hours to existing employees, who have to be paid a 50 percent premium for the extra work.


Dividing Race And Religion
To the Editor:
In the May 9 Styles section cover story  [ "Retro Speed Ahead" ] , Lenny Kravitz is described as being "half-black, half-Jewish." It seems to me that one can be half-black, half-white/ Oriental, etc., or half-Jewish, half-Christian/Muslim, etc., but not black-Jewish.
This comparison is made very often.
Religion and race are not the same.
MIRIAM BIEDER Rego Park, Queens


The Indelicate Art of Telling Adults How to Have Sex
ARESURGENCE of clubs where people meet for sex has prompted New York City to train inspectors to visit the places, trying to prevent the spread of AIDS.
Imagine what you will, a sex policeman's lot is not a happy one.


Marni Lerner, Charles Edelman
Mr. and Mrs.
Jerry Lerner of Jericho, L.I., have announced the engagement of their daughter Marni Jo Lerner to Charles Saul Edelman, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Frank Edelman of Chicago.
An October wedding is planned.
Ms.
Lerner, 27, is an associate at the New York law firm of Simpson Thacher &amp; Bartlett.
She graduated from Amherst College, as did her fiance, and received a law degree from Harvard University.


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
THE ENORMOUS VOGUE OF THINGS MEXICAN Cultural Relations Between  the United States and Mexico, 1920-1935.
By Helen Delpar.
University of Alabama, $38.95.


Erica Clements And Roy Raved
Sidney Monas of Austin, Tex., has announced the engagement of his daughter Erica Beecher Clements to Roy Raved, the son of Nettie B. Raved of Deerfield Beach, Fla., and the late Maurice Raved.
A July wedding is planned.
Ms.
Clements is an associate with the law firm of Fried, Frank, Harris, Shriver &amp; Jacobson in New York.
She graduated from Florida International University and received a master's degree in anatomy and biochemistry from the University of Miami, where she also received a law degree.
She is also a daughter of the late Carolyn Monas.
The prospective bride's father is a professor emeritus of Slavic languages at the University of Texas at Austin.
She is the stepdaughter of Clare Anderson Monas.
Her maternal grandfather, the late Dana G. Munro, was the director of the Woodrow Wilson School of Public and International Affairs at Princeton University.


Suspense


American Classics
When visitors called on George Washington at Mount Vernon, Va. (above), there were only 13 states, all of them continental.
Now, of course, there are 50, and vacationers can sample Hawaii's Volcanoes National Park, with its sulfur-laden breezes, or cruise among frolicking sea otters and ice floes on Alaska's Inside Passage without ever leaving the country.
Back on the mainland, many roads lead to Arizona's splendid Mission San Xavier del Bac, southern California's sumptuous Huntington gardens and Stroud's, Kansas City's great old joint, where the pan fried chicken is as classic as it gets.
Spending summer at home has a lot to be said for it -- for one thing, you don't have to worry about exchange rates -- but if you still yearn for foreign parts, you'll find some classics here, too: Spain's golden Salamanca; a South American river adventure, India's timeless Varanasi.


Tactical Technology Fights Counterfeiters
AS color-copying technology becomes more accurate, postal authorities, concerned about counterfeiting, are using more elaborate security measures in printing stamps.
Far in front of the field is the Royal Mail of Britain, which has incorporated a host of security features in its new $:10 Britannia stamp.
This stamp has the highest face value of any current British stamp, roughly equivalent to the United States' $14 Eagle.


BROWSING THE WORLD'S LARGEST STORES: Berlin bureau; Extravaganza Of International Delicacies
BERLIN'S GIANT KaDeWe is not only a grand place to shop but also a major tourist attraction.
Among the 80,000 people who pass through the department store's regal brass portals each day are many who come not to buy but simply to gape at the overwhelming variety and stylish displays.
They often encounter entertainers, such as string quartets, who add a touch of elegance to what has become one of Europe's great temples of consumption.
The KaDeWe, or Kaufhaus des Westens, opened in 1907, but had to be rebuilt after an American bomber crashed into it and exploded during an air raid in 1943.
Reconstruction was completed in 1956, and in that year the store's most famous attraction, its sixth-floor food extravaganza, was opened.


New &amp; Noteworthy
BARN BLIND, by Jane Smiley. (Fawcett Columbine, $10.) Jane Smiley's first novel, published in 1980 and never before in paperback, deals with an ambitious woman determined to have her farm-bound children become prize-winning equestrians.
The author "handles with skill and understanding the mercurial molasses of adolescence, and the inchoate, cumbersome love that family members feel for one another," Michael Malone said here.
THE CULTURE OF CONTENTMENT, by John Kenneth Galbraith. (Houghton Mifflin, $9.95.) The contented -- the top 20 percent in income in our society -- are a minority in number but a majority in power, asserts John Kenneth Galbraith.
Opposed to economic reform, these are the voters who brought us the lower taxes and laissez-faire approaches of the Administrations of the last two Republican Presidents.
Last year our reviewer, Robert N. Bellah, said: "I know of no book -- and I have read a number of excellent discussions of the subject lately -- that treats more incisively or more convincingly the profoundly injurious consequences of these policies to our economy." Houghton Mifflin has also reissued Mr.
Galbraith's strangely prescient 1968 novel THE TRIUMPH ($9.95), in which the American Government intervenes in Latin America on behalf of a corrupt but anti-Communist dictator.
Donald Barthelme found the book stuffy but, he said here, "The story is dandy."


MAY 9-15: A Larcenous Cash Machine; Thanks for the P.I.N., And Have a Nice Day
It was a high-tech bank robbery worthy of Mission Impossible.
Three smooth-talking men, claiming to be from a bank in New Jersey, installed an automated teller machine in a Manchester, Conn., shopping mall late last month.
When shoppers tried to withdraw money, it returned the cards, citing technical problems while secretly recording the card number and the card holders' personal identification number.
After filching more than 2,000 account numbers, the thieves retrieved their ATM last week and began to withdraw cash using forged cards, first in New York City and later in Florida.
Thus far 16 banks have identified fraudulent withdrawals totaling $58,000.


PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: May 16, 1993
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Fiction
1
2
SHADOWFIRES, by Dean Koontz. (Berkley, $6.99.) A woman is stalked by her supposedly deceased husband.
2
43
JURASSIC PARK, by Michael Crichton. (Ballantine, $5.99.) A biotechnician clones dinosaurs for use in a theme park.
3
13
THE PELICAN BRIEF, by John Grisham. (Island/Dell, $6.99.) A woman law student probes the murder of two Supreme Court justices.
4
68
THE FIRM, by John Grisham. (Island/Dell, $5.99.) A young lawyer learns that his firm is engaged in secret, possibly illegal activities.
5
4
"I" IS FOR INNOCENT, by Sue Grafton. (Fawcett, $5.99.) Kinsey Millhone investigates a man once charged with murdering his rich wife.
6
3
WAITING TO EXHALE, by Terry McMillan. (Pocket, $5.99.) The friendships and romances of four black women in Phoenix.
7
3
JEWELS, by Danielle Steel. (Dell, $6.99.) The life of a woman who becomes rich by dealing in precious stones.
8
57
A TIME TO KILL, by John Grisham. (Island/Dell, $5.99.) Racial tensions surface during the trial of a man charged with murder in rural Mississippi.
9
4
THE WITCHING HOUR, by Anne Rice. (Ballantine, $6.99.) A woman descended from witches brings a drowned man back to life.
10
3
FRENCH SILK, by Sandra Brown. (Warner, $5.99.) The ordeal of a New Orleans woman suspected of killing a television evangelist.
11
3
SWEET LIAR, by Jude Deveraux. (Pocket, $5.99.) In New York, a Kentucky woman copes with a mystery dating back to the Roaring Twenties.
12
1
FATHERLAND, by Robert Harris. (Harper Paperbacks, $6.50.) A thriller set in the Third Reich 20 years after Hitler wins World War II.
13
4
DANGEROUS, by Amanda Quick. (Bantam, $5.99.) Romance and danger in the ballrooms and country houses of Regency England.
14
4
THE ASSASSIN, by W. E. B. Griffin. (Jove, $5.99.) The Philadelphia police contend with a plot to kill the visiting Vice President.
15 *
1
NIGHT OF THE HAWK, by Dale Brown. (Berkley, $5.99.) American airmen and marines undertake to rescue a serviceman in Lithuania.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
NonFiction
1
3
THE SILENT PASSAGE, by Gail Sheehy. (Pocket, $5.50.) The psychological and social significance of menopause for today's women.
2
2
NOT FOR SALE AT ANY PRICE, by Ross Perot. (Hyperion, $5.95.) The Texas billionaire discusses America's economic and political problems.
3
497
THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $10.95.) Inspiration. (LP)
4
13
I KNOW WHY THE CAGED BIRD SINGS, by Maya Angelou. (Bantam, $4.99.) The poet's account of her childhood and adolescence.
5
83
A YEAR IN PROVENCE, by Peter Mayle. (Vintage, $10.) A sojourn in the south of France.
6 *
104
YOU JUST DON'T UNDERSTAND, by Deborah Tannen. (Ballantine, $10.) The different languages men and women speak.
7
1
WHERE THE BLUEBIRD SINGS TO THE LEMONADE SPRINGS, by Wallace Stegner. (Penguin, $11.) Essays celebrating the American West and criticizing the illusions it has fostered.
8
29
BACKLASH, by Susan Faludi. (Anchor/ Doubleday, $12.50.) A journalist contends that the media and political groups are staging a war against women's rights.
9
19
EARTH IN THE BALANCE, by Al Gore. (Plume, $13.) The Vice President discusses factors affecting the environment.
10 *
18
REVOLUTION FROM WITHIN, by Gloria Steinem. (Little, Brown, $11.95.) The reflections of a feminist on the struggle to achieve self-esteem.
11 *
13
WOMEN ON TOP, by Nancy Friday. (Pocket, $5.99.) The changes in social life during the past two decades that have affected the sexual fantasies of women.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Advice, How-To and Miscellaneous
1
2
TEACHING YOUR CHILDREN VALUES, by Linda Eyre and Richard Eyre. (Fireside/S&amp;S, $11.) Advice for parents of children from age 2 to the teen-age years.
2
134
THE T-FACTOR FAT GRAM COUNTER, by Jamie Pope-Cordle and Martin Katahn. (Norton, $2.99.) How to reduce fat in one's diet.
3
6
LIFE'S LITTLE INSTRUCTION BOOK: Volume Two, by H. Jackson Brown Jr. (Rutledge Hill, $5.95.) More tips for achieving a self-fulfilling life.
4
117
THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE, by Stephen R. Covey. (Fireside/S&amp;S, $9.95.) Principles for success.
5
92
LIFE'S LITTLE INSTRUCTION BOOK, by H. Jackson Brown Jr. (Rutledge Hill, $5.95.) Some 500 tips for achieving a self-fulfilling life.
These listings are based on computer-processed sales figures from 3,000 bookstores and from representative wholesalers with more than 38,000 other retail outlets, including variety stores and supermarkets.
The figures are statistically adjusted to represent sales in all such outlets across the United States. *An asterisk before a book's title indicates that its sales, weighted to reflect the book-selling industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
LP indicates that a book is available in large print.


The Nightmare's Roots: The Dream World Called Serbia
OVER the last year, as Americans and people in other Western countries have been forced to focus their attention on Serbia, this land and its inhabitants seem to have become more and more puzzling.
In their efforts to justify the brutal war and "ethnic cleansing" being waged in the name of a Greater Serbia, Serbs often appear gripped by emotions that take them beyond the reach of rational argument.
In explaining this, many analysts have pointed out that Serbia operates in near-isolation from the outside world's information media, and from opposition viewpoints.
Some, like the late novelist Ivo Andric, have suggested that the explanation lies deeper, in the land's historic culture.
Serbs, Mr.
Andric wrote, are a people "who easily make up fables and spread them quickly, wherein reality is strangely and inextricably mixed and interwoven with legend."


On Air in Los Angeles, A (Rare) Serious Voice
In the wasteland that is broadcast journalism in Southern California -- in which reality is nightly distorted through a prism of high-speed car chases, rapes and drive-by shootings -- Warren Olney stands out like a lush oasis.
With a deep steady baritone that exudes both authority and impartiality, the veteran television reporter has turned a small cramped public-radio studio in a basement at Santa Monica College into the main broadcast forum for serious issues in the troubled Los Angeles area.


Emily Foster, Charles Verbeck
Emily Bradstreet Foster, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Douglas Foster of Bronxville, N.Y., was married there yesterday to Charles Anthony Verbeck, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Pieter Verbeck of Darien, Conn.
The Rev.
P.
C.
Ennis performed the ceremony at the Reformed Church of Bronxville.
Mrs.
Verbeck is an assistant in the financial services division of Time Warner Inc. in New York.
She graduated from the University of Vermont.
Her father is the president of the Atlantic Legal Foundation, a public-interest law firm based in New York.
Her mother, Ann Foster, is the owner of Art for Institutions, a mail-order artwork company in Bronxville.


CURRENCY
Last
Prior
Year
Week
Week
Ago
Japanese Yen
110.80
110.40
129.75
per Dollar
German Mark
1.6020
1.5860
1.6095
per Dollar
Canadian Dollar
1.2743
1.2685
1.2021
per U.S. Dollar
British Pound
1.5390
1.5690
1.8325
U.S. Dollar
per British Pound
Gold
$367.30
$356.30
$338.50
Republic National Bank
Currency: Friday NY Close


Of Truth, Beauty and the Moment When a Photo Becomes Art
To the Editor:
While I appreciate "A Kiss Is Just a Kiss" (editorial, May 1), your whimsical comment on the suits over "Le Baiser de l'Hotel de Ville," the Robert Doisneau photo, your attitude on photography deserves comment.
Your view that Mr.
Doisneau's image of two lovers passionately embracing is somehow diminished because it may have been set up rather than "discovered" reinforces a common misconception.
That is that photographs are found, rather than made, which in turn often leads to the conclusion that pushing the shutter button is the critical creative act.


Shari L. Platt, Patrick Flynn
Dr.
Shari Lynn Platt, a fellow in pediatric emergency medicine at Bellevue Hospital Center in New York, was married last evening to Dr.
Patrick Alex Flynn, a fellow in pediatric cardiology at New York Hospital-Cornell Medical Center.
Rabbi Charles Lippman and the Rev.
Walter Smith, a Roman Catholic priest, officiated at the Manursing Island Club in Rye, N.Y.
The bride, 30, is the daughter of Bernice Weston of Mamaroneck, N.Y., and the late Arnold P. Platt.
She graduated from the University of Pennsylvania and received her medical degree from the State University Health Science Center at Brooklyn.


Corrections
Photographs on May 2 with an article about the restoration of the Stony Brook home of William Sidney Mount, the American genre painter, were published in error.
They showed another house under renovation in Stony Brook.


Free-Speech Lesson; Jeffries's Victory Shows the Difficulty Of Punishing Objectionable Opinions
A jury's decision last week that Leonard Jeffries's free-speech rights were violated when he was dismissed from a university post raises questions about how difficult it is to discipline professors who espouse objectionable views.
Legal experts say that although no academic has a job for life, university employees are protected just like any other workers by the First Amendment, which guarantees their freedom to express opinions, no matter how offensive they may be to others.


R. L. Marcotte, Elizabeth Wallach
Elizabeth Corey Wallach, the daughter of Edward and Cynthia Wallach of Scarsdale, N.Y., was married in New York yesterday to Robert Louis Marcotte, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert S. Marcotte of Oxford, Md.
Acting Justice Harold Silverman of State Supreme Court in the Bronx officiated at the Regency Hotel.
Mrs.
Marcotte, a graduate of Union College in Schenectady, N.Y., is studying for an M.B.A. at the University of Michigan.
Her father, a lawyer, is the secretary of the DBL Liquidating Trust in New York.


British by Birth, A Yank In His Work
In retrospect, Kenneth MaCmillan was the most American of British choreographers, and there is something more than right about American Ballet Theater's gala tribute to him tomorrow night at the Metropolitan Opera House.
MacMillan was 62 when he died of a heart attack on Oct. 29 backstage at the Royal Ballet in London.
He will always be remembered as a product of the Royal, where, in turn, he played a guiding role as artistic director in the 1970's and later as resident choreographer.
If he was not one of the pioneers of British ballet, he certainly widened its scope; he developed both the dramatic side of contemporary classicism and the genre of evening- long narrative works ("Romeo and Juliet," "Manon," "Mayerling," "Isadora," "The Prince of the Pagodas") that made him a major 20th-century choreographer.


The Difference, And Similarity, Of Royalty
Queen Silvia of Sweden has shared an experience familiar to many New Yorkers: she has shopped at Ikea.
"Of course I've been there," she said on Tuesday.
"It's a Swedish company. Now it's very popular to do it yourself."
The Queen and her husband, King Carl XVI Gustaf, who are not excessively regal, were in town last week to attend the opening night of "Bergman on Stage" at the Brooklyn Academy of Music.
Under the direction of Ingmar Bergman, the Royal Dramatic Theater of Sweden presented Ibsen's "Peer Gynt."


Adventures In Carrotland
I BENT an old spade last weekend, trying to dig up some Maryland clay to plant my carrots.
I love carrots.
They're high in vitamin A. They're crunchy and sweet.
They have a beautiful color.
The ones you grow yourself, that is -- or buy at a local farm stand.
Most supermarket types taste like petroleum to me.
I also worry about the pesticides and herbicides that root crops absorb through their tissues.
It's not as if you can just wash the stuff off -- it's in the cells.
So this spring, I told myself I would try to grow this magnificent root, and plenty of it.
Little stubby ones called Thumbelina, cylindrical types called Chantenays and even the long slender Nantes varieties that demand soil as rich and crumbly as a home-baked cake clear down to the little tip.


Ellen F. Grecco, James Gilmore 3d
Mr. and Mrs.
Frank A. Grecco of Northport, L.I., have announced the engagement of their daughter Ellen Frances Grecco to James F. Gilmore 3d, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Gilmore Jr. of Waterbury, Conn.
An October wedding is planned.


Kimberly Wilkes, Wayne Tirrell
Mr. and Mrs.
Robert E. Wilkes of Bethlehem, Pa., have announced August wedding plans for their daughter, Kimberly Conron Wilkes, and Wayne Francis Tirrell, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
C.
Barry Tirrell of Marion, Mass.
Miss Wilkes, 29, graduated from St.
Lawrence University.
She is a secretary in the marketing department for State Street Research and Management, an investment-management company in Boston.
Her father is the president and chief executive of First Valley Bank in Bethlehem.


Corrections
Because of a producer's last-minute program change, a picture and caption on page 31 of the Arts and Leisure section today and a music listing on page 41, about a performance this afternoon at Carnegie Hall, are outdated.
The conductor of the American Composers Orchestra will be Paul Lustig Dunkel, not James DePreist.


Pump Up the Volume, Check Out the T-Shirts; Willie and Friends
Urban cowboys will dust off their boots Saturday night when Willie Nelson takes the stage at Radio City Music Hall.
He will be part of "Country Takes Manhattan," the first citywide festival of country music in New York.
The event, which ends next Sunday, features some of country's biggest stars: Dolly Parton, Clint Black, Wynonna and Billy Ray Cyrus.


'Biggest Pool'
To the Editor:
Your April 25 story about the "Biggest Pool in New York" is good news for the many thousands who will be using this new state-of-the-art facility at the Asphalt Green in Yorkville.


Jacqueline Fern, Michael Winston
Dr.
Jacqueline Sherry Fern was married last evening to Dr.
Michael Howard Winston.
Both are dermatologists, she in Manhattan, he in Port Jefferson, L.I.
Rabbi Elliot T. Spar performed the ceremony at Pine Hollow Country Club in East Norwich, L.I.
The bride graduated from Brown University and received her M.D. from the New York University.
She is the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Mattis I. Fern of Roslyn, L.I.


FRENCH CHILDREN RESCUED BY POLICE
It was fatigue that finally gave the police a chance to rescue six young hostages from a suburban nursery school early today by killing their dozing captor with three silent gunshots to the head.
"Man neutralized," was the first message that crackled over police radios overheard by the crowd outside the school complex.
Barely thirty seconds after the man's death, the smiling 3- and 4-year-old girls held captive for two days were delivered to anxious parents outside.
One child was overheard protesting that she wanted to return for her toy giraffe.


From One Benefit to Another
Calvin and Kelly Klein will be hosts to a party at their East Hampton, L.I., home on June 5, that will benefit the Campaign for Military Service, a group fighting the ban on gay men and lesbians in the armed forces.


A Synthesis of East and West
WHETHER they are read as direct impressions or as automatist evocations, Kang-So Lee's paintings refer to landscape that is more water than land.
Each includes the outline of a duck or a boat (mostly it is the duck, or ducks), which the artist includes as if inscribing his signature.
Another prominent feature is the color -- or lack of it.
As hung on the alternately gray and white walls of the Bergen Museum of Art and Science here, these pictures either open windows or project themselves into the gallery; it depends on whether they are predominantly blue-gray mixed with white and touches of pink, or white marked with gray and blue.


Prairie Bayou's Victory Ends Sea Hero's Quest
Prairie Bayou, the onetime klutz of the Loblolly Stable, the underdog known around the barns as Prairie Dog, the beaten favorite in the Kentucky Derby two weeks ago, became king of the racing realm today when he won the 118th Preakness Stakes by half a length over Cherokee Run.
He also cut short the saga of Sea Hero, who outran him by two and a half lengths in the Derby and thereby made instant folk heroes of Paul Mellon, his 85-year-old owner, and MacKenzie Miller, his 71-year-old trainer.
They were lionized as the gracious senior citizens who won the Derby in the homestretch of their racing careers.
But today their racing fortunes took another turn when Sea Hero ran fifth and came to the end of his quest to become the 12th horse in racing history to win the Triple Crown.


In the Region: Westchester; Recent Sales
Port Chester, N.Y.  $175,000
531 Irving Avenue  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 70-year-old Colonial; dining room, in-law apartment, detached one-car garage; taxes, $4,880.
Rye, N.Y.  $180,000
35 Park Avenue  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 73-year-old colonial; enclosed front porch, dining room, detached two-car garage; taxes, $3,068.
White Plains, N.Y.  $247,000
76 Holland Avenue  5-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 62-year-old Tudor; entry hall, sun room, skylights, modern kitchen, finished basement; taxes, $3,700.
Hamden, Conn.  $170,000
1743 Whitney Avenue  4-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 149-year-old colonial; eat-in kitchen, fireplace, built-in shelves, 0.75 acre; taxes, $4,250.
Hartford, Conn.  $79,500
257 Saybrooke Street  3-bedroom, 1-bath, 50=yhear-old ranch; screened porch, laundry chute, formal dining room, 50- by 150-foot lot; taxes, $1,882.
Milford, Conn.  $285,000
70 Christine Terrace  4-bedroom, 4 1/2-bath, 28-year-old colonial; skylights, solarium, circular driveway, 2 acres; taxes, $3,735.
OTHER AREAS Bernardsville, N.J.  $650,000
1 Pine Hollow Road  5-bedroom, 4-bath, 2-half-bath, 5-year-old colonial; pantry, whirlpool, security system; taxes $10,713.
Carteret, N.J.  $102,000
1442 Roosevelt Avenue  3-bedroom, 1-bath, 35-year-old ranch, finished basement; taxes $2,649.
Glen Cove, L.I.  $290,000
5 Hickory Drive  3-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 20-year-old ranch; dining room, eat-in kitchen, family room, fireplace, basement; taxes $6,800.


Few Residents of Bensonhurst Attend a Meeting to Reduce Racial Tensions
A committee formed to study racial and ethnic tensions in New York City neighborhoods held its first community meeting yesterday at a Bensonhurst high school, but few local residents turned out despite advance publicity about the event.
The panel, the Independent Commission on Human Relations, was formed to try to bridge racial gaps and enhance relations among groups that have clashed in the past.
They chose to hold their first meeting in Bensonhurst because the Brooklyn neighborhood has been marred by some of the city's worst episodes of racial violence.


Nancy Friedman, James Margolin
Nancy Jo Friedman, the owner and president of a public relations concern in New York, was married yesterday evening to James Maurice Margolin, a special agent with the Federal Bureau of Investigation in New York.
Rabbi Bonnie Steinberg performed the ceremony at the North Shore Country Club in Glen Head, L.I.
The bride, 37, graduated from Antioch College.
She is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Lee Friedman of Sands Point, L.I.
Her father, now retired, was the founder and president of the former Kenly Manufacturing Company, makers of women's clothing, based in New York.
Her mother, Natalie S. Friedman, was the company's treasurer.


Votes in Congress
Tally Last Week in Connecticut, New Jersey and New York
Senate
1.
Voter Registration: Vote to cut off debate on a bill intended to increase voter registration.
Approved 63 to 37, May 11.
2.
Voter Registration: Vote on passage of a bill that directs states to provide voter registration forms in motor vehicle offices, military recruiting stations and welfare offices.
Approved 62 to 36, May 11.
3.
Savings and Loan: Vote on an amendment to a bill providing additional money for the savings and loan bailout that would extend from three to five years the statute of limitations for civil lawsuits against officials at failed thrifts.
Approved 63 to 32, May 13.
4.
Savings and Loan: Vote on passage of a bill that provides $34.3 billion as the last installment on the savings and loan bailout.
Approved 61 to 35, May 13.
1
2
3
4
Connecticut
Dodd (D) . . .
Y
Y
N
Y
Lieberman (D) . . .
Y
Y
Y
Y
New Jersey
Bradley (D) . . .
Y
Y
Y
N
Lautenberg (D) . . .
Y
Y
Y
N
New York
D'Amato (R) . . .
N
N
N
Y
Moynihan (D) . . .
Y
Y
Y
Y
KEY: Y Yea; N Nay; (A) Absent or did not vote; (P) Present.
House
There were no House votes last week.


BROWSING THE WORLD'S LARGEST STORES: Moscow Bureau; Some Western Enticements On Red Square
IN THE OLD DAYS, Moscow's central department store, GUM (a no-nonsense acronym from the Russian for State Department Store) was a place that would have made Western shoppers weep.
With its prime location right on Red Square, its arched glass roofs and central fountain, its three galleries, each painted a different color, crisscrossed by walkways and lined by second-floor balconies -- GUM should have been an elegant, enticing, turn-of-the-century shopping arcade.
Instead, it was a monument to the unhappy Soviet consumer, an 1893 building that was last renovated in 1953, a showcase of dreariness, dirt, bad quality goods and sullen service.


NEW JERSEY GUIDE
'LATE GREAT LADIES'
"The Late Great Ladies of Blues and Jazz," the singing and acting tour de force in which Sandra Reaves resurrects the styles and personalities of six legendary performers, will be presented in a full-scale production by Crossroads Theater Company at the State Theater in New Brunswick.
The first of six performances will be held at 8 P.M.
Friday.


Where the Streets Are Paved With Depositors
S&amp;L HELL The People and the Politics Behind the $1 Trillion Savings and Loan Scandal.
By Kathleen Day. 416 pp.
New York: W. W. Norton &amp; Company.


A Matter Of Motivation
To the Editor:
I hope that Michael Kimmelman's article, "At the Whitney, Sound, Fury and Not Much Else"  [ April 25 ] , will generate a boycott of the types of exhibitions he describes.


The Gripes of Wrath: 25 Years of Edward Sorel
The studio of Edward Sorel is a clean, well-lighted place, a cozy, garretlike work space in the corner of his TriBeCa loft.
The billboards over his drawing table and on the wall opposite are something else: a magpie assortment of preliminary sketches, notes, photographs, inside jokes, an award or two, and scraps ripped out of magazines.
A tour through the bits and pieces is a ramble through Mr.
Sorel's surprising and unusually convoluted brain.
There's the old Newsweek cover showing Sylvester Stallone as Rambo wrapped in an American flag.
"Someday I may need to know how the stripes work," Mr.
Sorel says; it's an odd comment from one of America's foremost political satirists.
An illuminated page by Jean Fouquet shows Joshua and his army blowing trumpets outside the walls of Jericho, which is represented as a jewel-like cluster of medieval town buildings.
That, too, might come in handy.
"I thought it would make a nice Christmas cover if all those buildings were department stores," Mr.
Sorel says.


Inquiry Won't Look at Final Waco Raid
Although President Clinton promised a "vigorous and thorough investigation" of the standoff involving the Branch Davidian cult, officials conducting the Justice Department review said this week that the inquiry would not examine the decision to assault the cult's compound near Waco, Tex., on April 19.
The person heading the Justice Department's inquiry is Philip B. Heymann, whose nomination to be Deputy Attorney General will be the subject of a Senate hearing on Tuesday.


Connecticut Q&amp;A: Anne L. Pierce; A Space Career Booster, Against the Odds
THREE decades after President John F. Kennedy set in motion a space program that finally put a man on the moon, President Clinton, who likens himself to Kennedy in many other respects, is deliberating about whether the nation needs expensive programs like the space station.
That is distressing to Anne L. Pierce, the executive director of the Connecticut Space Grant College Consortium.


Health Care's Fever: Not So High to Some
WITH medical bills hogging one dollar in eight of Americans' income, just about everybody knows there is a cost crisis in health care.
But could just about everybody, including the first President to focus like a laser beam on health care reform, be wrong?
Could rapidly rising outlays be a sign of the rational will of a rich society to take advantage of spectacular, if very expensive, advances in medical technology?
That remains a minority view in the ripening debate over health care reform.
But a striking number of economists do think that the severity of the medical-cost illness has been exaggerated.
"There's a problem with health care costs, not a crisis," says Burton Weisbrod of Northwestern University.
While he and others acknowledge that spending cannot continue to rise indefinitely two or three times as fast as incomes, they worry that cost containment will retard technology that promises enormous dividends in the quality of life.


Celibate and Happy
To the Editor:
When I was ordained to the priesthood 12 years ago, I was under the impression that I was voluntarily embracing apostolic celibacy for the kingdom of God.
The Rev.
Paul Dinter informs me in "Celibacy and Its Discontents" (Op-Ed, May 6) that, on the contrary, I was forced into it.
This is news to me and to tens of thousands of other well-adjusted and happily functioning priests in America. (Rev.) C. J. MC CLOSKEY 3D Princeton, N.J., May 6, 1993


Knicks Hoping Setback Is a Fluke
Now that the Hornets have taken a playoff game from the Knicks, two crucial questions remain.
Will Charlotte's classic 110-106 victory in double overtime Friday night only be a temporary setback for New York?
Or have the young, confident Hornets changed the momentum of the series?
Those questions will be answered Sunday afternoon when Game 4 of the second-round series is played before another capacity Hornet-crazy crowd at the Charlotte Coliseum (Channel 4, 1 P.M.).


Corrections
An article last Sunday about the Reality female condom misstated the annual pregnancy rate among users.
It is 21 to 26 percent, not 2.8 percent.
This high rate is believed by the Food and Drug Administration and the company to have resulted from improper use.
The study found that women who use Reality correctly every time have a pregnancy rate of about 10 percent.


Moore Institute Opens in Britain
The new Henry Moore Institute opened last month in Leeds in northern England, where Moore attended art school.
Financed by the Henry Moore Foundation at a cost of more than $7 million, the center, situated in three converted Victorian houses, is linked to the Leeds City Art Gallery by a glass bridge.
It contains galleries and the new headquarters for the Henry Moore Sculpture Trust, which promotes the production, study and appreciation of sculpture.
The institute's entrance, by Jeremy Dixon and Edward Jones, features a minimalist granite facade of contrasting finishes.
Four floors, totaling 20,000 square feet of space, include a central sculpture gallery in an open courtyard.
This space and three smaller galleries house exhibitions of historic and contemporary sculpture.
The opening exhibition, "Romanesque -- Stone Sculpture From Medieval England," will run through July 18.


Ms. Kelley and Mr. Southworth
Rosemary and Kevin Kelley of West Point, N.Y., have announced October wedding plans for their daughter, Mary Kathryn Kelley, to Hamilton Southworth 3d, the son of Eleanor and Hamilton Southworth of New York.
Ms.
Kelley, 27, is a law student at the University of Virginia, as is her fiance.
She graduated from Mills College.
Her father, an Army colonel, oversees field recruiters for the department of admissions at the United States Military Academy at West Point and teaches economics there.
Her mother teaches job-search skills, primarily in Newburgh, N.Y., for the New York State Division of Adult Education.


Israeli Court Limits Publisher's Power Over Staff
An Israeli labor court has ruled that while newspaper publishers have the right to set basic policy, they can be forced to pay a price for interfering with the way reporters and editors do their daily jobs.
A labor court judge in Jerusalem said that a newly installed publisher of The Jerusalem Post, Israel's only English-language newspaper, had peppered the newsroom with so many "constant questions and instructions" that "a reasonable journalist" could not be expected to continue working that way.


Brazil's Intricate Designs in Thread
THE city of Fortaleza, capital of Ceara State in northeastern Brazil, has started to attract American tourists.
They are discovering not only a pleasant coastal city with palm-shaded beaches but also a treasure-trove of intricately woven yet inexpensive lace -- bone and labyrinth laces, made primarily in small villages along Brazil's northeastern shore, and Renaissance lace from inland villages in Pernambuco State, farther south.
Portuguese colonists brought their native tradition of weaving renda, or lace, to Brazil in the early 17th century.
Designs and stitches were influenced by the regular visits of Spanish and French merchants, who distributed models of new kinds of lace popular in Europe.
Centuries later, Ceara women still make lace in the shady daylight of their front doorways or under gazebos roofed in straw or tile.
And Brazilians still sing this folk lyric: Hey, lace maker.
Hey, woman making lace.
If you will teach me to make lace, I will teach you to fall in love.
The traditions, techniques and lore of lace making are passed informally from one generation of women to the next.
Wives and daughters of fishermen or farmers create lace collars, doilies and tablecloths to sell to supplement their families' income.


POSTINGS: 19th-Century Brooklyn Mansions; Clinton Hill House and Garden Tour
If you take the A train next Sunday to Clinton Hill (with, it is to be hoped, a duly licensed motorman) you can visit one of Brooklyn's oldest and most beautiful neighborhoods and take part in the 1993 Clinton Hill House and Garden Tour.
The Hill, as the American Institute of Architects Guide to New York City notes, was home in the 19th century to many of Kings County's merchant and industrial kings: the Bedfords, the Pfizers, the Underwoods and, most especially, the Pratts.


When It Comes to Stealing, Yankees Can't Get Past First Base
Mike Stanley, the Yankees' catcher, was talking about stealing bases from a catcher's perspective when he added a commercial for himself as a base stealer.
"They should give me the green light," he said, smiling.
"I'm 6 for 6 lifetime. That averages to one a year, so sometime this year I'll get one."


What Does Europe Want?
WHAT does Europe want?
The question hung in the air from Washington to Sarajevo last week.
The answer, paradoxically, is stronger American leadership.
How could this be, in a week when European Community foreign ministers rejected Clinton Administration proposals for bombing Serbian military targets in Bosnia and Herzegovina and arming the Muslims there, at the same time as military and civilian officials of the NATO alliance were saying they urgently needed United States leadership to find a way to halt the cruel slaughter of Bosnian civilians?


Unfurling the Japanese Love Affair With Umbrellas
A geisha flirts from under a parasol on a woodblock print.
Skeletons parade with a skeletal umbrella across a four-panel screen.
And cyclists on an etching speed along beneath a moving roof of red umbrellas.
Japanese paper parasols -- open, closed or shredded -- have long inspired artists to create memorable images on objects, some of which are assembled in "Rain and Snow: The Umbrella in Japanese Art," at the Japan Society Gallery in Manhattan, through June 27.


Second-Home Market Begins to Stir
FEW sectors of the residential market have suffered as much in the last five years as second homes.
Prices for beach and country houses in most parts of the Northeast have fallen by as much as 30 percent, pushed down by the 1987 stock market crash, the subsequent recession and changes in the Federal tax code.
But in the last year the second-home market has shown faint signs of life, particularly in more affordable areas, like the Jersey Shore and the Poconos, but also in costlier locales, like the Hamptons, Vermont and Cape Cod.


For Sagging Fences, Braces and Turnbuckles
Common residential-fence woes include sagging gates, wobbly posts and loose chain-link fencing.
All are rather easy to repair by using the right methods and tools.
A simple way to repair most sagging wood gates is to make a brace with steel cable and a turnbuckle, which when tightened raises the gate's lower corner farthest from the hinge post.
Start by measuring the distance between diagonal corners on the gate and buy a length of eighth-inch-diameter galvanized-metal cable about two feet longer than the measurement.
Also buy a four- or six-inch-long metal turnbuckle, four U-bolt cable clamps and two eyescrews large enough to accept the cable.


Wall Street; A New List of Mutual Fund Underachievers
THERE is an opinion wherever you look on which mutual funds are the best.
But what about the worst?
Stephen Leeb, editor of Personal Finance newsletter, found eight victims for his "Mutual Fund Hall of Shame" a year ago, and the group managed to underperform all the major stock market averages in the 12 months ended Feb. 28.
In a recent issue, Personal Finance unveiled its new list of funds to avoid.
It included one that declined 17.56 percent in the same 12-month period -- Flag Investors Emerging Growth.
Another loser, United Vanguard, had an 8.5 percent maximum sales load.


Things Past


Steaming Across Lake Michigan
THE four-hour voyage of the S.S.
Badger on Lake Michigan between Manitowoc, Wis., and Ludington, Mich., resembles nothing so much as an ocean cruise in miniature.
All that is missing from a stroll on the gently rolling decks is the salt in the spray.
Surrounded by the steel-gray waters, with no land in sight, a dark plume of smoke overhead and the coal-fired steam engine rumbling below, the traveler feels a happy kinship with the Great Lake steamers that made maritime history in the Middle West.
The newly refurbished car ferry, 410 feet long and 58 feet wide, not only shaves some six hours off a 10-hour car trip around Lake Michigan but also provides an admirable excuse for visiting the towns on either side of the lake.


Perspectives: Housing the Homeless; Utilizing Private Vacancies for Families
"IT'S a marvelous program," says Baxter Lanius.
Then he identifies it by the uneuphonious acronym that has been its misfortune from inception -- EARP.
Mr.
Lanius owns 10 small rental buildings in Harlem and West Harlem, bought in the 80's at a time of rising property values.
"A child of the Harlem bubble," he calls himself.


It Isn't Over, So Why Is Alcala Smiling?
The 11-day Tour DuPont, America's showcase bicycle race, will end Sunday with a 36.7-mile time trial from High Point to Greensboro, here in North Carolina.
Actually, it seemed to have ended Friday evening at the Beech Mountain ski resort in the Blue Ridge Mountains, and nothing happened today to change that.
"I think it is over," Alcala said.
"A guy like Lance is real strong, but I should have no problem."


At Work; Busting the American Dream
That giant sucking sound you hear is the audio portion of Bill Clinton's popularity going south.
Maybe the Balkans are in flames, the recovery is guttering out and Mr.
Clinton's chief of staff needs to start carding his new hires.
But those are not the only reasons Mr.
Clinton's ratings are going phttt!
He is taking the hit for business-as-usual, filibustering Washington, which seems not to have noticed that many Americans feel the country is adrift and that they think their feelings, like the Velveteen Rabbit, are really real.
As Mr.
Clinton looks for ways to regain his Administration's composure, he could start by sending several cartons of Katherine S. Newman's new book, "Declining Fortunes: The Withering of the American Dream" (Basic Books), over to the Hill and down to the lobbyists on K Street.
Ms.
Newman, an anthropologist, spent many months talking with 60 or so intergenerational families in a suburban New Jersey town she calls "Pleasanton," both to disguise its identity and to indicate that it stands in for communities across the country.
She learned that high anxiety about the future has become the permanent existential state of young and youngish suburban middle-class Americans.


Mimi Kim, Stewart Kim
WHEN Mimi Kim and Stewart Kim met two years ago, they both worked at Merrill Lynch &amp; Company, he in mergers and acquisitions and she in fixed-income research.
He saw her across the office cafeteria, thought she was drop-dead beautiful and devised what he described as "a subtle, roundabout acquisition strategy."
Knowing she was Korean-American, as he is, Mr.
Kim pretended that he was the membership chairman of the Korean American Finance Association and called to see whether she might be interested in joining.
He suggested they meet for an "informative" lunch.
"It was the first and only call I made in my capacity as chairman," he said.


John O'Brien Jr., Katherine Trinkner
Katherine Marie Trinkner, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Keith A. Trinkner of Boca Raton, Fla., was married there yesterday to John Michael O'Brien Jr., a son of Mr. and Mrs.
O'Brien of New Milford, N.J.
The Rev.
Douglas Bailey performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at the Chapel of St.
Andrew.
Ms.
Trinkner, 23, graduated from Duke University.
Her father is the assistant manager for Deerfield Tire and Service in Deerfield Beach, Fla.
Her mother, Mimi Trinkner, is an instructor in telecommunications with Rolm, a Siemens Company that manufactures telecommunications equipment, in Boca Raton.


Cezanne Record Recalls the 80's
Who would spend $28.6 million for a sublime yet inedible plate of apples?
A ravenous art collector.
The price fetched for Cezanne's "Still Life With Apples" last week was a record for the artist and an unforeseen coup for Sotheby's auction of Impressionist paintings, drawings and sculptures.
Sotheby's had estimated that the Cezanne would bring between $12 million and $15 million.
It had reportedly tried unsuccessfully to sell the painting privately for $15 million to $18 million.
The seller, George Embiricos, who is a member of the Greek shipping family, bought the Cezanne for $252,000 at the 1958 sale of the Jakob Goldschmidt collection in London.


Man Dies in Leap From Bellevue
A 20-year-old man under a suicide watch at Bellevue Hospital Center jumped 12 stories to his death yesterday morning after struggling with three hospital workers who had tried to subdue him, the police and hospital officials said.
The man, Koji Shitoto, of 155 East 31st Street in Manhattan, landed on a first-floor awning in the rear of the hospital's main building at 462 First Avenue, at 28th Street, said Officer Scott Bloch, a police spokesman.


Sharon L. Kessler, Peter A. Walsh
Sharon Lynn Kessler, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Jules Y. Kessler of East Hills, L.I., was married yesterday to Peter Anthony Walsh, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Michael Walsh of Dun Laoghaire, Ireland.
Jean S. Kotkin, an ethical culture leader, officiated at the Pegasus Suite at the Rainbow Room of Rockefeller Center in New York.
Mrs.
Walsh graduated from the University of Pennsylvania.
She is to join the American Express Company in New York next month as a research manager.
Her father is the director of Benefit Planning Services and a sales representative in Jericho, L.I., for the Guardian Life Insurance Company.
Her mother, Rikki G. Kessler, is the president of Learning Links Inc., a publisher and distributor of educational materials in New Hyde Park, L.I.


Caitlin Stewart, Robert Harris
Paul and Vivienne Stewart of Alexandria, Va., and New York have announced the engagement of their daughter Caitlin Elizabeth Stewart to Robert Lauderdale Harris, a son of Ralph J. Harris of Nashville, Tenn., and the late Mary Elizabeth Harris.
An August wedding is planned.
Miss Stewart, 23, and her fiance, 25, graduated from Dartmouth College, he magna cum laude.
She received a master's degree in East Asian languages and cultures from Columbia University.
Her father, a former vice chairman of Time-Life Inc., is the executive vice president of Warner Music Enterprises, a division of Time Warner Inc., in New York and Alexandria.
Her mother is an actress, director and acting teacher at the Little Theater of Alexandria.


Quantity of Lawyers; Quality of Justice
The dean of the Yale Law School, Professor Guido Calabresi, demonstrated a disappointing lack of concern for the harmful effects of excessive litigation on our society when he states ". . . too many lawyers means an awful lot of people have legal rights protected . . ."  [ "An Advocate of the Law (and of Lawyers)," April 25 ] .
We would do well to question whether the quality of our judicial system is directly proportional to the number of attorneys available and the quantity of litigation that they produce.


INSIDE
Fast-Forward to November
Mayor Dinkins and Rudolph W. Giuliani are already looking past the mayoral primary, with the Mayor chasing swing voters and Mr.
Giuliani winning the Liberal Party's endorsement.
Political Memo, page 33.
New Approach on Welfare
A California county has become a pace-setter in raising the earnings of welfare recipients by emphasizing jobs over training.
Page 14.
W.
R.
Hearst Jr.
Dies at 85
William Randolph Hearst Jr., a Pulitzer Prize-winning journalist and the son of the legendary publisher, died in Manhattan.
Page 40.
Prairie Bayou Wins
Prairie Bayou, who finished second in the Kentucky Derby, won the 118th Preakness Stakes at Pimlico in Baltimore.
SportsSunday, section 8.


Acts of Love and Wonder
Dorothy Norman is best known for her role as Alfred Stieglitz's confidante, student and tireless promoter.
Though married and more than 40 years younger than Stieglitz when she first encountered him in his Manhattan art gallery in 1927, she was drawn swiftly into his world, enthralled by his genius and powerful convictions as well as by the contemporary art he championed.
Their relationship grew intimate and mutually sustaining, and lasted until his death in 1946.
As pointed out in the essays by the photography critic and curator Miles Barth and the photography historian Edward Abrahams in INTIMATE VISIONS: The Photographs of Dorothy Norman (Chronicle Books, cloth, $27.50; paper, $17.95), Ms.
Norman did not pursue a career as a photographer but approached photography as a private act of love and wonder.
Her cityscapes, portraits, images of flowers and architecture are reproduced here in the rich tones favored by her mentor and in their original small scale.
Not too surprisingly, Stieglitz is a vital presence in this elegantly designed book.
He inspired her style and subjects; even his handwriting becomes part of the book's graphic design.
The many portraits reveal the range of movers and shakers with whom Ms.
Norman, who is now 88 years old, was acquainted -- Lewis Mumford, Jawaharlal Nehru, Indira Gandhi, Richard Wright and Elia Kazan, among others.
Her pictures of Stieglitz, however, are more animated and more, in his words, wonderfully seen.


AN ARMY OF THE FAITHFUL
Perhaps I respond to the fundamentalist Christian right in much the same way that they responded to me on April 25, when I joined other gay men, lesbians, bisexuals, transsexuals and transvestites at the March on Washington.
We walked, hand in hand, we hugged and kissed, we remembered those we loved who had died and we showed compassion for our sick brothers and sisters.
We were the "army of the faithful," if ever there was one.
We do have an agenda: to love one another in mind, body and soul.
How can such an agenda erode the fabric of a family?


The Perennial Question, on Annuals, Too
"BUT will it flower all summer?" This is the question most often asked by gardeners buying plants.
Now that the planting season is at its height this is an important factor.
The answer to the question depends on what kinds of plants the gardener buys and the desired results.
Some plants flower all summer.
These are the annuals, and the seed growers have seen to it that desires are satisfied with plants that provide magnificent colors on sturdy stems.
Some are weatherproof, even drought-durable.


Viewpoints; Barter Is Best With Cash-Poor Russia
WINSTON CHURCHILL once described Russia as "a riddle wrapped in a mystery inside an enigma." Much has changed since Churchill's time, but not the truth of this dictum.
One of the hardest riddles posed today by Russia and the other former Soviet states is: How can America foster a good economic relationship with this promising but poor region?
On the one hand, the region is a huge potential market and a storehouse of resources.
Russia alone grows more wheat and produces more oil than any other country, for example.
Such facts aren't lost on American business, which had $3.6 billion in exports to the former Soviet states last year.
The area's attractions have also made American businesses the largest group of foreign investors in Russia today.


Free Concert to Recall Vienna of Yesteryear
COUNTY EXECUTIVE Andrew P. O'Rourke last month proclaimed May the first Arts Month in Westchester, noting that "art centers, museums, theaters, historic sites and libraries throughout the county are alive with opportunities for enrichment, participation and fun for the entire family." Certainly, that is true enough on the musical scene.
Among this afternoon's opportunities is a free concert called "Memories of Vienna" at 2:30.
The program consists of operetta favorites by Lehar, Romberg, Robert Stolz and at least two of the Strausses.
Aurora Chadurjian and Walter Chimel, both residents of Yorktown Heights, are the vocalists.
Their program with the pianist Isabelle Kafka is at the White Plains Public Library.
For more details, the number to call is 422-1400.


Right Woman for the Glass Ceiling
To the Editor:
Although Jane White's criticisms might have been valid in another era, she errs in thinking that as a labor leader in today's world, Joyce Miller's sole concerns were wage increases, occupational safety and acting as an adversary of management.


Data Update
*4*INDEXES OF HOUSING COSTS -- N.Y.-Northeast N.J. area*
% change from
% change from
Apr. 93
Mar. 93
Apr. 92
Rents
182.5
-0.9
+2.2
Homeowner's costs
181.9
+0.1
+1.9
Fuel and utilities
109.8
+1.0
+5.3
*4*Source: Bureau of Labor Statistics
*4**Five counties of New York City plus Nassau, Suffolk, Westchester
*4*Rockland, Putnam, Bergen, Essex, Morris, Union, Hudson, Middlesex
Somerset and Passaic.
Indexes: 1982-84=100
*4*MORTGAGE INTEREST RATES
(Averages)
Last Week
Previous Week
Year Ago
New York
Conventional (30-yr)
7.60
7.65
8.93
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
4.71
4.73
6.04
New Jersey
Conventional (30-yr)
7.47
7.54
8.80
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
4.55
4.61
5.80
Connecticut
Conventional (30-yr)
7.51
7.56
8.83
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
4.36
4.42
5.86
Co-ops (N.Y.)
Conventional (30-yr)
7.74
7.78
9.06
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
5.26
5.39
6.42
*4*Indexes for Adjustable-Rate Mortgages*
1-yr. Treasury security
3.23
3.25
4.25
National Mortgage Contract Rate
7.17
7.17
8.14
*Rates on most adjustable mortgages are set 1 to 3 percentage points above these indexes.  (Source: HSH Associates)


The Big Bang That Never Was
NEARLY a decade ago, when Japanese manufacturers were looking invincible and huge trade surpluses were starting to pile up here, the Government sought to place Japan at the forefront of a new realm: international finance.
Tokyo declared that its financial markets would be thrown open, making this the third leg of the global order, along with London and New York.
The Government promised a step-by-step freeing of Japan's minutely regulated markets.
The final blow to the old system -- the rough equivalent of London's "Big Bang" in 1986 -- was to have come last month, when the barriers preventing the many kinds of banks and securities houses here from competing with each other were to be lifted.


MAY 9-15: A Friend in the White House; President Signals Go-Ahead To Ex-Air Controllers
For President Ronald Reagan, the firing of 11,400 striking air traffic controllers in August 1981 was a defining moment of his Presidency.
The action signaled that behind Mr.
Reagan's folksy manner lurked a hard-edged politician.
Similarly, President Clinton's decision last week to reverse the controllers' fortunes, and enable them to apply for their former positions, could be a defining moment in his Presidency.
It also signals that organized labor, which has suffered through 12 years of Republican Presidents, has a friend in the White House.


In the Cockpit of the Free World
TURMOIL AND TRIUMPH My Years as Secretary of State.
By George P. Shultz.
Illustrated. 1,184 pp.
New York: A Robert Stewart Book/ Charles Scribner's Sons. $30.


CONNECTICUT GUIDE
PERRY IN TOKYO
Three works of 19th-century Japanese art, depicting American Commodore Matthew Calbraith Perry, his ships, seamen and civilian entourage during their expedition to Tokyo in 1854, dominate an exhibition at the Beinecke Rare Book and Manuscript Library at Yale.


Corrections
A picture essay on beauty beginning on page 42 of The Times Magazine today includes an erroneous credit.
The photographer is Kurt Markus.


Is Bigger Better? Not Always
P .J.
Harvey did everything right.
Polly Jean Harvey's rock trio emerged from the small English town of Yeovil, recorded a magnificent debut album, "Dry," for less than $5,000 and performed around England to wildly adoring audiences and rave reviews.
Riding the momentum of its British buzz, the group signed to Island Records in this country and toured America.
Even those wary of hype were virtually unanimous in praising Harvey's combination of serene control and primal jolt.
Her songs, about female archetypes, anger, pleasures and doubts, were taken to heart by listeners; her singing drew comparisons to every female vocalist in rock history.
P.
J.
Harvey was on critics' best of 1992 lists across the country.
But in 10 months of availability in the United States, the album sold only about 85,000 copies.
The band's strong new album, "Rid of Me," pushes the extremes a little farther, adding the muscularity that comes with a (slightly) bigger budget; it may already have outsold "Dry." Yet I'm not expecting it to knock Whitney Houston out of the Top 10, either.


Viewpoints; Light Paycheck? Consider the French
HOW to fund health care?
Besides sales and sin taxes, Administration officials are now eyeing the nation's tempting $3.6 trillion payroll.
Both employers and employees would pony up for this "payroll premium," officials say.
But, premium or not, American companies and workers should be thankful they're not French, German or Swedish.
Below are several foreign payroll tax rates for old-age, worker compensation and other programs -- plus America's as they are and might be under the Clinton plan.


In the Pimlico, Devil His Due Gains His 3d Victory in a Row
Devil His Due kept rolling along racing's seniors tour here today when he won the $600,000 Pimlico Special by a length over Valley Crossing, while the old war-horse Strike the Gold failed to generate his customary finishing kick and ran sixth and last.
It was the third victory in a row for Devil His Due and his second straight in the American Championship Racing Series, the program of nine handicap races that offers a bonus package of $900,000 for points accumulated along the way.
Devil His Due has run in three of the four races held so far, finishing fifth in the Donn Handicap at Gulfstream Park in February but then winning both the Gulfstream Handicap and the Pimlico Special plus the unrelated Excelsior at Aqueduct in between.


In Zaire, Starvation Is Growing in a Wealthy Land
In a fly-infested feeding center on the outskirts of Kinshasa, nearly 200 children gathered listlessly around a huge steaming bowl of milky gruel.
This was the only meal of the day for some, and others were eating for the first time in days.
There was no laughter or play.
Some of the children, no more than tiny skeletons with the faces of emaciated old men, were too weak to move.
Relief officials predicted that at least 10 percent of the children would soon die of hunger.


Canadiens Having Surprise Visitors
The bags were packed for Pittsburgh.
Skates, sticks, uniforms -- the Canadiens gathered all the necessities together, checked into a hotel in downtown Montreal, and waited.
A charter flight to Pittsburgh had been arranged for early this morning.
Hotel reservations had been made.
Game plans had been discussed.
Today, they happily unpacked.
The skates and the jerseys went back into their lockers at the Montreal Forum, where the Canadiens will play host to the Islanders on Sunday afternoon in Game 1 of the Wales Conference finals.


Bergman Does Ibsen
Opening-night dinner for a Swedish production at the Brooklyn Academy of Music, May 11.


Kerry Lawn and James Hornibrook Jr.
Mr. and Mrs.
John Lawn of Ridgewood, N.J., have announced the engagement of their daughter Kerry Ann Lawn to James R. Hornibrook Jr., the son of Beverly Hornibrook and Mr.
Hornibrook, both of Little Rock, Ark.
A September wedding is planned.
Ms.
Lawn, 26, is a flight attendant for American Airlines based in San Francisco.
She graduated from James Madison University.
Her father, a former administrator of the Drug Enforcement Administration during the Reagan and Bush administrations, is the vice president and chief of operations for the New York Yankees, in the Bronx.


SURFACING
THE RACES -- Adhesive bandages of color: Match-Patches are for people who don't like the way the traditional pinkish tones stand out against their skin or who feel slighted by the notion that those tones are "flesh colored." The new strips from Fleshtones Products of Hackensack, N.J., are available in what the company calls a "chocolate rainbow" of light and dark shades.
FRENZY -- Swiping "Marlboro miles": At chic bars and restaurants like Boom in SoHo, Marlboro smokers are having to watch their packs so no one will try to remove the "5 miles" labels from them surreptitiously.
The labels, part of the Marlboro Adventure Team promotion, can be used to obtain upscale outdoor gear.
IMAGE -- The Armani factor: The New Republic may be extending its purview beyond Washington's halls of power and into its clothes closets.
First, there were the Gap ads featuring the magazine's editor, Andrew Sullivan.
Now, it's on to high fashion: amid articles about Bosnia and Herzegovina, the Supreme Court and the like, the magazine is running Giorgio Armani ads.


Patricia M. Clark, William M. Jewett
Patricia Moira Clark was married in New York yesterday to William Manning Jewett.
The Rev.
Francis Hamill, a Roman Catholic priest, performed the ceremony at the Church of Our Savior.
Mrs.
Jewett is a vice president and a director of marketing at the United States Trust Company of New York, a financial services company.
She is a graduate of Fairfield University.
She is a daughter of Mrs.
Clifford F. Clark of Brielle, N.J., and the late Mr.
Clark.


AN ARMY OF THE FAITHFUL
Heavenly days!
That's all we need -- another fundamentalist political party.
Here comes the Christian Coalition, telling us what to believe and how to behave.
Beware new-age oppressors whose value systems are attributed to God as interpreted by the Pat Robertsons and the Christie Adkissons.


It's Pay-for-Play -- Health Clubs for the Toddling Set
CHILD'S play is becoming big business.
Gambling that parents of the growing baby boomlet are willing to pay for safe and creative places for their children to play, more commercial operators are rushing in to fill the perceived need with kiddie equivalents of health centers and fitness programs.


Rights Commissioner Reveals H.I.V. Infection
Ending years of personal turmoil, New York City's Human Rights Commissioner said yesterday that he was infected with the virus that causes AIDS and urged others in public life to make similar disclosures to overcome personal fears and to combat the stigma surrounding the illness.
"The more of us that do it, the easier it gets for somebody who is living in terror of being exposed," the Commissioner, Dennis deLeon, said in an interview amplifying on an article on the Op-Ed page of The New York Times in which he disclosed that he had tested positive for H.I.V. infection.


C. E. Gravante, Francis Castellano
Christine Elinor Gravante, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Nicholas A. Gravante of Brooklyn, was married in New York yesterday to Francis Joseph Castellano, the son of Dr.
Joseph Castellano of Brooklyn and the late Dr.
Eleanor Intagliata.
The Rev.
Brian Brennan performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at St.
Patrick's Cathedral.


Cathy Beck, Paul Golob
Hilaire Beck of New York has announced the engagement of her daughter, Cathy Beck, to Paul David Golob, the son of Mimi and Norman Golob of Rego Park, Queens.
A September wedding is planned.
Miss Beck, a lawyer at the Housing Litigation Bureau of the New York City Department of Housing Preservation and Development, graduated cum laude from Wesleyan University and received a law degree from the Benjamin N. Cordozo School of Law.
Her father, the late Louis Beck, was a lawyer in New York and served as the treasurer of the New York State Democratic Committee from 1963 to 1970.


Jamie Larowitz and Steven Sherman
Jamie Mara Larowitz, a daughter of Shirley and Paul Larowitz of Brooklyn, was married last evening to Steven Jason Sherman, the son of Ruth Sherman of Swampscott, Mass., and the late Barney Sherman.
Judge I. Leo Glasser of Federal District Court in Brooklyn performed the ceremony at the Manhattan Penthouse.
Ms.
Larowitz, who is 35, is keeping her name.
She graduated from the New School for Social Research and received a law degree from Brooklyn Law School.


Mutual Funds; Stars That Got Lost in the Crowd
With oceans of money flooding mutual funds, and more and more of the most popular ones slamming the door on new investors, it hardly seems possible that a good fund could escape notice.
But in their fourth annual list of "forgotten funds," analysts at Morningstar Inc., the Chicago mutual fund researchers, have found five overlooked funds they call real winners.
The funds, which each manage less than $100 million, have at least five years of track records, mostly built by the current managers.
They offer what Morningstar calls "two splendid attributes -- proven managements and agile asset bases."


'Burn This' in Revival At the Schoolhouse
IN the last scene of Lanford Wilson's "Burn This," two opposite people make a commitment.
It is a wildly romantic notion, a dreamy resolution to a story of disconnection, deception and free-floating panic.
Only a pushover for fairy- tale endings could have written this one and only a lyric playwright of Mr.
Wilson's artistry could make it work.
But it's only a scene.
The play that leads up to it is the improbable thing.
Mr.
Wilson has a proven flair for creating hope and illumination amid dross.
But this time, he appears to present an outsider's view of a world that eludes him.
Failing to invent wholly drawn characters to inhabit that inauthentic world, Mr.
Wilson lets his play depend on commanding performances and surpassing direction.


Business Diary/May 9-14
THE ECONOMY The Clinton Counter-Revolution on Taxes


How Garden Hobby Grew to Full-Time Job
SPRING may have been a little late this year, but at 80 Primrose Avenue here, a new evergreen rock garden is nearing completion.
The garden is one of many on almost an acre of plantings that serve as the showroom for the Primrose Landscape Design Company owned by the Gussoffs, Michael, age 42, and Beverly, somewhat older, a mother-and-son team who eight years ago turned their hobby into a blooming business.


New Passport: How Secure?
Questions have been raised about whether the new United States passports are as tamperproof as they are intended to be, but the State Department is standing behind them.
Richard Norton, an official of the Air Transport Association, questioned the new passport's effectiveness in preventing the kind of tampering that would allow people to enter the United States illegally.
Appearing on April 27 before the House Judiciary Subcommittee on International Law, Immigration and Refugees, Mr.
Norton said the airline industry supported efforts to improve immigration inspection with technological innovations, but he called the new passport "a flawed design."
Inside the new passport there is a device called a kinegram, which is similar to the holograms used on credit cards.
After the hearing Mr.
Norton told the Travel Management Newsletter, a trade publication, that a skilled person could peel back the laminated material and change the data underneath or alter the kinegram.


Average Traffic Speed: 2.7 Miles Per Hour
After a day slogging through the Garment District in a rickety truck loaded with dress suits, Jerome Miller was nearing the end of his delivery route.
One more stop, he muttered as he lurched down Seventh Avenue.
But then he turned west onto 37th Street, and suddenly it seemed as if he had driven into a bog.
Trucks and vans appeared to be glued to the street.
There was only one escape, a cramped passage to Eighth Avenue, but even that was jammed with workers unloading clothing.
Men pushing racks of dresses lunged on and off the sidewalks.
Pedestrians danced around the stranded vehicles. 'It's Crazy Out There'
Time had been defeated.
There was no progress.
Mr.
Miller and his truck had been swallowed up by perhaps the most congested block in New York City.


The Secret Is Out: Jersey Has Antiques!
"DON'T tell anyone about this place," said a New York City antiques dealer about the monthly flea market held in Rancocas Woods, N.J.
The truth is, except for Lambertville, all of New Jersey is pretty much a secret as far as antiques are concerned.
"New Jersey doesn't have much mystique as an antiques state," said Madeline Webb, of Edgewater Park, N.J., who was set up last Sunday under a stand of trees in Rancocas Woods with antiques and kitchenware.
"It's just between New York and Pennsylvania."


WORKBOOK/REVELATIONS


Lozano Case Tests How Racially Balanced a Jury Must Be
FIRST the Rodney King case, now the trial of William Lozano.
Once again, the issues of race and justice, especially as they pertain to the selection and composition of juries, have collided, this time in the case of a suspended Miami policeman whose retrial on manslaughter charges in the deaths of two young black men began here last week after being shifted five times among three Florida cities in a search for a racially and ethnically balanced panel.
Judge W. Thomas Spencer was surprisingly successful, ending up with a jury of three white, two Hispanic and one black members, to decide one of the most racially charged cases in recent Florida history.
But in the course of his quest, he made the argument, yet to be endorsed by higher courts, that in order for the perception as well as the reality of justice to be achieved, minority groups need to be represented on the jury in proportion to their presence in the population.


Lauren E. Wright, Daniel J. Toal
Mr. and Mrs.
Stephen W. Wright of Bennington, Vt., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Lauren Elizabeth Wright, to Daniel John Toal, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Lawrence J. Toal of New York.
A July wedding is planned.
Miss Wright, 25, is a legislative correspondent for Senator Patrick J. Leahy, Democrat of Vermont.
She graduated from Wheaton College.
Her father is the vice president and controller of H. Greenberg &amp; Son Inc., a lumber, hardware and housewares dealer based in Bennington.
Her mother, Barbara Wright, is a physical therapist at the Bennington Home Health Agency.


Imprisoned Gangster Indicted in Mob War
A mobster imprisoned for racketeering has been indicted on new charges that include plotting from prison to murder five people in a Mafia family war.
The inmate, Alphonse Persico, was among 11 members and associates of the bitterly riven Colombo crime group who were charged in an indictment made public late Friday in Federal District Court in Brooklyn.
The indictment stems from a bloody feud that erupted in 1991 between two factions vying for control of the group, one of the five major Mafia families based in New York City.


BROWSING THE WORLD'S LARGEST STORES: Paris bureau; Art Nouveau Overlooking The Seine
WHERE ELSE IN Paris can you have lunch with one of the best views in town and then work off that same lunch, just a few floors below, by scaling an indoor climbing wall?
Or sample fresh croissants while someone repairs your watch or your shoes and fixes your hemline and your curtains?
At La Samaritaine, a grand old department store where, common wisdom has it, you can get anything short of surgery or a tour of outer space.
In this choice part of Paris, on the banks of the Seine, you can buy a new dog, a cat or a goldfish and compost for the garden.
The store will deliver your skis and install your toilet, nay, your entire bathroom and kitchen.
You can test your boots on the sports department's climbing wall.
Few places in France, the store boasts, offer this range and service.


On Sunday; Dispensing Both Medicine And Example
SOON after Brian Weinstein was born he was diagnosed with cystic fibrosis, a hereditary disease that causes the body to secrete an abnormal, thick mucus, clogging the lungs.
The illness is deceptive.
Children appear healthy except for a persistent cough, then one day, they spit blood, are short of breath and need hospitalization.
Eventually the lungs give out and the person suffocates.
Doctors said Brian would not live to be 6.
The Weinsteins took baby Brian to Dr.
Jack Gorvoy, a specialist at Long Island Jewish Medical Center.
He taught them massage therapy for clearing the lungs and talked about advances in the field.
"He calmed us," said Sheryl Weinstein, Brian's mother.
"Our fear went away."


Conversations/Barbara Spyridon Pope; The Civilian Old Salt Who Took On The Navy's Cover-Up of Tailhook
WHEN Barbara Spyridon Pope demanded an unvarnished account of what happened at the 1991 Tailhook Convention, some of her Navy colleagues called her an over-reacting, over-emotional female.
She was even called -- horrors -- a liberal feminist.


Christine Wolff, Robert Schachter
Christine Wolff, a daughter of Carole Wolff of Valley Stream, L.I., and Edward Wolff of Oceanside, L.I., was married last evening to Robert Paul Schachter, a son of Martin and Barbara Schachter of Stuart, Fla.
Rabbi Sholom Stern officiated at Temple Beth El in Cedarhurst, L.I.


HOW HOSTILE ARE YOU?
I am probably showing my hostility, but I found the quiz "How Hostile Are You?" (Good Health, April 25) about as meaningful as those quizzes about how to to rate your boyfriend in magazines for teen-agers.
Your quiz seems to ignore the fact that sometimes circumstance rather than the personality of the individual is the cause of anger.
For example:
Question No. 2: What is the track record of the spouse in question?
The woman whose husband has bought her the wrong size four years in a row is showing more practicality than hostility if she elects to pick out her own present.


A DOZEN KILLINGS TIED TO COLOMBIA
The indictment last week of three young men for the killing of a Spanish-language journalist in Queens revealed the chilling reality that a drug lord in Colombia, angered by a man's writings, could order his death in New York City.
But law-enforcement officials say that in recent years hit men working for drug cartels 2,500 miles away have routinely killed their enemies in this country.
At least a dozen people are believed to have been killed in Queens on orders from Colombia's drug lords in the 14 months since a hooded gunman walked into a restaurant and shot and killed Manuel de Dios Unanue, a respected writer and editor who wrote extensively on the drug trade, the officials say.
Almost all of the victims have been managers or dealers for the cartels' operations in the city.


With Plenty Left to Say, Matalin Heads For Talk Show
NAME: Mary Matalin.
IDENTITY: 39-year-old former Bush deputy campaign manager.
Notorious memo writer.
Girlfriend of Clinton strategist James Carville.


What the World's Women Want
The staple image of overpopulation is a ravaged landscape: rivers thick with pollutants, land on which there is no topsoil, forests denuded of trees, and sad migrations of people looking for more space, more food, more chances.
What you won't see -- unless she's starving, and thus a cynosure for cameras -- is a woman whose life consists of bearing child after child to live, or die, in this wasted landscape.
During the years of debate over whether unbridled population growth is a boon or a disaster, nobody's talked much about her.
And, tragically, she cannot speak for herself.


Pittsburgh's Quest Ends Without Claiming No. 3
The white banners with three Stanley Cups proclaiming "Yes We Can" that decorated downtown telephone poles started to come down this morning.
So did the yellow signs in store and office windows that declared: "The Cup Stops Here."
Despite the sunshine that glistened off the roof of the Civic Arena just a little north of where the three rivers meet, supporters of the Penguins and residents of this city were gloomy this morning.


BROWSING THE WORLD'S LARGEST STORES: London bureau; Little Helsinki's Big Emporium
AFTER THE 19THcentury Lutheran cathedral on Helsinki's Senate Square and Eliel Saarinen's pink granite railroad station, it is probably the most famous building in Finland: a six-story red-brick fortress that is the headquarters of Stockmann, the largest and most celebrated department store in Scandinavia.
To Finns, and to the many others beyond Helsinki who rely on its thick export-sales catalogues, Stockmann is more than a store.
In Moscow, where foreign residents have turned to Stockmann for decades to supply them with everything from Bordeaux wines and fresh Atlantic salmon to kitchen cabinets, it is not uncommon to find Western diplomats' children who think Stockmann is the capital of Finland.


The Uses of Land By the Indians
The "Jerseyana" column of April 11 perpetuates Rosseau's myth of the noble savage as applied to the aboriginal people of New Jersey and how they lived in harmony with nature.
The fact is that the American Indians, like all peoples, manipulated nature to the extent they could, limited only by the level of their technology.


Mary E. Dunne, Roy A. Judelson
Mary Eileen Dunne, a daughter of Elizabeth H. Dunne and Dr.
John V. Dunne, both of Bradenton, Fla., was married yesterday to Roy Andrew Judelson, a son of Maria Olivia and David N. Judelson of New York.
The Rev.
Dr.
Arthur Caliandro officiated at the Marble Collegiate Church in New York.
Mrs.
Judelson, a graduate of Florida State University, is the store planning assistant in the corporate headquarters of Polo/Ralph Lauren in New York.
Her father is a thoracic and cardiovascular surgeon in Bradenton.
Her mother is a registered nurse for the Manatee County Health Department in Bradenton.


Your Home: Trust Ownership; New Legal Wrinkles For Co-ops
IT is becoming increasingly common for elderly shareholders at the 135-unit co-op at 480 Park Avenue to ask their boards for permission to have unit ownership placed in the name of a family trust.
This has also been happening at North Shore Towers, an 1,800-unit co-op in Floral Park, L.I., even though residents are of far more modest means.
A growing number of older shareholders have been approaching their boards with these requests because of fear that catastrophic medical bills, estate taxes or a nursing home will snatch away the valuable equity in those apartments before beneficiaries ever get a chance to enjoy the proceeds.


In Tune With the Spirit of Summer; New Works In a New Hall
Aspen, Colo., which has made its reputation as a winter sporting mecca, caters in the off-season to musical adventurers.
The Aspen Music Festival and School, which thrives on novelty, celebrates its 45th anniversary this summer with several premieres under the old circus tent and in a new auditorium.
The 500-seat Joan and Irving Harris Concert Hall will be the festival's first permanent facility for performance, rehearsal and recording.


Corrections
An article on Jan. 17 about co-op prices in New York City misstated the average price of a Manhattan studio apartment.
The figures in the survey cited were prices per room, and studio apartments were considered to have two or two and a half rooms.
A reader cited the error in a recent letter.


Charge Is 'Big Concern'
Allegations that a Syracuse University professor gave an athlete an "A" so he could continue playing lacrosse merits special attention, says one faculty group that plans to investigate.
"If the accusation is true -- and that's a very big if -- this makes a mockery of the whole system," said FREDERIC LYMAN, president of the Syracuse chapter of the American Association of University Professors.


Therese Lieblich, Douglas Moore
Therese Christine Lieblich, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Roger F. Lieblich of Chappaqua, N.Y., was married yesterday to Douglas Tucker Moore, a son of Mrs.
George H. Palmer of Cincinnati and the late B. Michael Moore.
Msgr.
Robert Welsh, a cousin of the bride, officiated at Our Lady of the Isle Roman Catholic Church on Shelter Island, New York.


Renee Doummar, John N. Hooper
Renee Alexis Doummar, the president of Renee DuMarr Inc., a women's suit manufacturer in New York, was married yesterday to John Nash Hooper, the founding partner and managing director of Curtis/Nash Associates, an investment banking concern based in New York.
The Rev.
Stephen Gushee, an Episcopal priest, officiated at the Church of Bethesda-by-the-Sea in Palm Beach, Fla.
Msgr.
Ronald Beshara took part in the ceremony.
Mrs.
Hooper, 35, graduated from Pace University.
She is a daughter of Violet L. and Henry T. Doummar of Lake Worth, Fla.
Her father, who retired as a civil engineer for the United States Government, is an engineering consultant to the city of Wellington, Fla.


LONG ISLAND JOURNAL
Emergency-Room Action
Sometimes his two worlds blur.
By night George Farley is a New York City police officer.
By day he's a nurse.
"He frisked me before he put the IV in," said a patient, Leon Glassgold of Fresh Meadows.


A Reader's Guide to the Balkans
To the Editor:
Robert D. Kaplan's suggestion that one should read the poems of C. P. Cavafy, Odysseas Elytis and George Seferis to understand the Greek psyche is misleading, for while these poets are certainly great in their own right, their poetry often deals with topics that have little to do with Greece and that are concerned with their personal philosophical problems.


'The Soul Of Western Music'
To the Editor:
In his essay on the redefinition of melody in 20th-century spiritual composition  [ "How Long Will Melody Linger On?" April 18 ] , Edward Rothstein advances a limited view both of what constitutes melody and of the extent to which melody is at the soul of Western music.


Cynthia K. Jones, C. J. Lautenslager
Cynthia Keeler Jones, a daughter of Carolyn W. Jones of Convent Station, N.J., and Harry H. Jones of Califon, N.J., was married yesterday to Christ John Lautenslager, a son of Margaret J. Lautenslager of Mount Prospect, Ill., and the late Curtis J. Lautenslager.
The Rev.
Carl Grey performed the ceremony at the Highland Park (Ill.) Presbyterian Church.
Mrs.
Lautenslager, 32, graduated from Miami University in Oxford, Ohio.
She was until recently a preschool teacher at the Lakeshore Teaching and Learning Center in Chicago.
Her father, now retired, was the chairman of Lynch, Jones &amp; Ryan, an investment firm in New York.


For Sagging Fences, Braces and Turnbuckles
Common residential-fence woes include sagging gates, wobbly posts and loose chain-link fencing.
All are rather easy to repair by using the right methods and tools.
A simple way to repair most sagging wood gates is to make a brace with steel cable and a turnbuckle, which when tightened raises the gate's lower corner farthest from the hinge post.
Start by measuring the distance between diagonal corners on the gate and buy a length of eighth-inch-diameter galvanized-metal cable about two feet longer than the measurement.
Also buy a four- or six-inch-long metal turnbuckle, four U-bolt cable clamps and two eyescrews large enough to accept the cable.


. . .And the Shadowy Figure Who Dreamed It Up
Vast expanses of scrambled eggs, laden with salt.
A strip steak, medium rare, glistening with globules of fat.
Rye toast, buttered.
Home fries.
Ketchup.
Steak sauce.
Coffee.
Orange juice.
A large paper cup filled to the brim with Coca-Cola.
"You're not having breakfast?" asks Bruce Wagner, solicitously.


Susan Feeney and Stephen Hirsh
Susan Feeney, the national political correspondent in Washington for The Dallas Morning News, and Stephen Hirsh, a White House producer in the Washington bureau of ABC News, were married last evening.
Rabbi Elliot Burke and the Rev.
Frank Almade, a Roman Catholic priest, officiated at the Pennsylvanian, a catering hall in Pittsburgh.


BOLIVIAN DICTATOR SEEKS PRESIDENCY
Gen.
Hugo Banzer Suarez says he has one last goal in life: to govern his country as its democratically elected president.
He has ruled Bolivia before, during a seven-year dictatorship in the 1970's.
And he has twice tried to regain power in elections, but Congress selected other candidates in 1985 and 1989 when no one on the ballot gained an outright majority of the vote.


BENEFITS
A Ballet Theater Gala  MONDAY -- The American Ballet Theater will benefit from a 7:30 P.M. performance at the Metropolitan Opera House that will feature a tribute to the late Sir Kenneth MacMillan, the British choreographer.
A dinner-dance will follow at the Promenade of the New York State Theater, where Peter Duchin and his orchestra will perform.
Black tie.
Tickets, $650, or $225 for those under 35, from (212) 477-3030, ext. 246.


Fishing for Compliments
Elka Gilmore is the enfant terrible of the modern California kitchen.
Neither the baseball cap she wears while minding the stove of her eponymous seafood restaurant nor the multiple earrings that stud her ear lobes alone make her the bad girl of San Francisco cuisine.
It's more her waiflike sense of wonder, the contradictory forces of innovation and tradition that make the 32-year-old Gilmore such an iconoclastic cook. ("Weird" is the way she describes herself.)
Considering such dishes as soba noodles tossed with ginger and caviar, or a tuna tartar (with toasted sesame oil and Japanese mirin) that takes sushi one step further, Gilmore says: "My cooking is getting more and more peculiar. I don't experiment for the sake of experimenting. Actually, I'm rather old-fashioned and slow to change. But in two decades, you get a certain kinesthetic sense of ingredients."


Enter the Clergyman, Handsome and Single
LOVING DAUGHTERS By Olga Masters. 319 pp. New York: W. W. Norton &amp; Company. $21.95.


Samantha Aldred, Harry DeMott 3d
Dr.
Samantha Louise Aldred, the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Peter Aldred of Santa Cruz, Calif., was married yesterday to Harry Joseph DeMott 3d, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
DeMott Jr. of Palm Beach, Fla.
The Rev.
Brian Brennan performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at Saint Patrick's Cathedral in New York.
Mrs.
DeMott, an intern in internal medicine at Lenox Hill Hospital in New York, graduated cum laude from Princeton University and received her medical degree from the Mount Sinai School of Medicine.
Her father is the laboratory manager for the General Electric Company in Pleasanton, Calif.


What Grows Around Comes Around
THE TREE IN THE WOOD Adapted and illustrated by Christopher Manson.
Unpaged.
New York: North/South Books. $14.95. (Ages 5 to 8)


What's New Tomcat?
IT was almost time for the evening news and Tom Jones, a night creature of long standing, having so far seized a small part of the day with a run on the boardwalk and breakfast, sat in an Atlantic City casino hotel suite considering his re-emergence into pop-culture consciousness.
"I just do what I do," he said.
"If people think it's hip, well, thank God."
That night, as he prepared for the final performance in a five-day stint at Tropworld, a familiar though slightly less-than-hip haunt, the singer was packing for a trip to Manhattan, where he would headline for the first time since a Madison Square Garden concert 20 years ago.
His venue for this against-type appearance was Limelight, the substantially more hip club in Chelsea.
Something awfully unusual is happening here.


Edmund Horman Service
A memorial service for Edmund C. Horman, who made an international crusade of his search for his son who vanished in Chile, will be held at 3 P.M. on May 23 at the Unitarian Church of All Souls, 1157 Lexington Avenue at 80th Street in Manhattan.
Mr.
Horman discovered that his son, Charles, a young writer, had been seized and murdered during a military coup in 1973.
The case was depicted in the film "Missing," starring Jack Lemmon as the father.
Mr.
Horman died on April 16.


Police Use of Power Is Under Scrutiny
WITH the Rodney G. King beating in Los Angeles still fresh in their minds, civil rights lawyers and minority leaders in the county have grown increasingly angry in recent months.
They contend that in Westchester, too, there is an ongoing pattern of police misuse of power -- lawlessness and racism, they say, among those whose job is law and order.
For years, police here have come under fire for using excessive force, for picking on groups that have little power to fight back -- and as Winston A. Ross, regional director of the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People, said, "for assuming that just because people are outside late at night, they must be doing something wrong."


Magadan Offers Lesson on Mets
To the Sports Editor:
While the Mets flail around with a team batting average of around .235, it is important to note that, going into the weekend, the former Met Dave Magadan of the Florida Marlins was batting .310, with an on-base average of .441.


New Gym Class: No More Choosing Up Sides
In every corner of the gymnasium, fifth graders are hopping, kicking, flailing their arms or crawling on their bellies in an interpretive dance based on a whimsical poem by Shel Silverstein.
Except for the girl who is expressing herself with a gagging gesture, sticking a finger in her mouth in time with the music, everyone actually seems to want to be here in physical education class.
P.E. has changed considerably since the days when kids in baggy uniforms waited their turns to climb a rope or shoot a basket, with all but the best athletes hoping the bell would rescue them from some fresh humiliation.
In recent years, schools across the country have joined a growing curriculum overhaul in physical education, replacing competitive sports with activities that prepare children for lifetime health rather than for varsity teams.
Goal Is Learning, Not Scoring
Today gym teachers may give students a choice of climbing the rope, swinging on it or simply holding on.
And rather than shooting at a basket once or twice during one class period, students might handle a ball hundreds of times a day, practicing repetitively with one that's the right size and weight for their skill and with a movable target that can be adjusted as their accuracy improves.
Even then, the goal is not so much to learn to score a basket as to develop body awareness, hand and motion skills and the confidence to try new activities.


Rhinoceros Metaphoros
WHAT: The two-ton recurring metaphor at the heart of "Wild Palms." A faux key to a bogus mystery.
Could become the most annoying thing on television since the midget on "Twin Peaks." THE CONTEXT: "Wild Palms" is the four-part, six-hour "event series" that begins tonight on ABC and already considers itself a cult classic.
Produced by Oliver Stone and written by Bruce Wagner, it is a convoluted cyber-paranoid soap opera set in Los Angeles in 2007, a very confusing year.
As two cults, the Friends and the Fathers, engage in a struggle to the death, Senator Anton (Tony) Kreutzer (Robert Loggia), head of the corporation Wild Palms Group and founder of a creepy religion called Synthiotics, starts a new network, Channel 3, which will bring virtual reality into America's living rooms.
A busy man, he is also chasing after the Go chip, which will confer immortality.
The action begins when regular-guy lawyer Harry Wyckoff (Jim Belushi) becomes head of business affairs at Channel 3.


Stiff Test for Newark Schools Auditor
People who know Rebecca A. Doggett say she knows how to walk into a complex situation and untangle things.
Her next assignment, auditor general of the public schools here, will test that appraisal in a politically sensitive job that could bring her into conflict with friends and former colleagues.
Ms.
Doggett, an executive with the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey, was appointed auditor general of the Newark school system on Thursday as part of a state monitoring effort that could lead to a takeover of the district.


MAY 9-15: Homosexuals in the Military; A Marine Colonel and His Son Agree to Disagree On Who Can Serve
The Marine Corps officer at the Senate Armed Services Committee last week sounded like many other service members as he criticized President Clinton's plan to lift the ban on homosexuals in the armed forces.
Then he dropped a bombshell.
"My son Scott is a homosexual," said Col.
Fred Peck, well known to Americans as the military's spokesman during the international relief operation in Somalia.
"I think he's a fine person. But he should not serve in the military."


T.W.A.'s Bumpy Flight Back
Whatever the fate of Trans World Airlines, this much is certain: There is no lack of can-do enthusiasm among its employees for reviving the bankrupt carrier, once ranked among the world's best.
Pilots dipped into their wallets to buy billboard advertisements, and are chatting up the airline to travel agents long disenchanted with it.
Workers bought sweatshirts proclaiming, "We're Comin' Back." In Kansas City, Mo., they posted a sign outside an overhaul base that reads,


Lucinda Bick, K. S. Melkonian
Lucinda Whitmore Bick, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Alan H. Bick of Garden City, L.I., was married there yesterday to Kenneth Seth Melkonian, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Cedric Melkonian, also of Garden City.
The Rev.
James W. Adelmann performed the United Church of Christ ceremony at the Garden City Community Church.


T. S. Zaubler and K. L. Sonnenberg
Dr. and Mrs.
Stephen M. Sonnenberg of Washington have announced September wedding plans for their daughter, Katharine Lee Sonnenberg, and Dr.
Thomas Scot Zaubler, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Leland S. Zaubler of Riverdale, the Bronx, and East Hampton, L.I.
Ms.
Sonnenberg graduated magna cum laude from Princeton University and received a law degree from Columbia University.
She is a law clerk for Judge Jan E. DuBois of the Federal District Court in Philadelphia.
Her father is a psychoanalyst and a clinical professor of psychiatry and behavioral sciences at George Washington University.
Her mother, Dr.
Dale F. Sonnenberg, is an assistant professor of social work at Virginia Commonwealth University.


Right Woman for the Glass Ceiling
To the Editor:
I am compelled to take issue with Jane White's objection to Joyce Miller heading up the Glass Ceiling Commission ("The Wrong Woman for the Glass Ceiling?" Letters, May 2).
The glass ceiling exists in all social institutions including the labor movement.
Ms.
Miller was appointed as the first woman to the A.F.L.-C.I.O. executive council, even though she was not a president of a national union.
Lane Kirkland, the A.F.L.-C.I.O. president, recognized the lack of woman on the council representation and appointed her, mainly because she headed up the Coalition of Labor Union Women, which forthrightly supported equality of opportunity in the workplace, pay equity, child care and the Equal Rights Amendment.


Irene McNulty, S. A. Sabadics
Irene McNulty, a manager in the business operations analysis division at the American Telephone and Telegraph Company, in Basking Ridge, N.J., and Stephen A. Sabadics, an engineer at A.T.&amp; T. Bell Laboratories, in Whippany, N.J., plan to marry in October.


Clintons Make A Quiet Visit To New York
There were no traffic alerts yesterday.
There were no blizzards of press releases, or frenzies of flesh-pressing, and there were only a few bright-blue barricades.
But for the second time in his Presidency -- and the second time in four days -- Bill Clinton came to New York City.
Making the kind of trip millions of Americans make each year -- take in the theater, visit some friends -- the Clinton family managed, it seemed, to wrest a few moments of privacy from a relentlessly public existence.


Ellen M. Cohen, Jeffrey Gershowitz
Ellen Marla Cohen, a daughter of Enid Cohen of Bensalem, Pa., and the late Ronald Cohen, was married yesterday evening to Jeffrey Adam Gershowitz, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Arthur Gershowitz of Oceanside, L.I.
Rabbi Maurice Simckes performed the ceremony at Temple Israel of South Merrick in Merrick, L.I.
Mrs.
Gershowitz, 29, is an associate in the emerging-markets trading and sales department of Nomura Securities International Inc., a securities company in New York.
She graduated from Boston University.


Technology; Putting the Tag on Shoplifters
IT was one of the retailing industry's most precise field experiments yet involving merchandising, consumer behavior and the criminal mind.
Texas Instruments Inc. and the Target discount stores wanted to discover the best way to entice shoppers to buy calculators while making it difficult for shoplifters to steal them.


Stepping Back to the Old West


Simone Genatt, James F. Haft
Stephen and Arlene Genatt of New York have announced the engagement of their daughter, Simone Michelle Genatt, to James Frederic Haft, the son of Elsa D. Haft and Jay M. Haft, both of New York.
An October wedding is planned.
Ms.
Genatt, 28, is a theater producer in New York.
She graduated from Stanford University.
Her father is the president of Genatt Associates Inc., an insurance brokerage in New Hyde Park, L.I.
Her mother is a family therapist in New York.


World Markets; Lining Up for Shares in Singapore
The rest of the world should have Singapore's problems.
Last year, the stock market of this tiny, prosperous Southeast Asian city-state foundered because of what many Singaporeans considered dismal economic news.
In 1992, the economy grew by 5.8 percent, the sort of growth that most nations would point to with giddy pride.
But not the disciplined, success-minded people of Singapore, who in recent years had come to expect something closer to 8 percent.


K. S. Templeton, G. B. Astrachan
Dr.
Hilda B. Templeton of West Orange, N.J., has announced the engagement of her daughter, Kimberly S. Templeton, to Gregory Bram Astrachan, a son of Margot W. Astrachan of New York and the late Dr.
John M. Astrachan.
A December wedding is planned.
Miss Templeton, 26, is an associate at the New York law firm of Cahill Gordon &amp; Reindel.
She graduated cum laude from Franklin &amp; Marshall College, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa.
She received a law degree from New York University, as did her fiance.
Her mother, a psychiatrist in Livingston, N.J., is the former clinical chief of psychiatry at St.
Barnabas Medical Center there.


Kimberly Winston and Alan Hartman
Mr. and Mrs.
Earle Yaffa of Armonk, N.Y., have announced the engagement of her daughter, Kimberly Ann Winston, to Alan Philip Hartman, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Lawrence Hartman of Dallas.
An October wedding is planned.
Miss Winston, 29, is the director of administration and facilities planning at EJV Partners, a financial information-services company in New York.
She graduated from Tufts University and received an M.B.A. from New York University.
Her stepfather is the managing director of the New York law firm of Skadden, Arps, Slate, Meagher &amp; Flom.
Ms.
Winston is also the daughter of the late Maj.
Charles C. Winston 3d.


The Executive Computer; H-P's New Laser: Smaller, Cheaper but Not Faster
The Hewlett-Packard Company's new Laserjet 4L personal laser printer, for DOS and Windows computers, is better and cheaper than its popular predecessor, the Laserjet IIP.
At a suggested list price of $849, and a probable discounted price of $650, the 4L might be the laser that blasts dot-matrix printers into oblivion.
Hewlett-Packard plans to deliver another version of the printer, called the Laserjet 4ML (list price $1,279, with a likely street price of about $999), for Macintosh computers and those PC users who use the powerful Adobe Postscript Level 2 software.
The 4ML will come with more than 50 extra type fonts (80 fonts in all, compared with 26 in the 4L).


Rosia Blackwell and Steve Lawrence
Rosia Mary Blackwell, the executive assistant to the president of Local 420 of the New York City Municipal Hospital Workers Union, and Aaron Steve Lawrence, a special assistant in New York to Representative Charles B. Rangel, Democrat of Manhattan, were married yesterday.
The Rev.
Preston Washington, a Baptist minister, performed the ceremony at the First Bethel African Methodist Episcopal Church in New York.
The Rev.
Patricia Reeberg, a Baptist minister, took part in the ceremony.
Mrs.
Lawrence, 30, graduated from Northeastern University.
She is a daughter of James Blackwell of Greenburgh, N.Y., and Frances Blackwell-Matthews of New York.
Her father is a supervisor at the General Motors Corporation in Tarrytown, N.Y.


Christina Rizopoulos, F. A. Valauri
Christina Rizopoulos, a first vice president and senior health-care industry research analyst at Paine Webber Inc., was married yesterday to Dr.
Fredrick Augustus Valauri, an esthetic and reconstructive plastic surgeon.
Both work in New York.
The Rev.
Dr.
Robert Stephanopoulos performed the ceremony at the Greek Orthodox Archdiocesan Cathedral of the Holy Trinity in New York.
Mrs.
Valauri graduated from Reed College.
She is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Constantine M. Rizopoulos of Flagler Beach, Fla.
Her father is a professor of mathematics at Embrey Riddle Aeronautical University in Daytona Beach, Fla.


Corrections
An article in The Times Magazine on April 18 about a girls' basketball team misidentified the birthplace of Calvin Coolidge.
It was Plymouth, Vt., not Northampton, Mass.


On the Edges Of Life And Death
LIFE'S DOMINION An Argument About Abortion, Euthanasia, and Individual Freedom.
By Ronald Dworkin. 273 pp.
New York: Alfred A. Knopf. $23.


Remembrance


Commercial Property: Brokers' Commissions; A Sour Aftertaste for Sweeteners?
W&amp;M PROPERTIES, Olympia &amp; York, S.L.
Green Real Estate and several other building owners and managers have begun to pay brokers their full commissions when leases are signed, rather than paying them in installments or waiting until free rent periods end.
Helmsley-Spear is now paying full commission on signing at most of its buildings.
And at the Empire State Building and One Penn Plaza, both of which are about 12 percent vacant and have a lot of smaller spaces, it paid brokers double commission on deals that closed between mid-November and April 30.


CALLING THE BRONX -- 718 Today
The Bronx joins the 718 area code this Sunday after a transition period that began July 1, 1992.
During the transition period, callers could dial either the 718 or 212 area code and still reach the Bronx, but beginning at 12:01 A.M.
Sunday they must use the 718 area code only.


To Fake It Well on the Set, It Pays to Be Genuine
Transforming John Guare's Broadway play "Six Degrees of Separation" into a movie can present challenges both visual and dramatic.
In Fred Schepisi's film ver sion of Mr.
Guare's 1990 work, the visual arts perform two critical, almost starring roles.
A double-sided Kandinsky holds the place of honor in a New York apartment where much of the action takes place.
And Michelangelo's ceiling in the Sistine Chapel, described but never seen in the play, had to be created for the movie, which is now being filmed in New York.
The drama is set in the Fifth Avenue apartment of Flan and Ouisa Kittredge, a private art dealer and his wife (played by Donald Sutherland and Stockard Channing, who is reprising her stage role).
The Kittredges become the victims of a scam perpetrated by a young man named Paul (Will Smith), who pretends to be Sidney Poitier's son, cons his way into their home, transforms their lives and vanishes.


An Admitted Long Shot, Gilligan Shows Optimism
UNTIL 10 days ago, five candidates were vying for the right to be the Republican nominee for governor in the June 8 primary.
In addition to Jim Wallwork, Cary Edwards and Christine Todd Whitman, two other candidates, Charles P. Hoffman of Brick and James Patrick Gilligan of Morris Township, were also busy campaigning.
On May 6, Mr.
Hoffman withdrew from the race and endorsed Mr.
Wallwork.
Mr.
Gilligan, however, has said he is "in it to stay."


Not Super, Not Splendid, Just Superior
Before Game 3 got away from the Knicks in the fourth quarter, before it was lost in double overtime to the Hornets here Friday night, 110-106, there was going to be so much to say about Charles Oakley.
That is just about how it goes for Oakley, though.
That is just his luck.
There is always someone else who shoots better, runs faster, jumps higher, talks clearer.
There is always someone with a reputation who gets the acclaim and the awards.
Oakley doesn't ask for -- nor does he deserve -- a star's illumination.
He never even gets nominated for best performance in a supporting role.


Debate on Sex Education Flares Anew in Trenton
AFTER more than a decade of relative acceptance, the teaching of sex education in New Jersey public schools is coming under fire.
Though a 1992 poll by the Eagleton Institute of Politics at Rutgers University indicates that New Jerseyans overwhelmingly support teaching about contraceptive methods in public schools, there is fierce disagreement over the content of those lessons and the timing of their introduction.


POSTINGS: 'Light Up New York'; Safe Streets Plan Enlists Landlords
And Frederick A. Smith said, "Let there be light!" And there was light.
And it was good.
Mr.
Smith is a broker at Cushman &amp; Wakefield, a major real-estate company, and he is the brainfather of a project he calls "Light Up New York," a program to help make New York City's streets safer by persuading property owners in midtown to light the lower facades of their buildings at night to make the adjacent streets light and bright.


Robin Henning, Albino Rocchi
Robin Gail Henning, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Theodore W. Henning of Manhasset, L.I., was married there yesterday to Albino Michael Rocchi, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Antonio J. Rocchi of the Bronx.
The Rev.
Maurice A. Fetty performed the ceremony at the Congregational Church of Manhasset.


The Perennial Question, on Annuals, Too
"BUT will it flower all summer?" This is the question most often asked by gardeners buying plants.
Now that the planting season is at its height this is an important factor.
The answer to the question depends on what kinds of plants the gardener buys and the desired results.
Some plants flower all summer.
These are the annuals, and the seed growers have seen to it that desires are satisfied with plants that provide magnificent colors on sturdy stems.
Some are weatherproof, even drought-durable.


Whole-Wheat Taste in a Whole New Light
WHOLE wheat has all the attributes of nutritional correctness.
It is rich in vitamins and high in fiber.
On the debit side of the culinary ledger, however, it has a flavor that is far more aggressive and rustic than refined white flour and its texture is rougher and heavier.
Fortunately, whole wheat is available in various forms.
Flour, pasta and whole-wheat berries that can be cooked like beans are some of them.
And there are a number of ways these whole-wheat ingredients can be combined successfully and extremely palatably in recipes.


A Wondrous Wee Car
IF it sometimes seems that America's automotive ardor has cooled, all you need to do is look at the attendance figures for New York's International Automobile Show.
T'ain't so; the love affair continues.
As usual, the recent show at the Javits Convention Center in Manhattan set a record, again assuring its place as the event with the country's largest gaggle of cars -- and the event that is the nation's most powerful magnet for those interested in tires that need kicking.


Carving an Identity Niche on the East End
THE front of WEHM-FM, the newest radio station in East Hampton, is a giant window on Main Street.
But it is a Hamptons main street.
"I always honk and wave to them as I drive by," said Christie Brinkley, the model.
"I'm not sure if they recognize my car yet."


THE GUIDE
JAY OPEN HOUSE
A 23-acre tract in Rye, where the boyhood home of John Jay once stood and which still contains the 1838 Greek Revival mansion built by the first Chief Justice's son, Peter Augustus Jay, will be open to the public free of charge today from noon to 5 P.M. at 210 Post Road.
The open house is co-sponsored by the Westchester Historical Society and the Jay Heritage Center, a group that has raised $750,000 of a required $5 million to restore the mansion and a 1912 carriage house and provide extensive landscaping.


K. M. Rosbrook, Thomas Hayden
Kathleen Michele Rosbrook, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
William B. Rosbrook of Skaneateles, N.Y., was married there yesterday to Thomas Gerard Hayden, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Raymond P. Hayden of Huntington, L.I.
The Rev.
James H. Carey performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at St.
Mary's of the Lake Church.
Mrs.
Hayden graduated from Hamilton College.
Until recently, she was a sales associate for national accounts at the Macmillan Publishing Company in New York.
Her father is a lawyer in Syracuse.


Why Branagh's Bard Glows on the Screen
Early in "Much Ado About Nothing," Kenneth Branagh takes a simple line of exposition from the play -- "Don Pedro is approached" -- and turns it into an exuberant movie spectacle.
The noble Don Pedro and his soldiers gallop toward the house of their host, Leonato.
As the opening credits appear, Mr.
Branagh cuts furiously between the fast-approaching soldiers (long shots of horsemen coming over the hill, close-ups of each man riding in dust and wind) and the household's preparations (women in a flurry of bathing bodies and flying clothes).
Finally the two groups march toward each other in Leonato's courtyard, with the camera rising in the air to gaze down on the beautifully resolved scene.
The episode captures visually all the spirit and excitement behind that single line, and sets the joyful tone of the film.
This "Much Ado" is a glorious version of Shakespeare, and it works not because it is Shakespearean but because it is cinematic.
Mr.
Branagh, who adapted the play for the screen and directed it, is faithful to Shakespeare's language and true to the raucous spirit of romance in the courtship of the determinedly unmarried Benedick (Mr. Branagh) and Beatrice (Emma Thompson).
As Shakespeare movies go, that's the easy part.


Big Features In Small Packages
OLYMPUS AMERICA INC. (that's the new name for the former Olympus Corporation) has been successful at putting little cameras into photographers' pockets for years.
Remember the 1959 Olympus Pen camera?
It started the half-frame boom in Japan, allowing people to take twice as many pictures per roll while using a smaller-than-normal camera.
And how about the pocket-size Olympus XA, which came out in 1979?


The 'Forgotten Borough' Makes Its Voice Heard
Queens, the self-described "forgotten borough" that nearly broke John V. Lindsay, cemented Edward I. Koch's neoconservative coalition, and gave Rudolph W. Giuliani more votes than David N. Dinkins received from any single borough four years ago, is flexing its political muscles again.
Last week alone, Carol A. Gresser, the New York City Board of Education member appointed by Borough President Claire Shulman, was elected president of the board after earlier providing the pivotal vote to oust Schools Chancellor Joseph A. Fernandez.
And Representative Thomas J. Manton, who doubles as the Queens Democratic leader, endorsed Mr.
Dinkins for re-election and urged the Mayor's chief remaining threat to renomination, City Council President Andrew J. Stein, to quit the race.


Ilene Gayle Karp, Robert Michaels
Ilene Gayle Karp, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Philip E. Karp of Riverdale, the Bronx, was married yesterday evening to Dr.
Robert L. Michaels, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Lee Michaels of Bellmore, L.I.
Rabbi Paul Kushner officiated at the Elmwood Country Club in White Plains.


Afternoon Offers a Pair of Premieres
THOUGH the concert season normally tails off by mid-May, the week's schedule includes two premieres, a pair of hits (Broadway and Off Broadway), symphonic programs, choral music, grand opera and more.
The premieres occur at 3 o'clock concerts this afternoon.
"And Trouble Came," commissioned by the Fidelio Trio of the violist Lois Martin, the cellist Harry Clark and the pianist Sanda Schuldmann, receives its first performance by the artists in the Seavern Room at the Bushnell.
The program, designed as a benefit for the Connecticut AIDS Residence Coalition, also features two earlier Fidelio commissions, Robert Starer's "Episodes" and the 1987 Trio by Libby Larson.
For more details, call the Coalition at 231-8212.


Crazy With Women, Lucky With Spain
GERALD BRENAN: THE INTERIOR CASTLE A Biography.
By Jonathan Gathorne-Hardy.
Illustrated. 660 pp.
New York: W. W. Norton &amp; Company. $35.


Spreading News On Health Issues
RESISTANT malaria, the cholera epidemic in South America, traveler's diarrhea, AIDS and its ties to sexual tourism, and hepatitis A: all were topics of consistent interest at the Third Conference on International Travel Medicine last month.
The widest debate, however, focused on the question of who is going to inform prospective travelers, particularly those from a developed country going to the third world, about how to protect their health.
Participants made progress toward a consensus on needed steps, but remained frustrated on how to deliver the news.
By the end of the conference, a committee had zeroed in on the idea of an information sheet to be distributed by travel agents, but, according to the reports of those who have tried, travel agents do not like talking about disease.
However, the president of the society holding the conference said there was a prospect of a breakthrough in this area.


Jane Humpstone, Courtney Ward 3d
Mr. and Mrs.
John H. Humpstone Jr. of Locust Valley, L.I., have announced the engagement of their daughter Jane Hamilton Humpstone to L. Courtney Ward 3d, the son of Lee C. Ward Jr. and Barbara Ward, both of New York.
Miss Humpstone, 29, is the manager of program strategies for APCO Associates Inc., a public-affairs concern in Washington.
She graduated magna cum laude from Colgate University, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa.
Her father, now retired, was the president of Legal Systems, Inc., a subsidiary of Bowne &amp; Company, the financial printing company in New York.


Sara C. Stone, B. K. Laughren
Sara C. Stone, the daughter of Susan and Samuel Stone of Tulsa, Okla., was married there yesterday to Brandon K. Laughren, a son of Margot R. Laughren of Rye, N.Y., and Terry Laughren of Darien, Conn.
The Rev.
Ralph U. Taylor performed the ceremony at Trinity Episcopal Church.
Mrs.
Laughren, 29, is the store design coordinator for Prescriptives Cosmetics Inc. in New York.
She graduated from the Rhode Island School of Design.
Her father is a founder of and the principal partner in Stone, Jessup, a Tulsa law firm.
Her mother, a management consultant for private schools, is the chairwoman of the Hillcrest Medical Center and the Hillcrest Heathcare Corporation in Tulsa.


In the Region: New Jersey; Recent Sales
Bernardsville  $650,000
1 Pine Hollow Road  5-bedroom, 4-bath, 2-half bath, 5-year-old colonial; pantry, whirlpool, security system; taxes $10,713.
Carteret  $102,000
1442 Roosevelt Avenue  3-bedroom, 1-bath, 35-year-old ranch, finished basement, storage shed, eat-in-kitchen; taxes $2,649.
Mendham  $550,000
21 Calais Road  5-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 7-year-old colonial; 3-car garage, gourmet kitchen, two-story foyer; taxes $9,255.
Piscataway  $260,000
372 Hamilton Blvd.  4-bedroom, 3 1/2-bath, 26-year-old colonial; 2 fireplaces, a/c, new roof; taxes $5,291.
Point Pleasant  $174,000
2222 Kilkare Parkway  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 39-year-old renovated colonial; large lot, inground pool, eat-in-kitchen; taxes $3,348.
Toms River  $85,000
45 Lagoon Drive East  3-bedroom, 1-bath, 34-year-old ranch; waterfront lot, Florida room, 2-car garage; taxes $1,496.
OTHER AREAS White Plains, N.Y.  $247,000
76 Holland Avenue  5-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 62-year-old Tudor; entry hall, sun room, skylights, modern kitchen, finished basement; taxes $3,700.
Hamden, Conn.  $170,000
1743 Whitney Avenue  4-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 149-year-old colonial; eat-in kitchen, fireplace, built-in shelves, 0.75 acre; taxes $4,250.
Glen Cove, L.I.  $290,000
5 Hickory Drive  3-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 20-year-old ranch; dining room, eat-in kitchen, family room, fireplace, basement; taxes $6,800.


The Strategic Retreat Still Packs a Punch
IT goes against the grain for most players to think of a retreat as an attack.
They take it for granted that they often must fall back when attacked, but who builds an attack by going backward?
Wilhelm Steinitz seems to have been the first to retreat a knight boldly and without embarrassment for the sake of a powerful repositioning.
It's not on record whether anyone laughed -- certainly his opponent, who had no antidote, did not.
Steinitzian retreats still catch opponents unawares, as can be seen in the game between the grandmasters Grigory Kaidanov of Lexington, Ky., and Aleksandr Goldin of Russia from Round 4 of the Hudson International Tournament at Pace University in Pleasantville, N.Y.
It was played on April 16.


G. A. Birkelund, Alfred Tibbetts
Gwynne Anne Birkelund, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John P. Birkelund of New York and New Canaan, Conn., was married yesterday to Alfred Pittman Tibbetts, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Paul D. Tibbetts of Darien, Conn.
The Rev.
Jeffrey Rider performed the ceremony at the Congregational Church in New Canaan.
Mrs.
Tibbetts is a freelance video and film producer for educational and corporate projects in New York.
She graduated from Brown University.
Her father is the chairman and chief executive of Dillon, Read &amp; Company, the investment bank, in New York.


Streetscapes: Central Park; Restoration Recalls the 1930's Battle of the Ballfields
ANYONE who knew the collection of rutted slopes and derelict structures that was the Central Park of the 1970's can hardly believe the steady reclamation of meadows, gardens and buildings since then.
So the announcement on May 7 of $51 million in private/public funds to complete the restoration of New York's great green landmark is surely the jewel in the crown of Elizabeth Barlow Rogers's nonprofit Central Park Conservancy, which conceived and largely pushed through the project.


Making His Way Out of the Muddle He Made
AS President Clinton strolled onto the White House South Lawn Friday morning for an education awards ceremony, he was greeted by the ruffles and flourishes of the Marine Band.
The day was sunny, the House Ways and Means committee had just passed his tax package and all seemed well at 1600 Pennsylvania Avenue.
"The Marine Band has been in especially fine form this morning," the President remarked cheerily.
"I woke up to them. I went jogging to them. I almost felt like a President this morning, for sure."


Lebow to Be Honored
FRED LEBOW, the director and founder of the New York City Marathon, CHARLES H. McCABE JR., the executive vice president of Chemical Banking Corp., JACK RUDIN, the president of his own real estate firm, and Manhattan Borough President PERCY SUTTON will be honored by Iona College at the school's trustee award dinner-dance at the Waldorf-Astoria on May 19.


Yankees and Perez Find Victory on the Rebound
Melido Perez survived, just like the Yankees.
Perez did not have his sharp forkball against the Blue Jays, the Yankees did not have Don Mattingly or Bernie Williams because of injuries.
For one afternoon at Yankee Stadium, the absences did not matter.
They did not matter because Toronto's Al Leiter, who debuted with the Yankees at the Stadium as a 21-year-old in 1987, was erratic and allowed four runs.
Because two suddenly important components, Mike Stanley and Mike Gallego, contributed in timely fashion.
Because Perez refused to loosen his grip once he had a lead.
And because the Yankees rebound like Dennis Rodman.


The Telephone Transformed -- Into Almost Everything
WHEN THE TELEPHONE RINGS IN ARNO Penzias's office at A.T.&amp;T.
Bell Laboratories, nothing is simple: first comes an electronic beep from one of the button-studded, silicon-filled instruments on his desk; then the cordless handset on the conference table trills along behind.
Penzias, the Nobel laureate who directs research at this most famous of American corporate laboratories, grouses: why didn't the caller use electronic mail instead?
Voice can be so retrograde, so intrusive.
Penzias gets up and switches phones to demonstrate one of his latest toys, something the Bell Labs engineers call "Bump in a Cord." It is an eavesdropper-foiling encryption device the size of a paperback book, and it works so well, he says, that the Government will not allow it carried out of the country ("Princess Di would love one").
But you do need another Bump at the other end -- for a proper demonstration, Penzias must look up a colleague's phone number.
So now, for just a moment, we put the Information Age on hold while he opens a drawer and rummages through a sheaf of what looks suspiciously like paper.
Paper?!


The Blizzard
To the Editor: The chart headed "Blizzard of '93: What the Airlines Offered" (Travel Advisory, March 28) states that American Airlines offered hotel and meal vouchers during the March blizzard.
While we were traveling from Maui to New York, it was made clear to us by American personnel in Maui, Honolulu and Los Angeles that all meals and accommodations would be at our own expense.
We spent 10 hours at O'Hare and were never offered meals or assistance with accommodations.


Parsons School of Design Has 97th Commencement
The Parsons School of Design, a division of the New School for Social Research, held its 97th commencement yesterday at the Riverside Church in Manhattan.
The school conferred 374 bachelor's and 45 master's degrees at the ceremony.
The New School's president, Jonathan F. Fanton, discussed a "national arts policy" in his address to the graduates.
Four years ago, the New School thrust itself into the debate over government financing of the arts when it filed suit against obscenity guidelines issued by the National Endowment for the Arts.
Mr.
Fanton was also involved in a dispute over the inclusion of a drawing that many felt was racist in a Parsons exhibition.
He let the exhibit remain.


Congressional Memo; Liquor-Warning Bill Reflects Personal Impact on Public Policy
For years, a bill requiring advertisers to attach safety warnings to liquor commercials has collected more dust than votes.
Then Nancy Moore Thurmond, the 22-year-old daughter of the Republican Senator from South Carolina, was run down and killed by a drunken driver last month.
Her death gave the legislation a new life.


Manager's Profile; Edward Trumpbour
Fund: Delaware Value; $93 million in assets.
Manager since 1987 inception. (Sponsor: Delaware Group, Philadelphia.)
Born: Nov. 21, 1957; New York City.


The Human Process
A dinner-dance at the American Museum of Natural History celebrates a new permanent exhibition, May 10.


Gun Measure Gains Ground In Hartford
Just one month ago, State Senator William A. Aniskovich, a Branford Republican, had a gilt-edged rating from the National Rifle Association.
This week, to the N.R.A.'s horror, he plans to vote yes on what is perhaps the most far-reaching gun-control bill ever to reach the floor of the Connecticut Legislature: a complete ban on the sale of large-magazine, military-style semiautomatic assault rifles.
In an issue where positions are often entrenched, the change of heart by Mr.
Aniskovich and some other lawmakers, and their willingness to reconsider gun control in light of new arguments and rising crime, has dramatically raised hopes that the bill could pass.
Sponsors say that the battle is still uphill, but that a few changed votes, especially in the 36-member Senate, would be enough.
Gov.
Lowell P. Weicker Jr. supports the measure, and the House of Representatives passed a similar bill last summer.


Corrections
An article on May 2 about pharmaceutical research in Connecticut misidentified the chief executive of Pfizer Inc.
He is William C. Steere Jr., the company's chairman.


Budget Watchdogs United in Battle
JOHN PILLAR's fiery speeches before the Groton Town Council have earned him the nickname "Little Napoleon." He is a short man with an angry voice when speaking out on a favorite issue.
Since he retired eight years ago, Mr.
Pillar, 76, has become a government watchdog in the town where he has lived for 39 years.
He is a fixture at town meetings, where he harangues local officials about holding down taxes, cutting government spending and keeping town business open to the public.
He recently started his own cable television program called "Wake Up Groton," in which he attacks examples of what he considers the town's wasteful spending.


Accident, Child Abuse Or Genetics?
Unfortunately the article "Determining the Cause of a Child's Fracture" (April 4) fails to mention that, in addition to accidents or abuse, childhood fractures may be caused by a genetic disorder, osteogenesis imperfecta.


Liza Wetanson, David Freilicher
Liza Wetanson, the owner of the Trattoria Sambuca restaurant, and David Freilicher, a senior vice president of Grey Advertising, both in New York, were married last evening.
Cantor David Benedict officiated at the Metropolitan Club in New York.
Mrs.
Freilicher, 32, is a daughter of Suzanne Wetanson and Herbert Wetanson, both of New York.
Her father, owns the BBQ and Tony's DiNapoli restaurants in New York.
Her mother is a sculptor.


Now Starring on Video: The Director's Cut
This month, Warner Brothers will release "Blade Runner: The Director's Cut" on videocassette.
The movie is, in fact, an early version of the cult film and far different from the movie that originally showed in theaters.
In June, New Line Home Video will bring out the "original, unrated director's cut" of "Damage." That film is not very different from the version shown in theaters last winter.
Last April, Live released the director's cut of "Basic Instinct," which differed from its theatrical counterpart by only 47 seconds.


Public &amp; Private; In Thin Air
A long, long time ago, when the Hula-Hoop was young and suits still ruled the earth, the fantasy job for girls was stewardess.
There were myths and legends about stewardess life, many of them abetted by airline advertising campaigns: perfect hair, great travel and a handsome frequent flier at the end of the rainbow.
Really the end, because on some airlines you couldn't stew after 32 or after "I do." Of course, no one talked about the low pay, long hours and high turnover rate.


Honored Guests
Celebrating art, theater and rare books.


For Sagging Fences, Braces and Turnbuckles
Common residential-fence woes include sagging gates, wobbly posts and loose chain-link fencing.
All are rather easy to repair by using the right methods and tools.
A simple way to repair most sagging wood gates is to make a brace with steel cable and a turnbuckle, which when tightened raises the gate's lower corner farthest from the hinge post.
Start by measuring the distance between diagonal corners on the gate and buy a length of eighth-inch-diameter galvanized-metal cable about two feet longer than the measurement.
Also buy a four- or six-inch-long metal turnbuckle, four U-bolt cable clamps and two eyescrews large enough to accept the cable.


New Yankee, New Verb
To the Sports Editor:
I have been inspired to coin a term, and that's to "bogg" something.
Bogging involves coloring the perception of events or persons in a way that makes them seem better than they are.


Same Audience, More Labels
To the Editor:
Jamie James captured exactly the state of marketing in the classical-music business  [ "Sex and the 'Singles' Symphony," May 2 ] , including the conventional wisdom that a lack of music education is responsible for the declining interest in classical music.
Whatever the state of music education, the fact is that the classical share of the record market has been more or less the same for decades (except for the boom when CD's were introduced).
What has changed is that there are now far more record labels.
The demand hasn't got smaller but the supply has grown enormously.


Celtics' Lewis May Seek Third Medical Opinion
The Boston Celtics' captain, REGGIE LEWIS, said he has not yet decided whether to seek a third medical opinion before resuming his basketball career, which seemed threatened earlier this month.
Lewis, in a radio interview, also accused some doctors of being inaccessible to him and of improperly releasing some details about his case to the public.
Lewis collapsed in an April 29 playoff game against Charlotte and spent the next 11 days in hospitals.
His problem was at first diagnosed as potentially career-ending heart disease but later diagnosed as a relatively harmless case of nerves sending confusing signals to the heart.
After collapsing, Lewis spent a weekend undergoing tests at New England Baptist Hospital.
After analysis of the results by 11 cardiologists -- none of whom examined Lewis or met with him -- Lewis was told he had a serious heart ailment.


Robyn E. Rituno, Robert S. Gorin
Robyn Ellen Rituno, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard Rituno of Rye, N.Y., was married last evening to Robert Scott Gorin, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Arthur Gorin of Framingham, Mass.
Rabbi Robert Rothman performed the ceremony at Tappan Hill in Tarrytown, N.Y.


Beth Ann Zarkin, Charles Ditkoff
Mr. and Mrs.
Herbert Zarkin of Sudbury, Mass., have announced the engagement of their daughter Dr.
Beth Ann Zarkin to Charles Joshua Ditkoff, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Jerome L. Ditkoff of Manhasset Hills, L.I.
A September wedding is planned.
Dr.
Zarkin, 29, is a fourth-year resident in general surgery at Columbia-Presbyterian Medical Center in New York.
She graduated cum laude from Yale University and received an M.D. from Johns Hopkins University.
Her father is the president of B.J.'s Wholesale Club, a division of Waban Inc. in Natick, Mass.


Kentuckians Try to Rein In Suburbia
The way Bob Clay sees it, Kentucky's Bluegrass Country is a national treasure, much like the Grand Canyon or the Great Lakes or the Florida Keys.
"It's one of those special places that Americans like to celebrate and visit," said Mr.
Clay, a horse breeder.
"Mention the word 'thoroughbred,' and people see in the mind's eye neatly fenced pastures with frisky foals rolling around in lush bluegrass. Maybe there's a picturesque barn standing on a hill beyond."


Mary McKenna, Mark H. Leeds
Anna M. McKenna of Pittsburgh has announced October wedding plans for her daughter, Mary McKenna, and Mark H. Leeds, the son of Gerald and Ruth Leeds of Boca Raton, Fla.
Ms.
McKenna is an associate at the New York law firm of Battle Fowler.
She graduated cum laude from Harvard College and received a J.D. from the University of Pennsylvania.
Her father, the late David G. McKenna, was an editor at The Pittsburgh Post-Gazette.
Her mother is the coordinator of graduate medical education at the Western Pennsylvania Hospital in Pittsburgh.


Ms. Hilton, Dr. Zimmermann
Alicia Marie Hilton, a special agent in New York for the Federal Bureau of Investigation, was married yesterday to Dr.
William Robert Zimmermann, a resident in anesthesiology at New York Hospital-Cornell Medical Center.
The Rev.
Ronald D. Meyer performed the Episcopal ceremony at Christ Church and Holy Family in Brooklyn.


So Small in the Presence of Death
I'LL SEE YOU IN MY DREAMS By Mavis Jukes.
Illustrated by Stacey Schuett.
Unpaged.
New York: Alfred A. Knopf. $15. (Ages 7 to 11)


Some Leading Americans
To the Editor:
In his review of my book "The Spirit of Community" (April 11), Edward Schwartz states that the book is "an exegetical commentary" on the communitarian platform, "a document developed and promulgated by Mr. Etzioni in the fall of 1991, endorsed by 70 unidentified 'leading Americans.' " This implies that the endorsers may not be leading.


Anatomy of Islander Upset: 'No Passengers on Bus'
When David Volek scored at 5 minutes 16 seconds of overtime Friday night to give the Islanders a 4-3 victory over the Pittsburgh Penguins, he concluded a remarkable upset for a team that had been lightly regarded and only marginally successful during the National Hockey League's regular season.
The goal brought happy tears to Volek's eyes, dropped a stunned hush over the 16,164 fans at the Civic Arena and turned the Stanley Cup playoffs into an unpredictable sprint to the finish for the four remaining teams.


Is Art for Our Feathered Friends or Us?
WHEN a museum opened in Southampton last May its target audience was all atwitter.
Visitors in their finest plumage flew in from all over to an exhibition by Roy Lichtenstein.
At the opening, jazz by Charlie (Bird) Parker floated through the air.
Spectators preened and chirped and fluffed their feathers.
The show was never seen by critics, however, and never viewed by collectors.


Through the Years


Let Us Journey Into the Mind of Managed Care; Fraud and Abuse
To the Editor:
Your May 1 front-page primer on managed competition fails to address how the Clinton Administration plan would curb fraud and abuse in health care.
According to a General Accounting Office study, fraud and abuse may cost us as much as 10 percent of our health care spending and, if left unchecked, could cost American taxpayers as much as $100 billion by 1995.


Bosnia Safe Havens Plan Makes Sense
To the Editor:
The call by Europeans for American and Russian ground troops to protect Muslim safe havens in Bosnia and Herzegovina (news article, May 11) is the correct call.
We should test their sincerity with it.
The armed protection of safe havens is based on the only correct reason for intervention: to enforce well-established international humanitarian laws, specifically the Geneva Conventions and the Convention on Genocide.
To let these laws be flouted offends the conscience, but also invites repetitions in dozens of ethnic and religious hotbeds.


Art Invitations As Small Scraps Of History
Exhibition invitations?
I've seen a few.
Any working art critic inevitably acquires an extensive knowledge of this genre of printed ephemera.
Heralding gallery and museum shows, invitations flood the mailbox, crowd the desk and all too often accumulate so intractably on the kitchen counter as to seem part of the decor.
You can't live with them, and until the show is over, you can't throw them out.
Still, life without such art-world byproducts would be a lot more difficult.
Not only do they convey the important facts -- the who, when and where -- of shows that need to be seen.


DAVID GEFFEN, STILL HUNGRY
In spite of any business conflicts we might have had, Steve Ross was and will always remain one of the most respected and central influences in my life ("David Geffen, Still Hungry," by Bernard Weinraub, May 2).
I therefore must point out a misunderstanding in your article, where I was quoted as saying of Ross, "He didn't make it easy for other people but he sure didn't have an easy life." What I clearly intended to say was, "He made it easy for other people, but he sure didn't have an easy life himself." DAVID GEFFEN New York, N.Y.


Calling the Rich the Rich
To the Editor:
Thank you for publishing the wail penned by Leonard Riggio, chief executive of Barnes &amp; Noble ("Dear Democrats: Don't Trash Business," Viewpoints, April 25).
It is good to know how sensitive to words Mr.
Riggio is, but I think he may have missed some of the jillion books sold in and about the 1980's explaining in detail about "greed" and about being "rich" and how good these words were, not to mention the attitudes and behavior they denoted.
Much nicer than the cozy "wealthy" or "well to do."


Sports of The Times; A Survivor Captures Preakness
There is that dismal moment in late February, when anybody stuck in New York begins to think, "Where did I go wrong?" People cough in your face in the subway.
You get shocks from the static electricity.
You fear disappearing into the potholes on the bridges and roadways.
We do not know whether Prairie Bayou took it personally when forced to spend the depth of winter in New York.
We do know he was consigned to race on the rugged inner track of Aqueduct, on the frozen steppes of Queens County.


Australia Speeds Effort to End Ties to Queen
When the new session of Parliament opened this month, Prime Minister Paul Keating and his Cabinet swore allegiance to "Her Majesty Queen Elizabeth II, her heirs and successors."
At the same time, a committee appointed by the Prime Minister began considering constitutional changes for appointing a president to replace the Queen as Australia's head of state, a position held by British sovereigns since 1788.


Finding Washington at Home
MOUNT VERNON, VA., draws visitors today for many of the same reasons that it attracted them during George Washington's lifetime.
They come in search of a personality, looking for the man obscured by myth and the passage of time.
During a visit to the most famous private home in America, I, too, found myself viewing Mount Vernon not so much as a historic building but, rather, as a key to understanding an extraordinarily elusive man.
During the final years of Washington's life, hundreds of people navigated the muddy roads of northern Virginia to reach Mount Vernon.
Some were friends from the Revolution; others were foreign dignitaries curious to meet the great republican leader.
A few were simply pests.
Whatever motivated the trip, travelers always encountered a gracious welcome.
Washington accepted the burden of entertainment as a civic responsibility, and he seemed genuinely surprised when visitors did not appear.
"Unless someone pops in, unexpectedly," he wrote in 1797, "Mrs. Washington and myself will do what I believe has not been  [ done ]  within the last 20 years by us, that is to set down to dinner by ourselves."


The Blizzard
To the Editor: My experience at the time of the blizzard does not bear out the information given in the chart.
I was booked on Flight 1165 from Kennedy Airport to Costa Rica on March 13.
I arrived at the airport three hours before the flight was due to leave at 9:59 A.M. for Miami.
We were informed that the plane was delayed and finally that it had been canceled, but we were told that unless we waited until the tickets were returned to us a refund could not be guaranteed.
No one could possibly blame American Airlines for the cancellation as by this time the blizzard was imminent.
Unfortunately, due to the delay in American's making this decision, I was not able to return to Connecticut by Connecticut Limousine as that company too had discontinued its service.
After recovering my luggage I inquired about hotel vouchers and was informed that it was not the policy of American to issue assistance to passengers if the flight cancellation was not their responsibility.
I requested that I might be allowed to sit in a chair as I am too old to sit on the floor as many people were having to do.
I was told that all the chairs had been removed from the main lobby because otherwise many derelicts used them.


Disney World
To the Editor: While enjoying Lynn Freed's article on a visit to Disney World ("It's A Small Unnatural World," April 11), I was reminded of our 5-year-old daughter's comment on our visit to Disney World in the 70's.
On leaving the 10,000 Leagues Under the Sea ride she asked, "Is the water plastic, too, Mommy?"
Thank you for sharing the trip.  CARROLL M. SCHLEPPI  Dayton, Ohio


AN ARMY OF THE FAITHFUL
I attended the first American Family Forum Conference, in June 1980, at the Shoreham-Americana Hotel in Washington, where hundreds of organizations, religious and political, banded together, determined to fight moral rot wherever we found it.
Together, we gave Ronald Reagan two landslides and George Bush one.
When Bush repudiated the Reagan legacy, many of our group dropped out of action, but nevertheless voted for Bush in 1992.
The country-club Republicans were the ones who deserted him for Ross Perot.
Some even backed Clinton.
G.O.P. leaders have never bothered to find out who makes up the religious right.
They'd have permanent heartburn if they knew, for example, how many Protestant Republicans here in Pennsylvania joined with Roman Catholic Democrats to elect our pro-life Governor, Robert Casey.


Game, Set and Perspective
APART from sharing the limitations of the rectangle -- as in court and canvas -- and John McEnroe's recent lob into art dealing at an Upper East Side gallery, the connection between art and tennis is not readily at hand.
But that connection is exactly what's being served on a spit of East River landfill in Long Island City, Queens, just north of Newtown Creek.
There, on the grounds of Tennisport, where those who run Citibank and HBO and Sotheby's -- and where everyone from Ivan Lendl to Pam Shriver to McEnroe -- go to volley, members of the art world celebrated the opening last Sunday of a group show in a 100-year-old building that used to house a bank and an Italian restaurant.


New Tax Policy: Losing Investors Must Pay More
Let's hope stock prices never go down.
If they do, Dan Rostenkowski and Bill Clinton have decided that the losers should pay more taxes.
A provision buried in the tax act approved by the Ways and Means Committee may make it impossible for investors unlucky enough to have capital losses ever to take tax deductions for those losses.


NEWS SUMMARY
International 3-13  SERBS DEFIANT AS THEY VOTE


Santa Maria Gives Women Rare Match-Racing Opportunity
Women who want to compete in match-race sailing have two choices: They can make themselves known in fleet regattas, in hopes of being invited to sail on the international match-racing circuit, or they can use the Santa Maria Cup as a stepping stone.
The all-woman event, which started in Baltimore two years ago as part of Columbus anniversary celebrations, is gaining in momentum and prestige.
This year's regatta will be Thursday through Sunday, off Baltimore's inner harbor.
Of the 10 skippers competing, two are ranked among the world's top 100 match-race sailors: Dawn Riley of Detroit, Santa Maria's defending champion, is No. 29, and Mary Brigden Snow of San Diego is No. 76.


Lisa A. Settle, N. T. Callaway Jr.
September wedding plans have been announced for Lisa Anne Settle and Norman Tooker Callaway Jr., the son of Mr.
Callaway Sr. of Princeton, N.J., and Elisabeth Ann Callaway of Cranbury, N.J., by her parents, Mr. and Mrs.
William S. Settle of Palm Beach, Fla.
Miss Settle, 26, is a candidate for an M.B.A. at Rutgers University.
She graduated from the University of Virginia.
Her father is of counsel to the law firm of Simpson Thacher &amp; Bartlett in New York and is chairman of the board of Hampden-Sydney College in Hampden-Sydney, Va.


A TIME FOR REVEALING
Beauty takes two directions this summer -- the bare, almost overexposed face and the one that's softly stylized.
Both are artfully natural, or as one makeup artist put it, "real enhancing," cleaned up and gently polished with makeup.
The face above is a delicate cameo of 1920's style.
The brow has lost its exaggerated thinness; cheeks are softly flushed; lips are strong but sweetened with gloss; hair is sculpted into a marcel wave.
For women of color, the thin knots and spaghetti braids, right, are a throwback to childhood, when everything felt natural and free.
The biggest change in makeup is texture, not color.
The new blushes and tinted moisturizers are so sheer, and applied so subtly, they look like color from within.
New blushes from Estee Lauder are slightly iridescent.
Tinted moisturizers with a strong pigment, like Yves Saint Laurent and M.A.C.'s, have just enough red to warm the skin.
Lipsticks are more like a glossy stain.
And eyes look naked but they're not.
The lid is rubbed with one of the newer shades of pale, like Chanel's vanilla, a pastel wash or a fleshy brown.


Lovely Shreds!
Deconstructionist designers are the pit bulls of avant-garde fashion.
Their clothes, with seams and darts torn open to reveal new textural effects, are tearing old-time glamour and status-dressing to shreds.
The only decorations are loose dressmaker tapes that wrap around sleeves, pick up skirts and mark high waist lines.
The deconstructionist movement was born in Paris in 1982, when the Japanese designer Rei Kawakubo proclaimed the New York street people her ideal vision of modern fashion.
In 1988, the Belgian designer Martin Margiela single-handedly crystallized the movement into an acceptable, fresh, bohemian style often worn with Converse sneakers.
His inside-out designs pressed on the raw nerve of fashion change -- a wake-up call from the glossy, 40-year-old, overly precious, riched-up, dolled-up look.


Mideast Peace, Slipping Away
Nineteen months after they began so promisingly in Madrid, the Mideast peace talks risk turning into an empty ritual.
Dutifully showing up to exchange position papers and hold press conferences is not enough.
What's needed most at this point is a greater sense of urgency on the part of the various Middle Eastern participants.
The United States, as co-convener and host, also needs to assume a more forceful role.


A Wondrous Wee Car
IF it sometimes seems that America's automotive ardor has cooled, all you need to do is look at the attendance figures for New York's International Automobile Show.
T'ain't so; the love affair continues.
As usual, the recent show at the Javits Convention Center in Manhattan set a record, again assuring its place as the event with the country's largest gaggle of cars -- and the event that is the nation's most powerful magnet for those interested in tires that need kicking.


Elise Dadourian and Steven Kline
Elise A. Dadourian, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Alexander A. Dadourian of Plandome, L.I., was married there last evening to Steven Carlton Kline, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Stanley Kline of Vicksburg, Miss.
Rabbi Hava Pell performed the ceremony at the home of the bride's parents.
The Rev.
Carnig Hallajian, an Armenian Apostolic priest, took part in the ceremony.
Mrs.
Kline, 27, graduated from the University of Hartford.
She is a project manager at the Dadourian Group International, an exporter of hospital supplies in New York.
Her father is president of the company.


Laura Ballard, Jeffrey Brand
Laura Elizabeth Ballard, the daughter of Robert Ballard and Eva Ballard, both of Houston, was married yesterday to Jeffrey Charles Brand, a son Donald Brand of Minneapolis and Gail Brand of North Haven, Conn.
The Rev.
Kate Latimer, a United Church of Christ minister, performed the ceremony at the Marquand Chapel at the Yale Divinity School in New Haven.


Let Us Journey Into the Mind of Managed Care; Wasteful Middle Man
To the Editor:
Re "The Changing Definition of Health Insurers" (Business Day, May 10), on the giant insurance companies that will control health-care delivery under Clinton health reform: Do we want huge insurance companies to determine the medical care Americans receive?


Fear of Floating
ON KISSING, TICKLING, AND BEING BORED Psychoanalytic Essays on the Unexamined Life.
By Adam Phillips.  138 pp.
Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press. $19.95.


Serbs Are Voting on Peace Plan; Signs of Rejection Are Apparent
Serbs across this devastated republic voted defiantly today in a referendum on an international peace plan, with strong indications that the two days of balloting would produce a landslide repudiation of Western pressure to end the war that has given them control of two-thirds of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Opposition to the peace plan was virtually unanimous among Serbian voters who spoke with reporters at the Serbian nationalist headquarters in this Alpine town 15 miles southeast of Sarajevo, the Bosnian capital.
When about 25 people lining up to vote in an abandoned furniture salesroom were asked as a group if they were for or against the peace plan, there were thumbs-down gestures and shouts of "Protiv! Protiv!" -- meaning against.


Results Plus
TENNIS Graf and Sabatini in Final Defending champion Steffi Graf and Gabriela Sabatini both went to three sets yesterday to win semifinal matches at the German Open in Berlin.
The top-seeded Graf survived a seesaw battle with Mary Joe Fernandez, coming from behind to win, 4-6, 6-4, 6-3.
Sabatini, seeded second, beat Conchita Martinez, 6-3, 4-6, 7-5, avenging a loss to the Spaniard last week in the final of the Italian Open.
Graf, who had never lost a set to Fernandez in nine meetings, trailed by 4-2 in the second set and by 3-0 in the third before elevating her game for the victory.
The third-seeded Fernandez was on the verge of beating Graf for the first time after taking the 3-0 lead in the decisive set.
But the German suddenly gained control of her erratic forehand and rediscovered her missing serve.
She won the next six games to clinch the match. (AP)


3 Men and a TV Contract: Viewer Discretion Advised
Who would have thought that a delicious battle would be waged by rival networks (NBC and ABC vs. CBS) for the future TV rights to major league baseball after four years of faltering ratings and huge losses by CBS?
Baseball's three-man TV committee cherishes its planned elopement to ABC and NBC, which would replace annual network payments with revenue-sharing.
All downside risk (and upside potential) sits with baseball.
The plan features a nutty scheme to regionalize the League Championship Series so a city designated a National League market would see broadcasts of only smidgens of the American League series.


Dose of Reality On Female Condoms
To the Editor:
For the past 25 years, I have been involved in contraception services for women in the United States and in other countries.
I have written about contraception, and I have argued with male contraceptive developers over the appropriateness of some of their ideas.


SUNDAY VIEW: Visions of Heaven -- and of Hell; Kiss of the Spider Woman -- A Breathtaking Hero, And a Musical Aching To Remake the World
"Kiss of the Spider Woman," the last musical of the season, is far and away the most thrilling, and not just because it allows a largely unknown Canadian actor, Brent Carver, to make an electrifying Broadway debut.
Playing a homosexual window dresser who holds the brutalities of prison life at bay by the sheer force of his imagination, Mr.
Carver gives a performance of such uncompromising truth that he qualifies, instantly and henceforth, as a star.
If I were a betting man, I'd willingly put my paltry savings on him to come up a winner at Tony time.
But that's just part of it.


Curtain Up on the New and the Nostalgic; Premiere Ventures
It won't be all musicals, revivals and Shakespeare this summer.
From California to Massachusetts, the theme is world premieres.
Herewith, a sampling.
A Contemporary Theater in Seattle will stage Jon Klein's "Red and the Black," adapted from the Stendhal novel runs through May 23.
Eric Overmyer's "Alki, a Version of Ibsen's Peer Gynt," begins Aug. 12.
The La Jolla Playhouse in California (where Broadway's current surprise hit, the Who's "Tommy," began last summer) will open James Lapine's dark comedy, "Luck, Pluck &amp; Virtue," on July 27.
The Mark Taper Forum will present Anna Deavere Smith's "Twilight: Los Angeles, 1992" on May 23.
As in her earlier "Fires in the Mirror," about unrest in Crown Heights, Brooklyn, Ms.
Smith will offer her new work a collection of voices, this time from interviews about the Los Angeles riots.
In Chicago, Keith Reddin's "Black Snow," drawn from Mikhail Bulgakov's comic novel, explores backbiting in the publishing world.
Performances begin June 5 at the Goodman Theater.
Peter Feibleman's play "Cakewalk," about his long friendship with the outspoken writer Lilliam Hellman, opens on May 28 at the American Repertory Theater in Cambridge, Mass.
The Gloucester Stage Company, also in Massachusetts, will stage Israel Horovitz's "Fighting Over Beverly," a comedy about a jilted lover, from Aug. 25-Sept. 26.
In New York, the Manhattan Theater Club will present "A Perfect Ganesh" by Terrence McNally.
The play, about two American women on a trip to India, begins performaces on June. 4.
The following list, which includes events through mid-September, is selective.
Performances rarely occur every day of the week, and programs are subject to change.
Alabama
MONTGOMERY Alabama Shakespeare Festival (800-841-4273).
In repertory, through July 11: "Heartbreak House"; "A Midsummer Night's Dream"; "Blithe Spirit"; "Henry IV, Part 1"; "Henry IV, Part 2"; "Dumas."
Alaska
JUNEAU Perseverance Theater, at the Voices Stage (907-586-3686).
Mon.-Sept. 23: "The Lady Lou Revue."
Arizona
FLAGSTAFF Flagstaff Festival of the Arts, Northern Arizona University, Creative Arts Theater (800-266-7740).
In repertory, July 7-Aug. 8: "Sleuth"; "Pump Boys and Dinettes"; "Nunsense."
PHOENIX Summerfest, at Symphony Hall and the Herberger Theater Center (602-678-2222).
June 15-20: "Jesus Christ Superstar." June 22-July 18: "Nunsense II." July 27-Aug. 31: "Heartbeats."
TUCSON Arizona Repertory Theater, at the University of Arizona (602-621-1162).
In repertory, June 9-July 11: "Tintypes"; "Mourning Becomes Electra."
Arkansas
LITTLE ROCK Arkansas Repertory Theater (501-378-0405). June 3-20: "Blues in the Night."
California
CARMEL Carmel Shakespeare Festival, at the open-air Forest Theater (408-649-0340).
In repertory, Sept. 4-Oct. 10: "Hamlet"; "Richard III."
COSTA MESA Orange County Performing Arts Center (714-556-2787).
June 22-27: "Aspects of Love." July 13-14: "Tommy Tune Tonight!" July 20-25: "My Fair Lady."
LA JOLLA La Jolla Playhouse (619-550-1010).
Today-June 13: "Children of Paradise: Shooting a Dream," by Theater de la Jeune Lune.
In repertory, June 22-Aug. 15: "Arms and the Man"; July 13-Aug. 22: "The Hairy Ape"; July 27-Aug. 29: "Luck, Pluck and Virtue."
LOS ANGELES Ahmanson at the Doolittle Theater (213-365-3500).
Through June 27: "Jake's Women," with Alan Alda.
July 15-Sept. 26: "Five Guys Named Moe."
Los Angeles Festival, various locations in the city (213-240-7600).
Aug. 20-Oct. 3: More than 200 musicians, drummers, dancers, puppeteers and performance troupes, focusing on cultures of the Middle East and Africa, including the director Peter Sellars's adaptation of "The Persians."
Mark Taper Forum, at the Music Center of Los Angeles County (213-972-0700).
May 23-July 18: "Twilight: Los Angeles, 1992 (On the Road: A Search for American Character)," a world premiere by Anna Deavere Smith.
July 25-Sept. 19: "Lips Together, Teeth Apart."
MISSION VIEJO Summer Stock '93, McKinney and Cabaret Theaters at Saddleback College (714-582-4656).
June 25-Aug. 15: "Nunsense." July 9-25: "Oklahoma!" Aug. 6-22: "Sweeney Todd."
OJAI Ojai Shakespeare Festival, Libbey Park Festivals Bowl (805-646-9455).
July 31-Aug 15: "The Taming of the Shrew." Aug. 6-8, 12-15: "Romeo and Juliet."
ORINDA California Shakespeare Festival, Bruns Memorial Amphitheater (510-548-9666).
June 18-Aug. 26: "The Winter's Tale." July 9-Aug. 28: "King John."
PASADENA Pasadena Playhouse (800-883-7529). July 9-Aug. 22: "A Tuna Christmas."
SACRAMENTO Music Circus (916-557-1999).
July 5-11: "My Fair Lady." July 12-18: "South Pacific." July 19-25: "The Best Little Whorehouse in Texas." July 26-Aug. 1: "Annie." Aug. 2-8: "Seven Brides for Seven Brothers." Aug. 9-15: "Grease." Aug. 16-22: "Man of La Mancha."
SAN DIEGO Blackfriars Theater (619-234-9583).
Through May 23: "The Unseen Hand." July 7-18: The Blackfriars will present "Abundance" in locations around the city.
Old Globe and Lowell Davies Theaters and Carter Center Stage (619-239-2255).
Through June 20: "Morning's at Seven"; "Out of Purgatory." June 25-Aug. 8: "Ballad of the Blacksmith." June 30-Aug. 15: "Burning Hope." July 3-Aug. 29: "King Lear," starring Hal Holbrook.
SAN FRANCISCO Golden Gate and Curran Theaters (415-474-3800).
Through May 23: "Evita." June 9-July 4: "Tommy Tune Tonight!" July 8-Aug. 29: "Joseph and the Amazing Technicolor Dreamcoat."
SAN JOSE Free Shakespeare in the Park, between First and Second Sts., St.
John and St.
James (415-666-2222).
Aug. 21-22, 28-29: "Twelfth Night."
SANTA CLARA San Jose Repertory Theater, at the Mayer Theater on the campus of Santa Clara University (408-291-2255).
July 8-Aug. 15: "Banjo Dancing."
SANTA CRUZ Shakespeare Santa Cruz, Performing Arts Complex at the University of California at Santa Cruz (408-459-4168).
In repertory, July 15-Sept. 5: "The Comedy of Errors"; "All's Well That Ends Well"; "Damn Yankees"; "Doctor Faustus."
SANTA MARIA P.C.P.A.
Theaterfest, at Marian Theater (805-922-8313).
July 1-24: "Oklahoma!" July 29-Aug. 14: "Ain't Misbehavin'." Aug. 5-Sept. 5: "Love Letters." Aug. 19-Sept. 4: "West Side Story."
Colorado
BOULDER Boulder Repertory Company (303-449-7258). Aug. 13-29: "The Master Builder."
Colorado Shakespeare Festival, University of Colorado (303-492-0554).
In repertory, June 25-Aug. 15: "The Merry Wives of Windsor"; "King Lear"; "The Tempest"; "Pericles."
COLORADO SPRINGS Theaterworks Shakespeare Festival, University of Colorado at Colorado Springs (719-593-3232).
July 30-Aug. 21: "Much Ado About Nothing."
CREEDE Creede Repertory Theater (719-658-2540).
In repertory, June 11-Sept. 7: "The Matchmaker"; "Nunsense" (opens June 25); "The Secret Garden" (opens July 10); "Abundance" (opens July 24); "Wiley and the Hairy Man" (opens Aug. 7); "Greater Tuna" (opens Aug. 13).
CRIPPLE CREEK Imperial Hotel (719-689-7777). May 29-Sept. 6: "The Star Crossing."
GREELEY Little Theater of the Rockies, University of Northern Colorado (303-351-2200).
June 24-26: "Bus Stop." July 1-3: "Enter Laughing." July 8-10: "Tintypes." July 15-17: "Sleuth." July 29-31: "Gypsy."
Connecticut
BRIDGEPORT Downtown Cabaret Theater (203-576-1636).
Through Aug. 7: "Nunsense." Aug. 14-Nov.6: "Buddy: The Buddy Holly Story."
CHESTER Goodspeed at Chester (203-873-8668). June 3-27: "Das Barbecu."
EAST HADDAM Goodspeed Opera House (203-873-8668).
Through July 2: "On the Town." July 7-Oct. 1: "Heartbeats."
HARTFORD Hartford Stage (203-527-5151).
Thur.-June 20: "Herringbone," starring Joel Grey.
IVORYTON The River Rep at the Ivoryton Playhouse (203-767-8348, after May 23).
June 22-July 3: "Steel Magnolias." July 6-17: "Lend Me a Tenor." July 21-Aug. 7: "Pajama Game." Aug. 10-21: "Harvey." Aug. 24-Sept. 5: "Dial 'M' for Murder."
NEW CANAAN New Canaan Summer Theater, at the New Canaan High School (203-426-3025).
Aug. 6-7, 13-14: "The Wizard of Oz."
NEW FAIRFIELD Gateway's Candlewood Playhouse (203-746-4441).
Tues.-June 5: "A Chorus Line." June 8-26: "Fiddler on the Roof." June 29-July 17: "Nunsense II." July 20-31: "Ain't Misbehavin'." Aug. 3-28: "Phantom." Aug. 31-Sept. 18: "City of Angels."
NEW HAVEN Long Wharf Theater (203-787-4282).
Tues.-June 27: "Absurd Person Singular." Tues.-May 23: "Stuff as Dreams Are Made Of." June 1-6: "The Lunatic, the Lover and the Poet," with Brian Bedford.
June 8-13: "The Sounds of the Baskerville."
SIMSBURY Centennial Theater Festival (203-651-7295).
June 16-26: "See How They Run." June 30-July 10: "Smoke and Mirrors." July 16-17: "The Flying Karamazov Brothers." July 21-31: "Bus Stop."
STORRS Nutmeg Summer Theater, University of Connecticut (203-486-3969).
June 11-26: "A Chorus Line." July 2-17: "Lend Me a Tenor." July 22-31: "The Belle of Amherst," with Kim Hunter.
WESTPORT Westport County Playhouse (203-227-4177).
June 21-July 3: "Noises Off." July 5-17: "The Decorator." July 19-31: "Dancing at Lughnasa." Aug. 2-14: "Phantom." Aug. 30-Sept. 11: "Nunsense II," with Pat Carroll.
WCT Free Summer Theater, Town Hall Theater (203-226-1983). July 16-25: "The Tempest."
District of Columbia
Arena Stage, Fichandler and Kreeger Theaters (202-488-3300).
Through June 13: "The Brothers Karamazov"; "The Skin of Our Teeth."
Folger Shakespeare Library, Elizabethan Theater (202-544-7077).
June 10-12: "Joyicity." In repertory, June 15-July 3: "Antony and Cleopatra"; "Romeo and Juliet"; "A Midsummer Night's Dream."
Ford's Theater (202-347-4833). Open-ended run: "Five Guys Named Moe."
Interact Theater Company, at the Church Street Theater (703-848-2632).
Through June 6: "Shirley Valentine." July 30-Aug. 22: "The Pirates of Penzance."
Kennedy Center (202-467-4600).
Through May 23: "Oleanna." Through May 30: "Guys and Dolls," starring Lorna Luft.
June 1-27: "The World Goes 'Round." June 8-July 17: "The Real Live Brady Bunch." June 29-Aug. 1: "The Twilight of the Golds." June 30-Oct. 2: "The Phantom of the Opera." Aug. 21-Oct. 24: "The Kentucky Cycle."
The National Theater (800-447-7400).
Through May 29: "My Fair Lady," with Richard Chamberlain.
Open Theater, at the American University Experimental Theater (202-234-9816).
Through June 6: "Woyzeck."
Shakespeare Theater's Shakespeare Free for All, Carter Barron Amphitheater (202-393-2700, before May 29; 202-426-0486 thereafter).
June 5-20: "Much Ado About Nothing."
Studio Theater (202-332-3300).
Through June 13: "Spunk." Second Stage, June 17-July 25: "Hot Fudge."
Warner Theater (202-628-1818).
June 1-6: "Love Letters," starring Robert Wagner and Stephanie Powers.
July 13-Aug. 1: "Evita."
Washington Theater Festival, Source Theater Company (202-462-1073).
Through June 13: "Red Scare on Sunset." July 7-Aug. 8: More than 50 new plays, some only 10 minutes long, in locations throughout the city.
Woolly Mammoth Theater (202-393-3939).
June 14-July 18: "Strindberg in Hollywood." Aug. 16-Sept. 26: "Kvetch."
Florida
FORT LAUDERDALE Fort Lauderdale Players, Parker Playhouse (305-761-5374).
Aug. 7-15: "Evita."
JUPITER Jupiter Theater (407-746-5566).
Tues.-June 26: "City of Angels." June 29-Aug. 14: "Annie." Aug. 17-Sept. 25: "Sugar Babies."
Georgia
ATLANTA Georgia Shakespeare Festival, at Oglethorpe University (404-264-0020).
In repertory, June 11-Aug. 15: "Cyrano de Bergerac"; "The Taming of the Shrew" (opens June 25); "Henry V" (opens July 9).
Theater of the Stars, at Fox Theater (404-252-8960).
June 1-6: "Annie Get Your Gun," starring Cathy Rigby.
June 22-27: "Grease." July 6-11: "Evita." July 20-25: "Fiddler on the Roof." Aug. 3-8: "42d Street." Aug. 17-22: "Phantom."
Idaho
BOISE Idaho Shakespeare Festival (208-336-9221).
June 3-26: "Quilters." In repertory, July 1-Sept. 18: "A Midsummer Night's Dream"; "Tartuffe" (opens July 15); "The Comedy of Errors" (opens Aug. 4).
COEUR d'ALENE Coeur d'Alene Summer Theater, at North Idaho College (208-667-0254).
July 15-24: "The Music Man." July 29-Aug. 7: "A Chorus Line." Aug. 12-15: "Side by Side by Sondheim." Aug. 19-28: "Camelot."
MOSCOW Idaho Repertory Theater, University of Idaho (800-345-7402).
In repertory, June 29-July 31: "The Voice of the Prairie"; "Lend Me a Tenor"; "Bedroom Farce" (opens July 6); "I Hate Hamlet" (opens July 8).
Illinois
BLOOMINGTON Illinois Shakespeare Festival, Ewing Manor (309-438-2535, after June 1).
In repertory, June 25-Aug. 7: "Richard II"; "Pericles"; "A Midsummer Night's Dream."
CHICAGO Court Theater, at the University of Chicago (312-753-4472).
Through May 23: "Pantomime."
Goodman Theater (312-443-3800).
Through June 5: "Black Snow." June 18-Aug. 8: "Cry, the Beloved Country."
Steppenwolf Theater (312-335-1650).
Today- June 27: "Ghost in the Machine." July 18-Aug. 29: "Death and the Maiden."
Indiana
INDIANAPOLIS Starlight Musicals, at Hilton University, Brown Theater (317-687-6600).
June 15-20: "The Best Little Whorehouse in Texas." June 22-27: "Grease." July 6-11: "Nunsense II." July 13-18: "Oliver!" July 20-25: "H.M.S. Pinafore."
MUNCIE Ball State Summer Theater Festival (317-285-8745).
June 15-19: "Summer Stock Murder." June 30-July 3: "Angel Street." July 7-10: "The Foreigner." July 20-25: "Guys and Dolls."
NASHVILLE Brown County Playhouse (812-988-2123).
June 10-July 4: "Little Mary Sunshine." July 8-Aug. 1: "Picnic." Aug. 5-28: "Out of Order."
TERRE HAUTE Summer Stage, New Theater, Indiana State University (812-237-3331).
In repertory, June 18-July 24: "Sugar"; "Loot" (opens June 23); "The Heidi Chronicles" (opens June 29); "Mary and Joe" (opens July 6).
WEST LAFAYETTE Purdue Professional Summer Theater, Purdue University Experimental Theater (317-494-3933).
June 17-26: "Crimes of the Heart." July 1-10: "The Heidi Chronicles." July 15-24: "The Swan."
Iowa
AMANA Old Creamery Theater, the Amana Colonies Visitors Center (800-352-6262).
Through May 30: "Simon's Suites." June 3-July 25: "The Farndale Comedy Murders." July 29-Sept 19: "The Mystery of Irma Vep." Aug. 25-Sept. 19: "Cowchip Jamboree: The Final Roundup."
CEDAR FALLS Theater U.N.I.
Summer Rep '93, at the University of Northern Iowa (319-273-6387).
June 24-July 3: "Deathtrap." July 8-17: "The Heidi Chronicles."
IOWA CITY Iowa Summer Rep, University Theater (319-335-1160).
In repertory, June 24-July 24: "Final Passages"; "The Kentucky Cycle I" (opens July 1); "The Kentucky Cycle II" (opens July 7); "Heaven on Earth" (opens July 11).
Kentucky
LOUISVILLE Kentucky Shakespeare Festival in Central Park (502-634-8237).
June 17-Aug. 7: "Richard II." July 8-Aug. 8: "A Midsummer Night's Dream." July 23-Aug. 8: "Les Plaideurs."
Maine
BERWICK Hackmatack Playhouse (207-698-1807).
June 22-July 4: "City of Angels." July 6-17: "January Thaw." July 20-Aug. 1: "Meet Me in St. Louis." Aug. 3-14: "Detective Story." Aug. 17-Sept. 5: "Annie Get Your Gun."
BRUNSWICK Maine State Music Theater, Pickard Theater on the Bowdoin College Campus (207-725-8769).
June 15-26: "Into the Woods." June 29-July 10: "West Side Story." July 13-31: "The Best Little Whorehouse in Texas." Aug. 3-14: "The Secret Garden." Aug. 17-28: "Cabaret."
CAMDEN Camden Civic Theater, at the Camden Opera House (207-236-7595).
June 4-5, 11-12: "The Madwoman of Chaillot." July 9-10, Aug. 19-20, 26-28: "The Fantasticks." Aug. 5-7, 12-14: "Oklahoma!"
MONMOUTH Theater at Monmouth, Cumston Hall (207-933-9999).
In repertory, June 11-Aug. 28: "Old Times"; "Twelfth Night" (opens July 2); "Tartuffe" (opens July 9); "She Stoops to Conquer" (opens July 21); "The Seagull" (opens Aug. 1).
OGUNQUIT Ogunquit Playhouse (207-646-2402, before June 14; 207-646-5511 thereafter).
June 28-July 10: "Phantom." July 12-24: "Noises Off." July 26-Aug. 7: "Nunsense II," starring Pat Carroll.
Aug. 9-21: "Dancing at Lughnasa," with the American Broadway cast.
Aug. 21-Sept. 4: "Oil City Symphony."
SOMESVILLE Acadia Repertory Theater (207-942-0831, before June 1; 207-244-7260 thereafter).
July 2-11 and Sept. 22-Oct. 3: "Sleuth." July 13-25 and Sept. 8-19: "The Importance of Being Earnest." July 27-Aug. 8 and Sept. 1-5: "The Imaginary Invalid." Aug. 10-29: "Go Back for Murder."
Maryland
BALTIMORE Center Stage, at the Pearlstone Theater (410-332-0033).
Through June 6: "Arms and the Man."
The Cockpit, Court Summer Theater at Essex Community College (301-780-6369).
June 18-27: "I Remember Mama"; "Social Security." July 9-18: "Heidi"; "Twelfth Night." July 23-Aug. 1: "Chicago"; "Carnival."
Maryland Arts Festival, at Towson State University (410-830-2787).
June 25-July 31: "Chess"; "Love Letters."
OLNEY Olney Theater (301-924-3400).
Through May 23: "Voice of the Prairie." June 1-27: "The Tavern." July 6-Aug. 1: "Lend Me a Tenor." Aug. 10-Sept 5: "Shadowlands."
WESTMINSTER Theater on the Hill, Western Maryland College (410-857-2592).
In repertory, June 25-Aug. 14: "Leader of the Pack"; "Barefoot in the Park" (opens July 16); "Big River" (opens July 29).
Massachusetts
AMHERST Shakespeare Under the Stars Summer Festival, Lord Jeffery Inn (413-256-4120).
June 22-July 10: "As You Like It." July 13-17: "Timon, Titus and Lear." July 20-24: "Chekhov, Chekhov, Chekhov." July 29-Aug. 14: "Romeo and Juliet."
BEVERLY North Shore Music Theater (508-922-8500).
June 3-19: "Oklahoma!" June 24-July 10: "City of Angels." Aug. 5-21: "Grand Hotel," starring Cyd Charisse.
Sept. 2-18: "Brigadoon."
BOSTON Huntington Theater Company (617-266-0800). Through June 20: "Arms and the Man."
Publick Theater (617-782-5425).
June 2-27: "The Pirates of Penzance." July 7-Aug. 1: "A Midsummer Night's Dream." Aug. 11-Sept. 5: "A Funny Thing Happened on the Way to the Forum."
CAMBRIDGE American Repertory Theater (617-547-8300).
In repertory, May 28-July 17: "Cakewalk"; "Orphee." A.R.T.
New Stages series at the Hasty Pudding Theater, through Wed.: "Those the River Keeps" by David Rabe.
Fri.-May 30: "The Caretaker."
CHATHAM Monomoy Theater (508-945-1589).
June 21-July 3: "The King and I." July 6-10: "Of Mice and Men." July 13-17: "Blithe Spirit." July 20-24: "Ten Little Indians." Aug. 3-7: "The Matchmaker." Aug. 10-14: "Lion in Winter." Aug. 17-21: "A Lesson From Aloes." Aug. 24-28: "A Midsummer Night's Dream."
CHESTER Miniature Theater of Chester at Town Hall (413-667-8818).
July 14-25: "Boss Grady's Boys." July 28-Aug.1: "An Audience With Fanny Kemble." Aug. 4-15: "Courage." Aug. 18-29: "Moving." Sept. 1-5: "Pinstripe Suite."
DEERFIELD Theater 81, White Church Community Center (413-774-7476).
July 31-Aug 15: "Arms and the Man."
DENNIS Cape Playhouse (508-385-3911).
June 28-July 3: "The Decorator." July 5-July 10: "Noises Off." July 12-24: "Phantom." July 26-31: "Oil City Symphony." Aug. 2-7: "Dancing at Lughnasa." Aug. 9-21: "Nunsense II," starring Pat Carroll.
Aug. 23-28: "Park You Car in Harvard Yard." Aug. 30-Sept. 11: "Breaking Legs."
FALMOUTH College Light Opera Company at Highfield Theater (216-774-8485, before June 14; 508-548-0668 thereafter).
June 29-July 3: "Trial by Jury" and "The Pirates of Penzance." July 6-10: "Carousel." July 13-17: "The Merry Widow." July 20-24: "Mame." July 27-31: "The Yeoman of the Guard." Aug. 3-7: "The Music Man." Aug. 10-14: "The Student Prince." Aug. 17-21: "Oliver!" Aug. 24-28: "Cabaret."
GLOUCESTER Gloucester Stage Company (508-281-4099).
June 2-27: "A View From the Bridge." June 30-July 25: "Two." July 28-Aug. 22: "The Last Yankee." Aug. 25-Sept. 26: "Fighting Over Beverley," a world premiere by Israel Horovitz.
LENOX Music-Theater Group (413-298-5504, from June 1).
July 3-10: "Diary of an African American," composed, written and performed by Hannibal Peterson and Company.
Shakespeare and Company at the Mount (413-637-3353).
Mainstage Theater: July 16-28: "A Midsummer Night's Dream." Sept. 1-5: "The Spirit Warrior's Dream." Stables Theater: In repertory, May 28-Aug. 29: "Julius Caesar"; "Duet for One"; "Virginia" (opens June 29); "Troilus and Cressida" (opens July 1); "Twelfth Night" (opens July 22).
Aug. 4-6: "Unparallel Lives: A DibbleDance." Aug. 11-27: "On the Road." Aug. 31-Sept. 5: Studio Festival of Plays.
Wharton Theater: In repertory, May 29-Oct 17: "Berkeley Squares"; "Mothers and Daughters," adapted from Edith Wharton short stories (opens July 3); "A Memory of Splendor" (opens July 3); "The Landscape Painter" (opens July 15); "The Custom of the Country" (opens Sept. 17).
Oxford Court Theater: Aug. 19-Sept 5: "The Henry VI Chronicles."
MARTHA'S VINEYARD Vineyard Playhouse (508-693-6450).
June 21-July 10: "The Color of Murder." July 12-17, Aug. 9-14: "Love Letters." July 21-Aug. 7: "Dancing at Lughnasa." Aug. 18-Sept 4.: "Taking Steps." Outdoor performance, July 19-Aug. 8: "Scapino."
NANTUCKET Actors Theater of Nantucket at the Methodist Church (508-228-6325).
May 28-30: "And Now, Mark Twain!" June 22-July 31: "Barefoot in the Park." July 4-26 and Aug. 1-7: "Comedy Night With Kevin Flynn." July 20-Aug. 14: "Bye Bye Birdie." Aug. 10-Sept. 5: "Confusions." Sept. 9-25: "Special Occasions."
Island Stage, the Performance Center in the Methodist Church (508-228-6620).
Sundays, July 11-Sept. 5: "Side by Side by Sondheim." Mondays, July 5-Sept. 6: "Love Letters."
NORTH FALMOUTH Falmouth Playhouse (508-563-5922).
June 23-27: "Nunsense." June 30-July 11: "Nunsense II." July 14-25: "Shirley Valentine." July 28-Aug. 8: "City of Angels." Aug. 11-22: "Fiddler on the Roof." Aug. 25-Sept. 5: "Carousel." Sept. 8-19: "42d Street."
ORLEANS Academy of the Performing Arts (508-255-1963).
June 17-26, July 5, 12, 26 and Aug. 9, 16, 30: "A Song of Ships." July 1-17: "Gigi." July 21-31: "The Nerd." Aug. 5-21: "Guys and Dolls." Aug. 25-Sept. 11: "The Fantasticks."
PITTSFIELD Berkshire Public Theater (413-445-4634).
In repertory, May 25-Sept. 5: "The Fantasticks"; "Spike Heels"; "You're Gonna Love Tomorrow: A Stephen Sondeim Evening."
PLYMOUTH Priscilla Beach Theater (508-224-4888).
Today-May 30: "The Pirates of Penzance." June 11-19: "Educating Rita." July 2-17: "Charlie Chaplin's Gazebo." July 23-Aug. 7: "Chlorine in the Cologne." Aug. 13-28: "Cat on a Hot Tin Roof." Sept. 2-5: "The Angel and the Eyes of Someone Else."
STOCKBRIDGE Berkshire Theater Festival (413-298-5576).
Mainstage, June 25-July 17: "Sweet and Hot: The Songs of Harold Arlen." July 20-31: "Camping With Henry and Tom." Aug. 3-14: "Breaking the Code." Aug. 17-Sept. 4: "Blithe Spirit." Unicorn Theater, July 2-17: "Mississippi Nude." July 27-Aug. 7: "Love and Anger." Aug. 24-Sept. 4: "Amphitryon."
WELLFLEET Wellfleet Harbor Actors Theater (508-349-6835).
Through May 23: "Heart of Jade." June 3-20: "The Baby Dance." June 30-July 25: "The Swan." July 5-Aug. 31: "Sex, Drugs, Rock-and-Roll." Aug. 4-Sept. 5: "Prelude to a Kiss."
WILLIAMSTOWN Williamstown Theater Festival (413-597-3400, after June 9).
Mainstage, June 23-July 4: "The Madwoman of Chaillot." July 7-18: "Nora," adapted by Ingmar Bergman from Ibsen's "Doll's House." July 21-Aug. 1: "Counselor-at-Law." Aug. 4-15: "An Inspector Calls." Aug. 18-29: "Fallen Angels." Other Stage, June 30-July 11: Therese Raquin." July 14-25: "If We Are Women," with Blythe Danner. July 28-Aug. 8: "The Waiting Room." Aug. 11-22: "Dirt." Free Theater: Aug. 12-21: "As You Like It."
Michigan
AUGUSTA Barn Theater (616-731-4121). June 29-July 11: "City of Angels."
COLDWATER Tibbits Summer Theater, at the Tibbits Opera House (517-278-6029).
June 23-26: "Hi-Hatok Hattie." June 30-July 10: "Fiddler on the Roof." July 14-24: "Blithe Spirit." July 28-Aug. 7: "I Do! I Do!" Aug. 11-21: "The Cemetery Club."
HOLLAND Hope Summer Repertory Theater, Dewitt Center Theater on the campus of Hope College (616-394-7890).
In repertory, June 11-Aug. 21: "Courage"; "Young Rube"; "The Importance of Being Earnest"; "Marvin's Room"; "I Hate Hamlet." June 11-July 3: "Peter Pan."
TRAVERSE CITY Michigan Ensemble Theater (616-922-1552).
June 14-July 10: "Ain't Misbehavin'." July 14-31: "Lend Me a Tenor." Aug. 4-Sept. 4: "Pump Boys and Dinettes."
Minnesota
ALEXANDRIA Theater L'Homme Dieu, affiliated with the University of Akron, Ohio (612-846-3150).
June 18-20: "Noises Off." June 23-July 4: "Baby." July 7-18: "A Midsummer Night's Dream." July 21-25: "Fences." July 28-Aug. 8: "Lend Me a Tenor."
MINNEAPOLIS Guthrie Theater (612-347-1188).
In repertory, July 3-Oct. 1: "Too Clever by Half"; July 6-Sept. 26: "Naga Mandala"; July 31-Sept. 26: "The Triumph of Love."
Minnesota Shakespeare Company (612-872-6914).
June 24-Aug. 1: "The Merry Wives of Windsor."
MOORHEAD Straw Hat Players, Moorhead State University (218-236-2271).
June 22-26: "Evita." June 30-July 11: "Brighton Beach Memoirs." July 7-24: "I Do! I Do!" July 14-18: "Quilters." July 21-31: "Broadway Bound." Aug. 4-8: "Fiddler on the Roof."
ST.
PAUL Ordway Music Theater (612-224-4222).
Through July 18: "The Phantom of the Opera." June 1-13: "Aspects of Love." Aug. 3-15: "Guys and Dolls," with Lorna Luft.
Aug. 17-Sept. 5: "Les Miserables."
Missouri
KANSAS CITY American Heartland Theater, Crown Center (816-842-9999).
July 8-Sept. 4: "Song of Singapore."
Unicorn Theater (816-531-7529). June 1-26: "The Heidi Chronicles."
ST.
LOUIS Stages St.
Louis, at the Kirkwood Civic Center (314-821-2407).
June 2-20: "42d Street." July 7-25: "Mame." Aug. 11-29: "La Cage aux Folles."
The Muny, at Forest Park (314-361-1900, ext. 335).
June 21-27: "The Sound of Music." July 5-11: "Annie Get Your Gun." July 12-18: "Grease." July 19-25: "Peter Pan." July 26-Aug. 1: "Fiddler on the Roof." Aug. 2-8: "Oliver!" Aug. 9-15: "Oklahoma!"
Montana
BIGFORK Bigfork Summer Playhouse (406-837-4886).
In repertory, May 28-Sept. 4: "Hello, Dolly!"; "City of Angels"; "Run for Your Wife"; "Paint Your Wagon"; "South Pacific."
BOZEMAN Montana Shakespeare in the Parks, presented by Montana State University (406-994-3901/5885).
Touring in parks throughout the state.
June 23-Sept. 5: "Henry V"; "The Comedy of Errors."
Nebraska
OMAHA Nebraska Shakespeare Festival, Elmwood Park (402-280-2391).
June 24-27, July 8, 10: "The Two Gentlemen of Verona." July 1-4, 9, 11: "The Merchant of Venice."
New Hampshire
HAMPTON Hampton Playhouse (603-926-3073).
June 12-27: "Don't Dress for Dinner." June 29-July 18: "Nunsense II." July 20-Aug. 1: "Guys and Dolls." Aug. 3-15: "Big River." Aug. 17-29: "Only Kidding."
HANOVER Dartmouth College Summer Repertory Theater (603-646-1213).
In repertory, July 14-29: "Noonday Demons"; "The Second Shepherd's Play." July 30-31, Aug. 6-7: Works in progress presented by New York Theater Workshop.
Aug. 11-22: "Red Noses."
LINCOLN North Country Center for the Arts, Papermill Theater (603-745-2141).
June 30-July 10: "Little Shop of Horrors." July 14-24: "Fiddler on the Roof." July 28-Aug. 7: "The Taming of the Shrew." Aug. 11-21: "Oliver!" Aug. 25-28: "Love Letters." Aug. 31-Sept. 5: "Nunsense."
MANCHESTER Stage One Productions 1993 Summer Series, at the Palace Theater (603-669-5511).
July 16-24: "Gypsy." July 30-Aug. 7: "Oliver!" Aug. 13-21: "Nunsense II." Aug. 26-28: "Broadway Revue."
MILFORD American Stage Festival (603-673-7515).
June 24-July 4: "Little Shop of Horrors." July 8-18: "Crimes of the Heart." July 22-Aug. 1: "Love Letters." Aug. 5-15: "The Country Girl." Aug. 19-29: "Lost in Yonkers."
NEW LONDON New London Barn Playhouse (603-526-4631/6710).
June 15-27: "Gigi." June 29-July 11: "42d Street." July 13-25: "Meet Me in St. Louis." July 27-Aug. 8: "A Chorus Line." Aug. 10-22: "Annie." Aug. 24-Sept. 5: "Seven Brides for Seven Brothers."
PETERBOROUGH Peterborough Players (603-924-7585).
June 30-July 11: "Ain't Misbehavin'." July 14-25: "You Can't Take It With You." July 28-Aug. 8: "Our Town." Aug. 11-22: "Blithe Spirit." Aug. 25-Sept. 5: "Waiting for Godot."
TAMWORTH Barnstormers Theater (603-323-8500).
July 5-10: "The Sunshine Boys." July 13-17: "Springtime for Henry." July 20-24: "Witness for the Prosecution." July 27-31: "The Late George Apley." Aug. 3-7: "Ghost Train." Aug. 10-14: "Blithe Spirit." Aug. 17-21: "Da." Aug. 24-28: "June Moon."
WHITEFIELD Weathervane Repertory Theater (603-837-9010).
In repertory, July 10-Sept. 4: "The Boyfriend"; "Nunsense II"; "Corpse!"; "Guys and Dolls"; "The Music Man"; "The Miser"; "She Loves Me"; "Love Letters."
New Jersey
BEACH HAVEN Surflight Theater (609-492-9477).
Wed.-May 30: "Joseph and the Amazing Technicolor Dreamcoat." June 2-13: "Sweeney Todd." June 15-27: "Sweet Charity." June 29-July 11: "The Secret Garden." July 13-25: "Shenandoah." July 27-Aug. 8: "The Phantom of the Opera." Aug. 10-22: "Promises, Promises." Aug. 24-Sept. 5: "The Sound of Music." Sept. 7-19: "Grand Hotel."
CAPE MAY Cape May Stage, at Congress Hall Hotel (609-522-7209).
June 18-29: "Poe Returns." July 6-31: "The Search for Signs of Intelligent Life in the Universe." Aug. 3-29: "I Ought to Be in Pictures."
EDISON Plays-in-the-Park, Roosevelt Park Amphitheater (908-548-2884).
June 23-July 3: "42d Street." July 14-24: "Nunsense." Aug. 4-14: "Man of La Mancha." Aug. 24-31: "California Suite."
LINCROFT Monmouth County Park System Summer Theater Series, the Barn in Thompson Park (908-842-4000).
June 17-July 3: "Kiss Me Kate." July 29-Aug. 14: "A Funny Thing Happened on the Way to the Forum."
MADISON New Jersey Shakespeare Festival, Drew University (201-408-5600).
June 9-26: "The Taming of the Shrew." June 30-July 17: "Arms and the Man." July 21-Aug. 7: "Othello." Aug. 11-28: "Ghosts."
MILLBURN Paper Mill Playhouse (201-376-4343).
Through Sat.: "My Fair Lady." June 2-July 17: "Phantom."
MONTCLAIR Summerfun Theater, at the Weiss Arts Center (201-256-0576).
June 22-July 3: "Oil City Symphony." July 6-10: "Cheaper by the Dozen." July 13-17: "The Butler Did It." July 20-24: "Dancing at Lughnasa." July 27-31: "Love Letters." Aug. 3-14: "Jerry's Girls."
NEW BRUNSWICK Crossroads Theater Company (908-249-5560).
Fri.-through May 25: "The Late Great Ladies of Blues and Jazz."
OAKLYN Ritz Theater (609-858-5230).
Through June 12: "Wait Until Dark." July 8-Aug. 1: "George M."
PEMBERTON Foundation Theater, at Burlington County College (609-894-2138).
June 16-27: "Pump Boys and Dinettes." July 7-18: "Educating Rita." July 21-Aug. 1: "I Hate Hamlet."
UPPER MONTCLAIR Theaterfest, at Montclair State College (201-893-5112).
June 23-July 4: "Lettice and Lovage." July 1-11: ". . . And the Rain Came to Mayfield." July 7-18: "The Trip to Bountiful," with Ellen Burstyn.
July 15-25: "Orphans." July 21-Aug. 1: "Ain't Misbehavin'."
WAYNE Wayne Center for the Performing Arts, at Hunziker Theater and Shea Center (201-595-2371).
June 10-13: "Act One." July 15-18: "The Royal Family." July 29-Aug. 1: "Unsung Cole (and Classics Too)."
New York
New York City
American Jewish Theater (212-489-6745). Through June 13: "Totie."
Brooklyn Academy of Music, Carey Playhouse (212-307-4100).
Thur.-Sat.: Ingmar Bergman directs "Madame de Sade" by the Royal Dramatic Theater of Sweden.
In Swedish, with English translation.
June 2-6: "Sheila's Day," a collaboration with the Houston Grand Opera and Crossroads Theater Company.
Ensemble Studio Theater (212-247-3405).
Annual Marathon of One-Act Plays, final two series in the program.
Series B, Wed.-May 30.
Series C, June 2-13.
Festa Italiana del Teatro, Love Creek Productions at Nat Horne Theater (212-769-7973).
Through June 6: Works by Italian playwrights, presented in four programs and translated into English.
The Field, at the Ohio Theater (212-691-6969).
June 25-27: "Ninety Plays in Nine Days: Act Two." .
Gershwin Theater (212-307-4100). June 17-Aug. 7: "Camelot," starring Robert Goulet.
Jean Cocteau Repertory, at the Bouwerie Lane Theater (212-677-0060).
In repertory, through Fri.: "The Cenci." Through June 6: "The Idiot." Aug. 20: "The First Lulu."
Jewish Repertory Theater, at Playhouse 91 (212-831-2000).
June 5-June 27: "Show Me Where the Good Times Are."
Kings County Shakespeare Company, Prospect Park Bandshell, Brooklyn (718-596-9685).
Aug. 19-29: "Othello."
La Mama E. T. C. (212-475-7710).
Annex Theater.
May 27-30: "Extrarradios." June 3-13: "The Empire of Half Truths." First Floor Theater.
Through May 23: "Angel From Montgomery." May 28-June 12: "Extended Forecast," with Estelle Parsons.
June 17-27: "The White Whore and the Bit Player." The Club.
June 3-12: "Haunted Taxi Ride."
Lehman Summerstage, at Lehman College, Bronx (212-960-6096).
July 8-11: "Latin Lives." July 15-25: "The Taming of the Shrew."
Lincoln Center Theater (212-239-6200).
Mitzi E. Newhouse.
"Playboy of the West Indies." Vivian Beaumont Theater.
Begins July 16: "In the Summer House."
Manhattan Theater Club, at City Center (212-581-1212).
Through May 23: "Putting It Together," with Julie Andrews.
Tues.-June 27: "Playland." June 4: "A Perfect Ganesh" with Zoe Caldwell and Frances Sternhagen.
Metropolitan Opera House, Lincoln Center (212-799-7900).
July 6-18: "Disney's Symphonic Fantasy," a stage spectacle featuring Disney characters, music and narrative. (Also, see Dance listings.)
New York Shakespeare Festival, Delacorte Theater in Central Park (212-861-7277).
July 1-25: "Measure for Measure," with Kevin Kline.
Aug. 5-29: "All's Well That Ends Well."
Joseph Papp Public Theater/Martinson Hall (212-598-7150). Through June 6: "Marisol."
Playhouse 91 (212-307-4100). Through May 27: "Sharon."
Playwrights Horizons (212-279-4200).
In previews; opens May 23: "Later Life," a world premiere by A. R. Gurney.
Pregones Theater, Teatro Festival (718-585-1202).
July 7-18: Works by U.S.-based theater companies and theaters from Mexico, Peru, the Dominican Republic and Puerto Rico.
Many plays are in Spanish, with English synopsis.
Highlights include: July 8: "Medea's Last Rosary." July 9-10: "Sor Juana Today." July 10-11: "Historias." July 15-16: "A Woman's Work." July 16-17: "The Fable of the Five Travelers."
Repertorio Espanol (212-889-2850).
In repertory, through June 27: "Blood Wedding"; "Innocent Erendira"; "Coffee With Milk"; "Botanica"; "The Eclipse"; "The Charcoal That Was Ember"; "The Italian Grandmother"; "I'm Getting Off at the Next Stop -- and You?"; "The House of Bernarda Alba."
Roundabout Theater Company, at Criterion Center Stage (212-869-8400).
Through July 11: "She Loves Me." Aug. 4-Sept. 26: "Black Comedy."
Second Stage (212-239-6200). Through May 30: "Time on Fire." June: "Loose Knit."
Serious Fun Festival.
Lincoln Center (212-875-5400).
July 8-9: "Insekta." July 10: Culture Clash.
July 13: Megadance.
July 15: Instant Girl, David Gordon, Ain Gordon and Ken Bullock.
July 16: Pomo Afro Homos.
July 17: Susan Marshall Dance Company.
July 20: La Compagnie Marie Chouinard.
July 21-22: "The Complete History of America (Abridged)." July 23: Kipper Kids.
July 24: "Historias." July 26: Lisa Kron.
July 27: Lamont Young.
.
SoHo Rep (212-334-0962).
May 20-June 13: "David's Red-Haired Death." On alternate nights: "Three Americanisms" and "Terminal Hip."
Theater for the New City (212-254-1109).
Through June 6: "Master and Margarita." Aug. 7-Sept. 19, in streets, parks and bandshells of the five boroughs: "Don't Worry We're All Gonna Be Rich."
Toyota Comedy Festival (212-307-7171).
June 3-12: More than 50 events at 28 locations, ranging from Avery Fisher Hall, Apollo Theater, Nuyoricans Poets Cafe, P. S. 122 and comedy clubs.
Some events are free.
Performers include Whoopi Goldberg, Robert Klein, Eric Bogosian, Rita Rudner, Funny Gay Males, Russell Simmon's Def Comedy Jam.
Union Square Theater (212-307-4100).
Tues.-July 11: "The Invisible Circus," with Victoria Chaplin and Jean Baptiste Thierree.
Upstairs Theater (212-889-2743).
May 28-June 27: "Classified."
Variety Arts Theater (212-239-6200). July 6: "Annie Warbucks."
Vineyard Theater (212-353-3874). Through May 30: "Christina Alberta's Father."
WPA Theater (212-206-0523). May 25-June 27: "Ten Below."
Long Island
BELLPORT Gateway Playhouse (516-286-0555).
Through May 23: "Fiddler on the Roof." May 26-June 20: "Nunsense II." June 23-July 25: "Phantom." July 28-Aug. 22: "City of Angels." Aug. 25-Sept. 12: "Grand Hotel."
BETHPAGE Broadhollow Theater (516-731-1100).
Fri.-June 20: "The Butler Did It." June 25-July 25: "Starting Here, Starting Now." July 30-Aug. 29: "Pools Paradise."
Swan Theater (516-796-5666).
Through June 6: "Into the Woods." May 19-20, 26-27, June 3: "Agnes of God." June 11-27: "Lost in Yonkers." June 24, July 1: "American Buffalo." July 9-22: "Oklahoma!"
EAST FARMINGDALE Arena Players, Main and Second Stage Theaters (516-293-0674).
Through June 6: "Marry Me a Little." Through June 13: "Pajama Tops." June 10-July 4: "Murder by Misadventure." June 18-July 25: "Molly." July 8-Aug. 1: "Shmulnik's Waltz." July 30-Sept. 5: "Loot." Aug. 5-29: "Our Country's Good." Sept. 2-26: "Breaking Legs."
EAST HAMPTON Guild Hall (516-324-4050).
July 2-17: "The Heartsick Pioneer" and "Busted." Aug. 13-28: "Fiery Furnace," starring Julie Harris.
July 19, 26 and Aug. 2: Play readings by Circle Repertory Company.
LINDENHURST Studio Theater (516-226-1833).
Through May 29: "Six Rms Riv Vu." July 9-Aug. 7: "Red Scare on Sunset." Aug. 13-Sept. 11: "The Octette Bridge Club."
PORT JEFFERSON Theater Three (516-928-9100).
Sat.-July 3: "1776." May 30-June 23: "Eleemosynary." July 10-Aug. 21: "Mr. Cinders." July 14-Aug. 11: "Shirley Valentine." Aug. 28-Oct. 2: "Equus."
SAG HARBOR Bay Street Theater Festival (516-725-1108).
May 28-30: "Full Gallop: An Evening With Diana Vreeland." June 16-July 4: "Alone at the Beach." July 21-Aug. 9: "Desdemona." Aug. 18-Sept 4: "Men's Lives."
STONY BROOK Staller Center, at the University of Stony Brook (516-632-7233).
July 7-17: "The Office Party." Aug. 1: "The Flying Karamazov Brothers."
Upstate
ALBANY Actors Shakespeare Company, Washington Park (518-436-3983).
In repertory, July 2-Aug. 22: "Holy Matrimoney!"; "Two Gentlemen of Verona" (opens July 8); "Richard III" (opens July 15).
AUBURN Merry-Go-Round Playhouse Summer '93, at Emerson Park (800-457-8897).
June 2-Aug. 21: "A Funny Thing Happened on the Way to the Forum"; "Big River"; "Meet Me in St. Louis"; "Gypsy."
BUFFALO Shakespeare in Delaware Park (716-852-6638).
June 29-July 18: "A Midsummer Night's Dream." July 27-Aug. 15: "Romeo and Juliet."
CHATHAM Mac-Haydn Theater (518-392-9292).
Wed.-May 30: "No, No, Nanette." June 2-13: "Shenandoah." June 16-27: "Irene." June 30-July 18: "Show Boat." July 21-Aug. 8: "Sugar Babies." Aug. 11-29: "Phantom." Sept. 1-12: "The Music Man."
CORTLAND Cortland Repertory Theater, Pavilion Theater (607-756-2627, after June 7).
June 16-26: "You Can't Take It With You." June 30-July 10: "The Middle Ages." July 14-31: "Ain't Misbehavin'." Aug. 4-14: "Marvin's Room." Aug. 18-28: "Smoke and Mirrors."
ELMIRA Mark Twain Musical Drama, at Mark Twain State Park (800-395-6275).
July 6-Sept. 5: "Mark Twain Musical Drama."
ENDICOTT Cider Mill Playhouse (607-748-7363).
May 27-June 13: "Little Shop of Horrors." July 7-July 25: "Pump Boys and Dinnettes." July 28-Aug. 8: "Passion of Dracula." Aug. 11-29: "Cabaret."
FORESTBURGH Forestburgh Playhouse (914-794-1194).
June 21-July 3: "Sleuth." July 5-17: "Evita." July 19-Aug. 7: "Fiddler on the Roof." Aug. 9-21: "Nunsense." Aug. 23-Sept. 4: "The Odd Couple."
GARRISON-ON-HUDSON Hudson Valley Shakespeare Festival, at Boscobel Restoration (914-265-9575).
July 8-Aug. 1: "The Merry Wives of Windsor."
ITHACA Hangar Theater (607-273-4497).
June 9-19: "Shirley Valentine." June 24-July 10: "Evita." July 14-24: "Candida." July 28-Aug. 7: "A View From the Bridge." Aug. 11-22: "Lips Together, Teeth Apart."
LEWISTON Artpark (716-754-4375 or 800-659-7275).
June 9-20: "Oliver!" July 21-31: "Damn Yankees." Aug. 11-21: "Anything Goes." In repertory through Aug. 29: "The Fantasticks."
MILFORD Leatherstocking Theater (315-858-0534).
July 6-11: "The Curious Savage." July 27-Aug. 1: "Our Town." Aug. 10-15: "A Couple of Blaguards." Aug. 31-Sept. 5: "Stepping Out."
NAPLES Bristol Valley Theater (716-374-6318).
June 24-July 4: "Dracula." July 8-18: "I Ought to Be in Pictures." July 22-Aug. 1: "Verdict." Aug. 5-15: "And a Nightingale Sang." Aug. 19-29: "Oil City Symphony."
NEW LEBANON Theater Barn (518-794-8989).
June 18-27: "Lend Me a Tenor." July 1-11: "Closer Than Ever." July 15-25: "Dames at Sea." July 29-Aug. 8: "The Hollow." Aug. 12-29: "A Funny Thing Happened on the Way to the Forum." Sept. 2-12; "Pirates of Penzance."
NEW PALTZ New Paltz Summer Repertory Theater, at the College at New Paltz (914-257-3880).
June 24-July 3: "Our Town." July 8-24: "Sentimental Journey." July 28-31: "Dear Liar."
POTSDAM Music Theater North, at Snell Music Theater, SUNY (315-265-3070).
June 17-26: "Just So." July 1-10: "The Foreigner." July 15-24; "Man of La Mancha." July 19-Aug. 7: "The 1940's Radio Hour." Aug. 12-21: "The Most Happy Fella."
POUGHKEEPSIE Powerhouse Theater, at Vassar College (914-437-5907 or 914-437-5902).
June 25-27: Festival of new play readings.
June 30-July 11: "Play With Repeats." July 14-25: "The Largest Elizabeth in the World." July 28-Aug. 7: "Tough."
PURCHASE Phoenix Theater Company, Performing Arts Center, SUNY (914-251-6200).
June 30-July 18: "End of Summer." July 21-Aug. 8: "Sullivan and Gilbert." Aug. 11-29: "Long Day's Journey Into Night," with Ruby Dee and Ossie Davis.
ROCHESTER Geva Theater (716-232-4382).
In repertory, May 25-June 27: World premieres of "Criminal Hearts"; "What Is Art?" and "A Penny for the Guy."
ROME Summerstage '93, at Capitol Theater Center for the Performing Arts (315-337-6277/ 6453).
July 9-11: "Oliver!" July 23-25: "Little Shop of Horrors." Aug. 6-8: "Barefoot in the Park." Aug 20-22: "Nunsense."
SARANAC LAKE Pendragon Theater (518-891-1854).
In repertory, June 9-Sept. 4: "Marvin's Room"; "Betrayal"; "Safe Harbor"; "You Can't Take It With You."
TUXEDO New York Renaissance Festival, Sterling Forest (914-351-5171, after June 1).
Weekends and Labor Day, July 31-Sept. 19: "A Midsummer Night's Dream"; "Tales of the Decameron"; "The Fall of Man and Other Tales"; "Tales of Robin Hood."
WESTPORT Depot Theater (518-962-4449).
June 25-July 11: "The Mystery of Irma Vep." July 23-Aug. 1: "The Sum of Us." Aug. 20-Sept 4: "Into the Woods."
WOODBURY Rushmore Festival (212-794-4894). June 16-27: "The Cherry Orchard."
WOODSTOCK River Arts' Woodstock Festival '93, at Bearsville Theater (914-679-2100).
June 25-26: "Gray's Anatomy," with Spalding Gray.
July 8-Aug. 14: "The Legend of Sleepy Hollow." July 15-Aug. 1: "My Mother Said I Never Should," starring Estelle Parsons.
Aug. 19-Sept. 5: "Trouble in Tahiti." Aug. 27-29: "The Strange Life of Ivan Osokin."
New Mexico
ALBUQUERQUE Arts of the Americas, University of New Mexico (505-277-4402).
June 7-July 16: "Fronteras '93," a festival celebrating the cultures of the Americas, featuring "Savage Beasts."
SANTA FE New Mexico Repertory Theater (505-984-2226).
June 15-July 11: "Lady Day at Emerson's Bar and Grill." July 20-Aug. 15: "Noel and Gertie."
North Carolina
BANNER ELK LMC Summer Theater, at Lees-McRae College (704-898-8709).
July 1-5: "I Remember Mama." July 22-26: "Nunsense." Aug. 12-16: "Guys and Dolls."
BLOWING ROCK Blowing Rock Stage Company (704-295-9627).
June 24-July 5: "Radio Gals." July 8-19: "Love Letters." July 22-Aug. 2: "Nuptials." Aug. 5-14: "The All-Night Strut!"
FLAT ROCK Flat Rock Playhouse (704-693-0731).
May 26-30: "To Forgive, Divine." June 2-13: "Smoke on the Mountain." June 16-27: "Rockers.".
June 30-July 11: "City of Angels." July 14-25: "Don't Dress for Dinner." July 28-Aug. 8: "Hello, Dolly!" Aug. 18-22: "A Few Good Men." Aug. 25-Sept. 5: "Breaking Legs."
GREENSBORO UNCG Summer Theater, at University of North Carolina (919-334-5546).
June 3-5, 10-12: "Prelude to a Kiss." June 17-19, 24-26: "Reckless." June 15-16, 22-23: "Morticians in Love."
GREENVILLE Summer Theater of East Carolina, at East Carolina University ((919-757-6829). June 22-26: "Our Country's Good." July 6-10: "Quilters." July 20-24: "Lettice and Lovage."
HIGHLANDS Highlands Playhouse (704-526-3605, before May 31; 704-526-2695 thereafter).
June 30-July 18: "Mame." July 21-Aug. 1: "The Prisoner of Second Avenue." Aug. 4-22: "Lend Me a Tenor." Aug. 25-Sept. 4: "Social Security."
HIGH POINT North Carolina Shakespeare Festival (919-841-6273).
In repertory, Aug. 13-Oct. 2: "The Taming of the Shrew"; "The Merchant of Venice" (begins Aug. 20).
WINSTON-SALEM National Black Theater Festival (919-723-7907).
Aug. 2-7: Theater companies include Negro Ensemble, Jomandi Productions, Carpetbag Theater and Nuyorican Poets.
Ohio
CHILLICOTHE Sugarloaf Mountain Amphitheater (614-775-0700).
June 11-Sept. 4: "Tecumseh."
CLEVELAND Cleveland Playhouse (216-795-7000). Through June 20: "Heartbeats."
CLEVELAND HEIGHTS Cain Park (216-371-3000).
June 17-Aug. 1: "You're Going to Love Tomorrow -- a Stephen Sondheim Evening." Aug. 5-15: "Anything Goes."
COLUMBUS Actors' Summer Theater, Schiller Park (614-444-6888).
June 17-July 3: "King Lear." July 8-Aug. 7: "The Sound of Music." Aug. 12-28: "The Winter's Tale."
CUYAHOGA FALLS Porthouse Theater Company at Blossom Music Center (216-672-3884, before June 1; 800-262-9444, thereafter).
June 18-July 3: "Dames at Sea." July 9-24: "Foxfire." July 30-Aug. 15: "Amadeus."
FINDLAY Summer Stock Repertory, at the University of Findlay (419-424-4562).
In repertory, July 19-Aug. 1: "Carousel"; "Beauty and the Beast"; "Noises Off"; "Les Liaisons Dangereuses"; "You're the Top."
NEWARK Weathervane Playhouse (614-366-4616).
June 17-19, 24-16: "Guys and Dolls." July 1-3, 8-10: "The Odd Couple." July 15-17, 22-24: "Some Enchanted Evening." July 29-31, Aug. 5-7: "Prelude to a Kiss." Aug. 12-14, 19-21: "Anything Goes."
OXFORD Miami University Summer Theater (513-529-6031, before June 21; 513-529-2247 thereafter).
In repertory, July 1-31: "Sweet Charity"; "Lend Me a Tenor"; "Lips Together, Teeth Apart."
WESTERVILLE Otterbein Summer Center Theater (614-898-1109).
June 22-Aug. 15: "Nunsense II"; "The Boys Next Door"; "Pack of Lies."
Oklahoma
EDMOND Oklahoma Shakespeare in the Park (405-340-1222).
Thur.-June 13: "Twelfth Night." June 17-July 11: "All's Well That Ends Well." July 15-Aug. 5: "She Stoops to Conquer." Aug. 12-Sept. 5: "Julius Caesar."
Oregon
ASHLAND Actors' Theater of Ashland, Minshall Playhouse (503-535-5250).
Through May 29; June 17-Sept. 4: "The Madwoman of Chaillot."
Oregon Shakespeare Festival (503-482-4331).
In repertory, through Oct. 31: "Richard III"; "A Flea in Her Ear"; "Joe Turner's Come and Gone" (through July 18); "Lips Together, Teeth Apart" (through Sept. 12); "The Illusion" (July 28-Oct. 30); "Light in the Village" (through June 27); "The Baltimore Waltz" ; "Mad Forest" (July 7-Oct. 30); "Antony and Cleopatra" (June 8-Oct. 2); "A Midsummer Night's Dream" (June 9-Oct. 3); "The White Devil" (June 10-Oct. 1).
Pennsylvania
ALLENTOWN Muhlenberg Summer Music Theater Festival, Muhlenberg College (215-821-3333).
June 23-July 11: "The Pirates of Penzance." July 28-Aug. 15: "Gypsy."
BLOOMSBURG Bloomsburg Theater Ensemble, at Alvina Krause Theater (800-282-0283).
Through May 29: "The Visit." July 9-Aug. 1: "The Mystery of Irma Vep."
BOALSBURG State College Community Theater, at Boal Barn Playhouse (814-466-7141).
June 15-26: "Man of La Mancha." June 30-July 10: "Catch Me If You Can." July 14-24: "Morning's at Seven." July 28-Aug. 7: "Rumors." Aug. 11-21: "The 1940's Radio Hour."
COOKSBURG Cook Forest Sawmill Theater (814-927-6655).
Wed.-Sat: "Houdini." May 27-29: "Everybody Loves Opal." June 2-5: "Bloody Jack." June 9-12: "New Odd Couple." June 16-19: "Battle of Shallowford." June 24-July 3: "South Pacific." July 7-10: "Jacques Brel Is Alive and Well and Living in Paris." July 15-24: "Oliver!" July 28-31: "Adrift in New York." Aug. 5-14: "Shenandoah." Aug. 19-28: "Bells Are Ringing." Sept. 1-4: "Send Me No Flowers."
FAYETTEVILLE Totem Pole Playhouse (717-352-2164).
May 29-June 13: "I Do! I Do!" June 15-27: "Don't Dress for Dinner." June 29-July 18: "Dracula." July 20-Aug. 1: "Arsenic and Old Lace." Aug. 3-15: "Plaza Suite." Aug. 17-29: "Shirley Valentine."
GETTYSBURG Gettysburg Theater Festival, Kline Theater (717-337-6064).
June 24-July 3: "The Chalk Garden." July 8-17: "T Bone N Weasel." July 22-31: "Ten Nights in a Barroom."
INDIANA Summer Theater-by-the-Grove, Indiana University of Pennsylvania (412-357-2590).
June 24-July 3: "Romance, Romance." July 8-17: "Corpse!" July 22-31: Heart and Soul."
LATROBE St.
Vincent Summer Theater, at St.
Vincent College (412-537-8900).
Thur.-June 5: "Wally's Cafe." June 10-July 3: "The Foreigner." July 8-31: "Breaking Legs." Aug. 5-29: "Nunsense II."
MALVERN The People's Light and Theater Company (215-644-3500).
Through June 13: "John Brown's Body." June 16-July 11: "The Importance of Being Earnest." July 30-Aug. 22: "Our Town."
MILL HALL Millbrook Playhouse (717-748-8083).
Mainstage, June 17-27: "Noises Off." July 1-11: "Anything Goes." July 14-18: "The Glass Menagerie." July 22-Aug. 1: "Pump Boys and Dinettes." Aug. 5-15: "Nunsense II." Cabaret, July 7-11: "Frankie and Johnny in the Clair de Lune." July 28-Aug. 1: "Marvin's Room." Aug. 11-15: "Only Kidding."
MOUNT GRETNA Mount Gretna Playhouse (717-964-3627).
June 16-26: "Rumors." June 30-July 10: "Shirley Valentine." July 14-24: "Park Your Car in Harvard Yard."
MOUNTAINHOME Pocono Playhouse (717-595-7456).
June 9-13: "Nunsense." June 16-20: "Nunsense II." June 23-27: "Shirley Valentine." June 30-July 11: "Fiddler on the Roof." July 14-25: "City of Angels." July 28-Aug. 8: "Carousel." Aug. 11-22: "A Chorus Line." MURRYSVILLE Sherwood Forest Theater (412-733-8222).
May 27-June 12: "Into the Woods." June 17-26: "Rumors." July 1-10: "The Wind in the Willows." July 15-24: "The Taming of the Shrew." July 29-Aug. 14: "The Mystery of Edwin Drood." Aug. 19-28: "Life With Mother."
NEW HOPE Bucks County Playhouse (215-862-2041).
Wed.-June 6: "Little Shop of Horrors." June 9-27: "Fiddler on the Roof." June 30-July 4: "Shirley Valentine." July 7-11: "I Remember It Well." July 14-25: "42d Street." July 28-Aug. 8: "A Chorus Line." Aug. 11-22: "Sugar Babies." Aug. 25-Sept. 5: "City of Angels."
PHILADELPHIA International Movement Theater Festival of Mime (215-382-0600).
July 26-Aug. 20: 15 performances by international solo artists and troupes.
Philadelphia Festival Theater for New Plays (215-898-6791).
Through Sat.: "The Big Numbers." May 26-June 6: "Effie's Burning."
Wilma Theater (215-963-0345). Through June 20: "Etta Jenks."
PITTSBURGH Carnegie Mellon Drama's Showcase of New Plays, at Kresge Theater (412-268-2407).
July 2-4: "Marie Hasparren." July 9-11: "Watbanaland." July 16-18: "Children." July 23-25: "What Are Tuesday Like." July 30-Aug. 1: "Graffiti."
Three Rivers Shakespeare Festival, Stephen Foster Memorial Theater at the University of Pittsburgh (412-624-7529).
May 28-June 12: "Much Ado About Nothing." June 24-July 10: "A Midsummer Night's Dream." July 9-Aug. 1: "Macbeth."
Rhode Island
BLOCK ISLAND Oceanwest Theater, New Harbor (401-466-2971).
Sat.-Sept. 8: "The Big Band Bash"; "Cabaret"; "The Bad and the Horrible."
MATUNUCK Theater-by-the-Sea (401-782-8587).
June 1-19: "The Odd Couple." June 22-July 18: "The Wizard of Oz." July 20-Aug. 22: "Phantom." Aug. 24-Sept. 12: "Nunsense II."
NEWPORT TRIST Summer Theater Festival, St.
George's School (401-849-7892).
Aug. 6-Sept. 5: "Eastern Standard."
PROVIDENCE Trinity Repertory Company (401-351-4242).
Through June 6: "The Good Times Are Killing Me."
WESTERLY Colonial Theater (401-596-0810).
June 18-July 11: "The Skin of Our Teeth." July 8-25: "As You Like It." July 16-Aug. 8: "Italian-American Reconciliation." Aug. 13-Sept. 5: "Candide."
South Carolina
CHARLESTON Spoleto Festival, Dock Street Theater (803-255-4659).
May 27-June 13: "The Last Yankee."
Tennessee
CROSSVILLE Cumberland County Playhouse (615-484-5000).
Through July 14: "Pump Boys and Dinettes." May 29-June 19: "The Foreigner." June 25-Sept. 5: "Oklahoma!" Aug. 4-Sept. 12: "The Grapes of Wrath."
Texas
CANYON Pioneer Amphitheater (806-655-2181). June 9-Aug. 21: "Texas."
DALLAS Shakespeare Festival of Dallas, Samuell-Grand Park (214-559-2778).
June 15-27: "The Merry Wives of Windsor." July 6-25: "Richard III."
Theater Three (214-871-3300).
Through May 30: "A Small Family Business." June 11-July 11: "The Unfamiliar Showcase Festival." June 11-13: "John, His Story." June 25-27: Los Actores de San Antonio in "Las Nuevas Tamaleras." July 9-11: Jubilee Theater presents "Shakin' the Mess Outa Misery." July 23-Aug. 22: "B . . . My Name Is Bob." Sept. 3-Oct. 3: "School for Husbands" and "The Imaginary Cuckold."
FORT WORTH Casa Manana Theater (817-332-2272).
Theater on the Square, through June 27: "Cotton Patch Gospel." Casa Manana Theater, June 8-20: "City of Angels." July 6-18: "Brigadoon." July 20-Aug. 1: "Grand Hotel," with Cyd Charisse.
Aug. 3-15: "Nunsense II." Aug. 17-29: "Fiddler on the Roof."
GALVESTON ISLAND Galveston Island Theater (409-737-3440).
May 27-Aug. 27: "My Fair Lady." June 17-Aug. 28: "The Best Little Whorehouse in Texas." July 14-Aug. 21: "Ain't Misbehavin'."
HOUSTON Alley Theater (713-228-8421).
Through May 30, Neuhaus Arena Stage: "Death and the Maiden." Through June 13, Large Stage: "Macbeth."
Houston Shakespeare Festival, at Miller Outdoor Theater at Hermann Park (713-520-3291).
July 30, Aug. 5, 7, 11, 13: "Henry V." July 31, Aug. 4, 6, 12, 14: "A Midsummer Night's Dream."
Utah
CEDAR CITY Utah Shakespearean Festival, at Southern Utah University (801-586-7878).
In repertory, June 24-Sept. 4: "A Midsummer Night's Dream"; "Richard II"; "Timon of Athens"; "Our Town"; "Tartuffe"; "The Royal Family."
ODGEN Utah Musical Theater, at Weber State University (801-626-8500).
Allred Theater: July 2-17: "Fiddler on the Roof." July 23-Aug. 7: "Peter Pan." Aug. 13-28: "West Side Story." Monson Theater: July 9-Aug. 28: "Pump Boys and Dinettes."
Vermont
BENNINGTON Oldcastle Theater Company, at Southern Vermont College (802-447-0564).
Through May 23: "Some Enchanted Evening." June 1-20: "Broadway Bound." July 6-25: "Nunsense II." Aug. 10-29: "Lend Me a Tenor."
BURLINGTON Atlantic Theater Company. (212-645-8015, before June 25; 802-862-5360 thereafter).
July 8-10: New live radio drama by David Mamet, Howard Korder, Craig Lucas, Kenneth Lonnergan, others.
July 14-17: "Ivanushka." July 21-31: "Intrigue With Faye." Aug. 4-14: "The Lights."
DORSET Dorset Theater Festival, at Dorset Playhouse (802-867-5777, after June 9).
June 17-26: "My Children, My Africa!" July 1-17: "110 in the Shade." July 22-31: "Sherlock Holmes and the Unseen Hand." Aug. 5-21: "Relatively Speaking." Aug. 26-Sept. 5: "Mama Drama."
WESTON Weston Playhouse (802-824-5288, from June 7).
June 24-July 4: "Arsenic and Old Lace." July 8-25: "Fiddler on the Roof." July 29-Aug. 8: "City of Angels." Aug. 12-22: "Driving Miss Daisy." Aug. 26-Sept. 5: "A Day in Hollywood, a Night in the Ukraine."
WHITE RIVER JUNCTION White River Theater Festival, at Briggs Opera House (802-296-2505).
June 30-July 17: "Candide." July 21-Aug. 7: "A Midsummer Night's Dream." Aug. 11-28: "Our Country's Good."
Virginia
ABINGDON Barter Theater and Playhouse (800-368-3240).
Barter Theater, through June 12: "Lend Me a Tenor." June 16-July 10: "The Cocktail Hour." July 14-Aug. 15: "A Funny Thing Happened on the Way to the Forum." Aug. 18-Sept. 11: "Kuru." Playhouse, June 2-Aug. 1: "Nunsense." Aug. 4-29: "Frankie and Johnny in the Clair de Lune."
ARLINGTON Washington Shakespeare Company, Gunston Arts Center (703-739-9886).
May 28-June 26: "The Tempest."
CHARLOTTESVILLE Heritage Repertory, at Culbreth Theater, on the University of Virginia Campus (804-924-8966, before May 31; 804-924-3376 thereafter).
July 6-Aug. 23: "Love Letters." July 27-Aug. 14: "Lady Day at Emerson's Bar and Grill." In repertory, June 24-Aug. 14: "How the Other Half Lives"; "Angel Street"; "House of Blue Leaves"; "Les Liaisons Dangereuses."
Washington
OLYMPIA Washington Shakespeare Festival (206-753-8586).
In repertory, Aug. 19-28: "As You Like It"; "King Lear."
SEATTLE A Contemporary Theater (206-285-5110).
Through May 23: "The Red and the Black." June 3-27: "The Cover of Life." July 8-Aug. 1: "Lonely Planet." Aug. 12-Sept. 8: "Alki."
Alice B. Theater, Annual Gay and Lesbian Theater Festival (206-322-5423).
July 7: "Talk! Move! Camp!" The three-week event features theater companies and solo artists.
Bumbershoot, various locations at Seattle Center (206-682-4386).
Sept 3-6: A multi-arts showcase, with more than 40 performances by contemporary and avant-garde groups.
Intiman Theater Company, Intiman Playhouse at Seattle Center (206-626-0782).
Through June 5: "Faith Healer." June 16-July 10: "The Importance of Being Earnest." July 21-Aug. 14: "From the Mississippi Delta."
West Virginia
MORGANTOWN Lakeview Theater, at West Virginia University's Creative Arts Center (304-293-3020).
July 6-18: "Fiddler on the Roof." July 20-25: "Peter Pan." July 27-Aug. 1: "Cabaret." Aug. 3-8: "Camelot." Aug. 10-15: "South Pacific."
Wisconsin
MADISON Broom Street Theater (608-244-8338).
Through May 30: "The Twisted Sex Life of J. Edgar Hoover." June 11-July 18: "Daughter of Jesus." July 30-Sept. 5: "Doctor Kevorkian's Country Kitchen."
MARINETTE Marinette County Theater, at University of Wisconsin (608-735-9734).
July 10-13, 17-20: "A Chorus Line." July 31-Aug. 4: "Nunsense." Aug. 14-17, 21-24: "Annie."
PLATTEVILLE Wisconsin Shakespeare Festival, at University of Wisconsin-Platteville (608-342-1298).
In repertory, July 9-Aug. 14: "A Midsummer Night's Dream"; "The Merry Wives of Windsor"; "All's Well That Ends Well."
RIVER FALLS St.
Croix Valley Summer Theater, at Davis Theater at University of Wisconsin-River Falls (715-425-4288).
July 6-10: "I Hate Hamlet." July 14-24: "Nunsense II." July 28-Aug. 7: "The Pirates of Penzance."
ST.
CROIX FALLS St.
Croix Festival Theater (715-483-3387).
July 31-Nov. 6: "Five O'Clock Shadows." Aug. 11-21: "Love Letters." Aug. 28-Sept. 25: "The Belle of Amherst."
SPRING GREEN American Players Theater (608-588-2361).
In repertory, June 17-Oct. 3: "The School for Wives"; "The Merchant of Venice"; "The Taming of the Shrew"; "King Henry IV, Part I."
Wyoming
LARAMIE Fine Arts Theater, University of Wyoming (307-766-3212).
June 9-12: "Early One Evening at the Rainbow Bar and Grill." June 23-26: "Lend Me a Tenor." July 7-10: "Goodnight, Desdemona." July 21-24: "The Odd Couple."
Canada
BANFF Banff Festival of the Arts, Banff Center, Greenham Theater (403-762-6300).
Aug. 13-22: "School for Scandal."
CHARLOTTETOWN, PRINCE EDWARD ISLAND Charlottetown Festival, Confederation Center of the Arts (902-565-1267).
June 25-Sept. 4: "Anne of Green Gables." June 22-Sept. 3: "The Shooting of Dan McGrew." July 5-Sept. 25: "A Closer Walk With Patsy Cline."
NIAGARA-ON-THE-LAKE, ONTARIO Shaw Festival, Festival, Court House and Royal George Theaters (416-468-2172).
In repertory, May 26-Oct. 31: "Saint Joan"; "The Silver King" (through Oct. 10); "Blithe Spirit" ; "Candida" (through Sept. 26); "The Unmentionables" (through Sept. 26); "The Marrying of Ann Leete" (through Sept. 25); "And Then There Were None" ; "Gentlemen Prefer Blondes" (through Oct. 10); "The Man of Destiny" (through Sept. 26).
STRATFORD Stratford Festival (519-271-4040).
In repertory, "Antony and Cleopatra" (May 31-Oct. 17); "A Midsummer Night's Dream" (June 2-Nov. 13); "Gypsy" (June 4-Nov. 14); "The Imaginary Invalid" (July 31-Oct. 16); "The Mikado" (July 2-Oct. 30); "The Importance of Being Earnest" (July 16-Oct. 31); "King John" (June 1-Sept. 18); "The Wingfield Trilogy" (June 16-Aug. 22); "Bacchae" (July 1-Sept. 18); "Fair Liberty's Call" (July 15-Aug. 28); "The Illusion" (Aug. 6-Sept. 19).
Also, July 13: "An Evening With Christopher Plummer."
TORONTO Fringe of Toronto Festival (416-534-5959).
July 2-11: More than 70 companies from Canada and abroad in 400-plus performances at locations throughout the city.
St.
Lawrence Center for the Arts (416-366-7723).
Through June 12: "Piaf." June 15-July 10: "Forbidden Broadway." July 13-31: "Wrong for Each Other." Aug. 3-Sept. 25: "Little Shop of Horrors."
Tarragon Theater (416-531-1827).
Through May 30: "The Theory of Relatives." Tues.-June 13: "Miracle Mother."
Theater Plus Toronto, at Premiere Dance Theater (416-973-4000).
June 5-26: "The House of Martin Guerre." In repertory, July 6-25: "Abundance"; "Holiday." Aug. 26-Sept. 18: "Transit of Venus."


Rights Commissioner Reveals H.I.V. Infection
Ending years of personal turmoil, New York City's Human Rights Commissioner said yesterday that he was infected with the virus that causes AIDS and urged others in public life to make similar disclosures to overcome personal fears and to combat the stigma surrounding the illness.
"The more of us that do it, the easier it gets for somebody who is living in terror of being exposed," the Commissioner, Dennis deLeon, said in an interview amplifying on an article on the Op-Ed page of The New York Times in which he disclosed that he had tested positive for H.I.V. infection.


Diane Iacobucci and Gregg Deger
Diane Elizabeth Iacobucci, a daughter of Olga Iacobucci of Rockville Centre, L.I., and Rudolph Iacobucci of Hampton Bays, L.I., was married yesterday to Gregg Jeffrey Deger, a son of Trudy Deger of Huntington Station, L.I., and George Deger of Boynton Beach, Fla.
Msgr.
Edmond J. Trench performed the ceremony at the Sacred Hearts of Jesus and Mary Roman Catholic Church in Southampton, L.I.


Not What Hamilton Had in Mind
To the Editor:
Prof.
Thomas K. McCraw's analogy in the "Deficit Lessons: Hamilton, the Hero" (May 2) doesn't fit.


Corrections
A picture caption on May 2 about bluegrass performers at the 1964 Newport Folk Festival misidentified the musician at the left.
He was George Shuffler.


After-School Routines Leave Little Time for Traditional Play
WHEN the afternoon bell signals the end of the school day for most Westchester children, their scheduled activities are far from over.
A second shift begins as thousands of children fan out to various team practices, music lessons and courses that teach everything from horticulture to computer literacy.
Increasingly rare, parents and experts in child development say, are afternoons where children simply go home to play.
And while many parents recognize the benefits of both formalized team sports and the many after-school classes available to youngsters in the county, others bemoan what they perceive as lost leisure and the lazy days of childhood.


India Bombings: Gangs Involved, But Who Else?
For nearly two hours on March 12, explosions thundered through this city, sending pillars of black smoke skyward.
First the stock exchange was jarred by a blast that collapsed walls and ceilings.
Then the central office of Air India shuddered under the force of a blast.
And then, through the city, more bombs, more columns of thick, sooty smoke.
By the time the explosions ended, more than 250 people had died.


Fresh Air Fund to Add Camp for Careers
Several teen-agers were busy teaching Jessye Norman, the opera diva, the finer points of a dance called the Electric Slide as couples sashayed across the floor under the fluffy white tent at the Tavern on the Green.
For those less inclined to swing their hips, the band's renditions of popular songs from the 50's to the 80's were enough to please everyone attending the Fresh Air Fund's party in Central Park on Tuesday evening.


Tracy Pogue, Michael Hausman
Tracy Ellen Pogue, a lawyer, was married yesterday evening in New York to Dr.
Michael Robert Hausman, a hand and microvascular surgeon.
Rabbi Burt Aaron Siegel and the Rev.
Richard Leonard, a Unitarian minister, officiated at the Unitarian Church of All Souls.
Ms.
Pogue, 33, is keeping her name.
She is an associate at the New York law firm of Cravath, Swaine &amp; Moore.
She graduated from Princeton University and received an M.B.A. from the University of Chicago and her law degree from New York University.
She is the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard W. Pogue of Shaker Heights, Ohio.
Her father is a senior partner in the law firm of Jones, Day, Reavis &amp; Pogue in Cleveland.


Whole-Wheat Taste in a Whole New Light
WHOLE wheat has all the attributes of nutritional correctness.
It is rich in vitamins and high in fiber.
On the debit side of the culinary ledger, however, it has a flavor that is far more aggressive and rustic than refined white flour and its texture is rougher and heavier.
Fortunately, whole wheat is available in various forms.
Flour, pasta and whole-wheat berries that can be cooked like beans are some of them.
And there are a number of ways these whole-wheat ingredients can be combined successfully and extremely palatably in recipes.


New Chairwoman of Wilson Foundation
Eleanor Thomas Elliott, the former chairwoman of the trustees of Barnard College and a member of the board of governors of the New York Hospital in Manhattan, has been elected chairwoman of the Woodrow Wilson National Fellowship Foundation in Princeton, N.J.
The foundation, an independent, nonprofit organization formed in 1945, offers fellowships and other programs in a variety of fields to promote excellence in teaching, the humanities, ethics and religious values, rural policy and women's studies.


The Perennial Question, on Annuals, Too
"BUT will it flower all summer?" This is the question most often asked by gardeners buying plants.
Now that the planting season is at its height this is an important factor.
The answer to the question depends on what kinds of plants the gardener buys and the desired results.
Some plants flower all summer.
These are the annuals, and the seed growers have seen to it that desires are satisfied with plants that provide magnificent colors on sturdy stems.
Some are weatherproof, even drought-durable.


Edmund Burke Jr., 88, S.E.C. Commissioner
Edmund Burke Jr., a commissioner of the Securities and Exchange Commission during the Administration of Franklin D. Roosevelt, died on Thursday in Buffalo of pneumonia, his family said.
He was 88 and died of pneumonia.
Mr.
Burke also worked as a lawyer for Texaco Inc. for 16 years, and was active in the community of Greenwich, Conn., where he lived from 1954 to 1983.


Corrections
Because of a computer typesetting error, the Nasdaq national market listings on page 20 of the Business section today omit about 200 entries, between Environmental Technologies and In-Store Advertising.
The entries will appear in Business Day tomorrow.


Union City Is Destroyed
The 118th Preakness Stakes was marred today by the first fatal accident in 34 years in any of the Triple Crown races when Union City suffered a compound fracture of his right front ankle.
The 3-year-old colt, owned by the Overbrook Farm and trained by D. Wayne Lukas, buckled after running three-quarters of a mile and was pulled up by his rider, Pat Valenzuela.
The horse was taken by ambulance to the stable area for treatment but was destroyed by injection about an hour later.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball National League  MONTREAL EXPOS -- Placed Scott Aldred, pitcher, on the 15-day disabled list.
Recalled Mike Gardiner, pitcher, from Ottawa of the International League.
College  ARIZONA STATE -- Announced the resignation of Maura McHugh, women's basketball coach, effective June 30.
JAMES MADISON -- Announced the resignation of Ray Heatwole, baseball coach, effective at the end of the season.
Named Kevin Anderson baseball coach.


All the Art You'll Ever Need
Simply study this picture -- "Mona Lisa Contemplating the Bust of Nefertiti as God Creates Order out of Chaos on a Starry Night on the Island of La Grande Jatte as the Infanta Margarita Looks On," painted for The Sophisticated Traveler by Marco Ventura -- and you'll never again need to set foot in any musty old museum.


Holly Hegener, J. B. Cummings
Mr. and Mrs.
Peter W.O.K.
Hegener of Princeton, N.J., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Hilary Robinson Hegener, to Jonathan Benton Cummings, a son of Dr.
Nancy B. Cummings and Milton C. Cummings Jr., both of Washington.
An August wedding is planned.
Ms.
Hegener, 27, is known as Holly.
She graduated from Yale University and received a law degree from the University of Chicago.
She is an associate in the Washington office of O'Melveny &amp; Myers, a Los Angeles law firm.
Her father and mother, Karen C. Hegener, are the founders and chief executives of Peterson's, publishers in Princeton.


Robyn Fairclough, Andrew Stewart
Robyn Whitney Fairclough, a painter in New York, was married yesterday to Andrew Stewart, the publisher of Chanticleer Press Inc. in New York.
Jean Wilson, a justice of the peace in Newfane, Vt., performed the ceremony at the Four Columns Inn in Newfane.
Ms.
Fairclough, who is keeping her name, graduated from the University of California at Santa Cruz.
She is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
James Fairclough of Westport, Conn.
Her father, who is retired, was a purchasing agent for the J. C. Penney Company in New York.
Her mother, Irene Fairclough, teaches at the Covenant Children's Center in Easton, Conn.


Rising Above Slights of Youth
Modeling may be the best revenge.
Fabienne Terwinghe, a 6-foot-tall model from Belgium, was always teased about her height growing up.
"When I was a kid I was very upset about it," she said on Wednesday.
"At 14, I was already that size."


Sarah Radcliffe, Drew Quigley
Dr. and Mrs.
Warren A. Radcliffe of Mountainville, N.J., have announced the engagement of their daughter Sarah Townsend Radcliffe to Andrew Lawrence Quigley 2d, a son of Mrs.
Cornelius J. Reid Jr. of Mill Neck, L.I., and the late Lawrence A. Quigley.
An October wedding is planned.
Miss Radcliff, 28, is a marketing manager for the Polo/Ralph Lauren Corporation in New York.
Her father is an endodontist in Chatham and Westfield, N.J.


MAY 9-15: Down Tobacco Road; A Judge's Decision Cheers The Anti-Smoking Cause
With the sole exception of tobacco companies, almost everyone agrees that, as the Surgeon General has stated, cigarette smoking is hazardous to your health.
But until last week, judges hearing lawsuits brought by dying smokers and their survivors against the industry remained mum on the subject.
Judge Eugene Bogen of Washington County Circuit Court in Greenville, Miss., said that in his courtroom the dangerousness of cigarettes is settled.
They are defective as a matter of law, he wrote, "because when used as intended, they cause cancer, emphysema, heart disease and other illnesses."


It's a Shoe! It's a Skate! It's an Antique?
Are they shoes or are they skates?
These relics from the late 60's or early 70's were never as prevalent as bell-bottoms (they really didn't balance all that well), but they will make fine artifacts for anthropolgists of the future.


Self-Help Vs. Sitcom Jokes
To the Editor:
"Is Shelley Long's new CBS sitcom, 'Good Advice,' living up to its name" when it arouses the ire of a family therapist who castigates it for "trivializing suicide and sensationalizing it" by -- horror of horrors! -- making a joke (Egos &amp; Ids: Notes, May 2)?


William Randolph Hearst Jr., 85, Journalist, Dies
William Randolph Hearst Jr., a Pulitzer Prize-winning journalist and the editor in chief of the media empire his father founded, died Friday night at New York Hospital.
He was 85 and lived in Manhattan.
He suffered cardiac arrest and died shortly after arriving by ambulance at the emergency room, a hospital spokeswoman said.


New Loss But No New Ideas For Mets
The manager's office had the air of the wrong ballroom on election night.
The clubhouse was empty and noiseless.
There had been another defeat for the Mets, a 2-1 loss to the Expos, and afterward there was anger, resignation and confusion.
The manager said he had been left drained by the defeats, today's setback having run the club's recent record to 4-15, its record for the season to a pathetic 12-22.
One player, claiming he had lost 10 to 15 pounds amid all the failure, searched for a metaphor, and was left only to say that the losing had begun to feel like a disease that is contagious and consuming.


If Not a Pele, Maybe He's a DiMaggio
IT was the bottom of the seventh and last inning of the Little League game.
The home team, down by one run, was up, and the bases were loaded.
The 12-year-old star of the team was up next but his mother motioned that it was time to leave.
The boy hurried off the field so he could arrive on time for his soccer game.
Moments later, a pinch-hitter struck out, and the baseball game was over.


On Pitching Woo
To the Editor:
Thanks to Jamie James's article, those of us in the industry know that classical music will finally be saved by the "discovery" that sex sells.
Not surprisingly, the American Symphony Orchestra's thematic musical lovefests (previously known as subscription concerts) have begun to make even our box-office receipts look pretty sexy.
Take, for example, "European Immigrant Composers in America" (sex in new places), "Surrealism in Music" (kinky sex), "Shakespeare and Romanticism in Music" (confused sex), "German Romanticism in Painting and Music" (sex with oils).


E. J. Borrack, Robert Reider
Esther Jo Borrack, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Morris Borrack of Woodbridge, Conn., was married there last evening to Robert Leonard Reider, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Adolph Reider of Oceanside, L.I.
Rabbi Herbert Weinberg performed the ceremony at Congregation B'nai Jacob.
Ms.
Borrack, 29, who is known as E. J., is keeping her name.
She is an associate at the law firm of Cozen &amp; O'Connor in Philadelphia.
She and her husband are cum laude graduates of the University of Pennsylvania, from which she also received her law degree.
Her father, who is retired, was the chairman of the mathematics department at Amity Junior High School in Bethany, Conn.
Her mother, Harriet Borrack, owns Back 2 Amity, a gift and stationery store in New Haven.


Driver Improves
The rookie driver ROSS BENTLEY, who suffered first- and second-degree burns to his face, neck and hands when his car caught fire during practice for the Indianapolis 500 on Friday, was listed in good condition yesterday at Methodist Hospital in Indianapolis.
He will remain at the hospital at least until today, doctors said.


No Headline
I think it is wrong for a hearing parent to deny a deaf child their cultural identity and force them to be hearing.
Everyone should try and meet in the middle.
TOM WILLARD, editor of Silent News.  [ 22:3. ]


Diversity Joins Ranks of the Junior League
WHEN Earl G. Graves, the publisher and entrepreneur, thought of creating a designer show house in the stately but rundown house he bought here as a real estate venture, he conceded that he didn't think of collaborating with the Junior League.
It was that group, after all, which, because he was black, didn't want Mr.
Graves singing with his high school glee club 40 years ago at a league event in Brooklyn.
Why then would he turn now to the organization, which has had a white-glove, elitist image for much of its 92-year history, to create the vibrant sense of black cultural life consistent with the house's past?
Mr.
Graves bought the 11,000-square-foot house -- which sits on a 25-acre hillside on Hardscrabble Road -- from Howard University, to which it had been bequeathed by the late Dr.
Clilian B. Powell, a wealthy black radiologist and the publisher of The Amsterdam News.
Mr.
Graves, a Scarsdale resident, consultant to presidents and publisher of Black Enterprise Magazine, said he wanted to accomplish two things with a show house: to make his newly acquired house salable at his asking price of $5 million and to benefit a local educational organization.


Counter to Trend, a Welfare Program In California Has One Idea: Get a Job!
After a decade of national experimentation, no program has done as much to raise the earnings of people on welfare as one here in Riverside County, and its workings can be seen in the gains, losses and dish-worn hands of Janice McClung.
The philosophy here is unromantic: get a job, any job, even a low-paying, unpleasant job.
That cuts across the more prevalent national practice, which stresses education and training first, in the hope that people on welfare can earn more later.


She Outplayed Them, Then Outlasted Them
In a sport that gradually but inexorably grinds to the psychic nub those who play it for a living, no champion has proven more resistant to erosion than JoAnne Carner.
The player known as Big Momma might acknowledge that it's simply because there is so much of her.
But it wouldn't change the fact that at 54 -- without the safety net of a Senior Tour -- Carner is the oldest professional golfer still truly competitive against the best players in her sport.


AN ARMY OF THE FAITHFUL
The pictures, in your article, feature only white faces.
No African-Americans, no Latinos, no Asians. (And, by self-definition, no Jews, no Muslims, no ethnic Roman Catholics and no openly gay men or women.) Measured as a relative percentage of voting-age adults, the core group that the Christian Coalition's message appeals to is only going to shrink in size in coming years.
If the Republicans choose to accommodate this message, the Democrats can make political hay simply by courting those whom this message targets and excludes.
TOM MONAHAN Brooklyn


Clare Probert, Scott Carlson
Clare Probert, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert E. Probert of Ridgewood, N.J., was married on Friday to Scott Carlson, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
Barry Carlson of Victoria, British Columbia, Canada, and St.
Petersburg Beach, Fla.
Judge Kimba Wood of Federal District Court in Manhattan officiated in her chambers.
Mrs.
Carlson is an administrative assistant to Mortimer Zuckerman at Boston Properties Inc., a real estate development and management company, in New York.
She graduated from the University of Rhode Island.
Her father is the president of Probert Associates, an investment banking firm in New York.


Potent Disagreement
To the Editor:
At the conclusion of her otherwise thoughtful review of two books critical of political correctness (April 11), Linda Bradley Salamon claims that whatever mistakes may have been made by those who have written the new rules on "hate speech," they were "drawing on the academy's long tradition of civility in discourse, one that makes possible potent disagreement on matters of great moment." Here Ms.
Salamon misses the main point of the controversy: it is precisely because the rules prohibiting any disagreement with received ideas about race, sex and gender violate "the academy's long tradition of civility in discourse" that political correctness has brought about such strong opposition, as is evidenced by the books by Robert Hughes and Jonathan Rauch that are reviewed.
LAWRENCE HYMAN Ridgewood, N.J.


COLONIALISM'S BACK
Paul Johnson makes a compelling call for a revival of colonialism ("Colonialism's Back -- and Not a Moment Too Soon," April 18).
He states: "There simply is no alternative in nations where governments have crumbled and the most basic conditions for civilized life have disappeared."
Johnson's language sounds familiar.
In his 1904 annual message to Congress, Theodore Roosevelt put it this way: "Chronic wrongdoing, or an impotence which results in a general loosening of the ties of civilized society, may . . .  ultimately require intervention by some civilized nation." For Roosevelt, the "insurrectionary habit" of "wretched republics" imposed a "moral mandate" for the United States to intervene.


Pride in a Soundless World: Deaf Oppose a Hearing Aid
Among the rich idioms of American Sign Language, there is a sign for "hearing" -- the right index finger, held parallel to the mouth, circling forward like a rolling log.
From it comes a second, related sign for a deaf person who thinks like a hearing person: the same finger, circling forward in front of the forehead.
It is not a compliment.


In the Region: Westchester; Dealing With Cellular Phone Antennas
WHEN Catherine Lederer-Plaskett learned that a commercial cellular telephone antenna was going to go up on her block she went door to door to galvanize opposition to what she saw as a potential health hazard.
"Most of my neighbors knew nothing about it," said Ms.
Lederer-Plaskett, who lives in Hartsdale.
"We organized an information meeting and found out that there were just too many unanswered questions."


A Reader's Guide to the Balkans
To the Editor:
Robert D. Kaplan's suggestion that one should read the poems of C. P. Cavafy, Odysseas Elytis and George Seferis to understand the Greek psyche is misleading, for while these poets are certainly great in their own right, their poetry often deals with topics that have little to do with Greece and that are concerned with their personal philosophical problems.


Baby Left at Penn Station
A newborn girl was found yesterday in a plastic bag on a train platform at Pennsylvania Station.
The infant was discovered about 1 A.M. by a homeless man on Platform 21 and he alerted the police, said Sam Zambuto, a spokesman for the Long Island Rail Road.
The child, only hours old, was taken to St.
Vincent's Hospital and Medical Center, where she was listed in good condition, said Officer Scott Bloch, a police spokesman.


Rocky Mountain Low: Aspen's Design Conference
What if they gave a design conference and nobody came?
It would not be a great loss to design.
The whole field is such a shambles today -- despite annual gatherings in Aspen, Colo., Los Angeles and New York -- that one more conference is not going to put things right.
In fact, if people don't show up next month at the International Design Conference at Aspen, the most venerable of the convocations, design might come out ahead.
There would be reason to hope that American designers could regain the sense of social mission the Aspen conference once stood for.
In February, the board of the International Design Conference at Aspen voted to go ahead with this year's meeting in spite of Colorado's passage of Amendment 2, the state measure that excludes homosexuals from civil-rights protection.
In a written statement, the board expressed its opposition to Amendment 2 but declined to honor the boycott that has been organized to protest it. (In response to that boycott, 24 groups have canceled conventions planned for Colorado.)


Glass From an Artistic Counterrevolution
SIGMUND FREEDMAN acknowledges that he knew nothing about Art Nouveau glass when he bought his first piece for $200 at an antiques show 30 years ago.
"I only remember that it was green," he said.
He changed his mind on the purchase, went back and traded it in for a $300 vase signed Durand.
The maker was a glass artist who worked for Louis Comfort Tiffany.


The Sunshiny Menace of 'Wild Palms' . . .
Remember this one? "the tried and true is dead and gone."
That pronouncement was made a couple of years ago by Brandon Tartikoff, then of NBC, when "Twin Peaks" leaped into the national psyche and international headlines.
As it turned out, the David Lynch series self-destructed from its own excesses, and commercial television quickly retreated to the tried and true.
"All-family audience" is the current programming mantra.
But apparently someone at ABC, whether out of wit or malice, still has a yen for the offbeat and decidedly bizarre.
How else to explain the season's-end appearance of "Wild Palms," a truly wild six-hour mini-series that, beginning this evening at 9, will be broadcast on four consecutive nights.
Set in Los Angeles in the year 2007, "Wild Palms" resembles nothing so much as an acid freak's fantasy, drenched in paranoia and more pop-culture allusions than a Dennis Miller monologue.


Lawbreakers We Have Known and Loved
THEY walk where they're not supposed to walk.
They climb where climbing is not allowed.
They jump where they shouldn't jump, and, yes, they drive trains they have no business driving.
They are the daring and endearing fools who rush in where angels fear to tread, and when they do, it is generally the angels who lead the applause.


Corrections
The Practical Traveler column on April 25 referred incorrectly to the status of McTravel, an Illinois travel agency offering rebates of commissions to customers.
McTravel, now using the name Travel Avenue, is in business.


The Hazards Of Flying Indian Airlines
Air travel in India, never very convenient or pleasant, has recently assumed more dangerous proportions, with a spate of hijackings and crashes overshadowing the usual delays, rudeness and lost baggage.
In the first four months of 1993 alone, there were two crashes and four hijackings. (There were no incidents of either type in 1992.)
At least 75 people were killed in an April 26 Indian Airlines crash that occurred near Aurangabad in western India when the pilot failed to get an overloaded Boeing 737 into the air and hit a truck loaded with bales of cotton.


Corrections
An article on April 25 about residential lofts misstated several aspects of the New York City law regulating their use.
While most lofts are required to be in zoning districts where residential use is permitted or has been grandfathered, a small number are exempt from this requirement.
Loft tenants do not have to be certified artists, except in parts of SoHo and NoHo.


Beach's Six Goals Help Loyola of Baltimore Rout No. 7 Navy
Loyola of Baltimore, the 10th-seeded team in the 12-team tournament, upset No. 7 Navy yesterday as the National Collegiate Athletic Association's Division I lacrosse tournament began.
With Kevin Beach scoring six goals, the Greyhounds routed the Sailors, 19-8, in a night game at Annapolis, Md.
Other opening-round victors were Army, Hofstra and Virginia.


Beyond CD: Music Takes A Back Seat
When the compact disk was introduced a decade ago, it gained prestige from its association with classical music.
At a news conference, the conductor Herbert von Karajan said, "All else is gaslight." He convinced Sony, which developed the format with Philips, to build the first European CD plant in his own Austrian village, near Salzburg.
The classical repertory influenced the playing time of the CD, which was designed to contain Beethoven's 70-minute Ninth Symphony.
And though the aura of art camouflaged the artifice of CD sound (Luddites like myself still prefer the LP), the link with classical music helped market the new medium: High-priced CD's and players found their first buyers in the high-income classical audience.
Two new digital formats, which have received some attention in recent months, take the opposite approach.
They are being presented with an emphasis on pop; only a few classical labels have shown interest.
Sony has developed the mini-disk (MD) system, which uses a 2.5-inch disk for both recording and playback in a Walkman-like unit; Philips, which invented the conventional cassette, is offering a successor, the digital compact cassette (DCC).


Let Us Journey Into the Mind of Managed Care
To the Editor:
In the last few weeks I have had two experiences with health maintenance organizations that suggest what things may be like with plans for universal health coverage that stress managed care.
A young woman came to me after having suffered increasingly severe abdominal pain over a few hours.
My findings on examination, coupled with a high blood count, were the basis for a diagnosis of acute appendicitis.
The treatment is surgical.
However, the H.M.O. required authorization before referral to another doctor.
I phoned.


The Perennial Question, on Annuals, Too
"BUT will it flower all summer?" This is the question most often asked by gardeners buying plants.
Now that the planting season is at its height this is an important factor.
The answer to the question depends on what kinds of plants the gardener buys and the desired results.
Some plants flower all summer.
These are the annuals, and the seed growers have seen to it that desires are satisfied with plants that provide magnificent colors on sturdy stems.
Some are weatherproof, even drought-durable.


Back in Action


Time to Start Providing Rounds of Drink
Sudden 90-degree weather like what hit last week makes it doubly important to mulch and water newly transplanted roses, perennials, evergreens, potted trees and shrubs.
Water them deeply, once a week if necessary, all summer and fall, to help them establish good root systems.
Continue to remove faded flowers and flower stems from tulips and other spring-blooming bulbs.
Prune forsythias, deutzias and lilacs after they finish blooming.


A Price of Precision Is Memory Strain
THE annual Cavendish Invitational Pairs, normally played over Mother's Day weekend, is unlike any other bridge event.
Many of the world's best players take part and are involved in substantial entry fees, cash prizes and a Calcutta pool.
At the 19th gathering, played at Loew's Summit Hotel in Manhattan a week ago, the playing conditions were excellent, but the quality of the field was lower than usual.
This was partly because the usual foreign entry was greatly diminished, probably for financial reasons, and partly because many experts chose to play with paying partners rather than with regular partners with whom they could aspire to victory.


In the Streets


Applied Materials (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to May 2


Optical Radiation Corp.  (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


A Vermont Yankee in French Canada
John LeClair grew up in Vermont and listened to Boston Bruins games on the radio.
The storied history of the Canadiens' franchise was not a part of his childhood, and the hockey fever that is an obsession in Montreal is not second nature to him.
Still, he understands.
It has been seven years since the Stanley Cup resided in this city, and that is too long for the Montreal fans.
Pittsburgh is gone, eliminated by the Islanders, and that means that Stanley Cup hopes have turned into Stanley Cup expectations for LeClair and his fellow Canadiens.


Staples Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to May 1


Coping With Kids Is Knicks' Headache
He's lovable, he's cute and he's the darling of underdogs worldwide.
But nearing the end of the second quarter, enough was enough.
Doc Rivers had taken about all he could from Muggsy Bogues.
Rivers and Patrick Ewing had just tried to run a pick and roll.
With the ball, Rivers bent forward as the play began to unfold.
Bogues stepped up and, wham, his head butted Rivers above the right eye.


Unitil Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


BBDO Revamps Creative Department
BBDO New York said Friday that it would reorganize its creative department so that the staff would report to one top executive rather than two.
The reorganization ends five years of dual creative leadership under Ted Sann and Charlie Miesmer, vice chairmen and executive creative directors.
Mr.
Sann, 47, has been promoted to chief creative officer, effective immediately.
That position had been vacant since 1988, when Philip B. Dusenberry relinquished it to become the agency's chairman and chief executive.
Mr.
Sann, who currently oversees accounts including Pepsi-Cola, Gillette, General Electric and Du Pont, will continue to do that for the time being, in addition to assuming the responsibility of overseeing the agency's entire creative product.


Puzzle of New York City's Growing Budget
Only in the upside-down world of New York City budget-making could the Mayor talk of hard times and spending cuts to close a budget gap while the bottom line of his budget is growing faster than inflation.
But that is exactly what has happened.
While Mayor David N. Dinkins and City Council leaders are preparing for a tough budget that will probably contain millions of dollars in spending cuts in some areas, the overall cost of the city government has actually grown by $1.1 billion in the last 12 months and will grow at least by another $800 million in the next fiscal year, budget officials said.


Allegheny &amp; Western Energy Corp. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  WEEKEND American League
MINNESOTA TWINS -- Placed Shane Mack, outfielder, on the 15-day disabled list, retroactive to May 15.
Purchased the contract of David McCarty, outfielder-first baseman, Portland of the Pacific Coast League.
National League
CINCINNATI REDS -- Recalled John Roper, pitcher, and Jacob Brumfield, outfielder, from Indianapolis of the American Association.
Sent Roper and Gary Varsho, outfielder, to Indianapolis.
Designated Travis Buckley, pitcher, for assignment.


Yankees Turn a Nice Home Into a Chamber of Defeat
A game was played at Yankee Stadium yesterday, which turned out to be bad news for the Yankees.
For home is where the hurt is for the residents of the Bronx of late.
And yesterday that hurt was applied in a big way by the Toronto Blue Jays.
Toronto, the defending World Series champions, made Yankee Stadium look not only like a bandbox but a part of its world, banging five home runs.
Two came off the bat of Paul Molitor, who lived up to his designated-hitter's title and lived off Yankees pitching all day as he set the tone in a 12-6 Toronto victory.


'You Weren't a Tokyo Motors Type.'
Some excerpts from "The Kieretsu," written by Ikko Shimizu and translated by Tamae K. Prindle:
"Shall we send down a new president for you?" Abe said it as casually as if he were throwing a bone to a dog.


Review/City Ballet; Recalling the Balanchine Of the Star-Studded 50's
Dancers danced very differently in George Balanchine's New York City Ballet in the 1950's than in later years, and that special and creative era in the company's history was recalled in its "Balanchine Celebration" over the weekend.
A geyser of nearly forgotten ballets brought in three Balanchine classical showpieces: the sparkling "Minkus Pas de Trois" (1951), the glittering "Glinka Pas de Trois" (1955) and the luminous but difficult "Sylvia Pas de Deux" (1950).


Emerging Battlefronts in Software Strategy Wars; Microsoft as Arbiter Of 'Paperless Office'
The Microsoft Corporation has quietly assembled an alliance of office-equipment makers, through which it hopes to establish a "paperless office" software standard.
The standard is meant to enable the creation of networks linking desktop computers, copiers, facsimile machines, printers and telephones.
Microsoft, whose Windows software has become an industry standard for personal computers, wants to use Windows as the means for consolidating control of virtually every piece of electronic equipment in the modern business office.


Help Newark's Failing Schools 1
In the wake of a damaging report by a team of investigators, New Jersey's Education Commissioner has appointed a special auditor to oversee schools in Newark.
The appointment brings the state a step closer to taking over its largest school district.
Newark school officials insist they can put their own house in order.
But the report documents serious, systemic problems, including poor management of finances and academic programs.
It's time for aggressive state intervention.


Water Found Safe to Drink
Residents of the Bay Ridge section of Brooklyn were told yesterday that their tap water was safe to drink again, after routine testing had discovered high levels of bacteria in three samples late last week.
Albert F. Appleton, Commissioner of the city's Department of Environmental Protection, told a news conference that some businesses in the neighborhood were to be commended for even "lowering the price of bottled water" during the two days that residents were told to either boil their tap water or use bottled water.
About 60,000 residents were affected in the area at the southern end of the borough.


Bowe Is Still Fighting Growing Pains
There is always a hum when the heavyweight champion of the world is in the room.
But near the ring set up in the Convention Center here, Riddick Bowe is sitting passively.
Eddie Futch is taping his hands.
In a few minutes, the 6-foot-5-inch, 240-pound Bowe will knock sparring partners about the ring, getting ready for the defense of his World Boxing Association and International Boxing Federation titles against Jesse Ferguson on Saturday night.


Croatia Is Facing Pressure to Stop Fighting by Bosnia Croats
As fierce fighting between Croats and Muslims in the Bosnian city of Mostar entered its eighth day, officials in the Croatian capital faced growing international pressure this weekend to restrain their surrogates in neighboring Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Appalled by the carnage and by newspaper and television images over the last week showing hundreds of Muslims being herded into a detention camp outside Mostar, the European Community and the United Nations have already raised the possibility of imposing sanctions against Croatia if its Government does not bring the Bosnian Croats to heel.


Editorial Notebook; Points of Light in South Africa
Helen Lieberman was a speech therapist in a Cape Town hospital when she went to check on the condition of a black child after surgery and discovered the child had been discharged.
"The baby surely was going to die without follow-up care," she recalled.
"But the mother couldn't afford the bus fare for treatment because the father likely had no job. It was so very sad and the hospital was already overwhelmed by a heavy caseload."
So Mrs.
Lieberman went into the black township of Langa, itself an illegal act under apartheid, to look for the mother and child.
That was about 25 years ago.
She found them, and found a calling as well: Ikamva Labantu.


Suicide Doctor Tests Law, Stays With Man Who Dies
Acting without a medical license and apparently defying for the first time a Michigan law created to stop assisted suicide, Dr.
Jack Kevorkian was with a man who killed himself today.
Shortly before 10:50 A.M., a 54-year-old man suffering from lung and bone cancer died with Dr.
Kevorkian at his side at a real estate office in Detroit, according to the Detroit police and Dr.
Kevorkian's lawyer, Geoffrey Fieger.


6 More Die in Gaza As Violence Widens And Tensions Grow
In the fiercest attack against Israelis since the Government closed the occupied territories seven weeks ago, two vegetable dealers and their two Arab business partners were shot to death today in the Gaza Strip.
In separate incidents, Israeli troops also shot and killed two children in Gaza.
One was an 18-month-old infant who was playing nearby during a clash between soldiers and local youths.
The other was an 11-year-old boy; witnesses said he was shot as he started to run away after seeing soldiers enter the street where he was playing.


Karen Koorejian and Stanley Chartoff
Karen Koorejian, a daughter of Mrs.
Harry Koorejian of Orange, Conn., and the late Mr.
Koorejian, was married yesterday to Dr.
Stanley Edward Chartoff, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Maurice Chartoff of Union, N.J.
Rabbi Steven Mason officiated at the Milford (Conn.) Yacht Club.
The Rev.
Untzag Nalbandian, an Armenian Apostolic priest, took part in the ceremony.
Mrs.
Chartoff is a nursing administrator at the Hospital of Saint Raphael in New Haven.
She graduated from Columbia University and received a master's degree in health policy and management from Harvard University.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
Under heavy lobbying by the drug industry, the Clinton Administration has apparently decided not to impose rigid controls on drug prices, opting instead to set guidelines for new drugs, monitor compliance and reprimand companies whose prices are judged to be excessive.  [ Page A1. ]
The tax plan cleared by a House Ways and Means Committee last week includes a break for small businesses that buy new equipment.
But some say the provision's benefits are narrow.  [ D4. ]


An Eponymous Honor for Perot
What do you call an award to be presented to the year's best example of an campaign that was outstanding in theory, but somehow didn't produce the intended results?
To the Advertising Club of Westchester, the answer is the Perot.


Okaputa Journal; Cheetah's Race With Fate: U.S. Couple to Rescue
Of the two species the American conservationists work with here on the thorn-tree plains of central Namibia -- cheetahs and farmers -- it is hard to tell which is more vexing.
The cheetah, with its magnificent but overspecialized body and its genetic frailties, defies all the conventional strategies for protecting it from extinction.
The farmer, who is inclined to see the cheetah as vermin and the conservationist as a bookish buttinsky, makes an unlikely partner in the salvation of the species.


Grey Advertising Wins Egg Account
The American Egg Board said on Friday that it had selected Grey Advertising in New York to handle its account, which has been handled by CME KHBB Advertising in Chicago, for the last 17 years.
Billings were estimated at $5 million to $10 million.


New Chairman For Forbes
Forbes Inc. will announce today the appointment of former Secretary of Defense Caspar W. Weinberger as chairman, company executives said.
The position has been vacant since the death of Malcolm S. Forbes in 1990.
Mr.
Weinberger, 75, has been publisher of Forbes magazine since 1989.
He will be succeeded by Jeffrey M. Cunningham, 40, who has been associate publisher of the magazine for three years.


Bookseller's Art of the Headlines
The goal of a publisher is to sell as many books as possible, and yet, when a Federal judge recently temporarily barred Harper Collins from distributing "A Dark and Bloody Ground," by Darcy O'Brien, the publisher got an unexpected windfall.
The judge's action prompted news stories, which in turn ignited interest in the book's subject, a gruesome 1985 murder in rural Kentucky.
Suddenly, a book that had been selling slowly was "hot," especially in the Southeast where the killing took place and the judge's order was issued.


Patents
THESE are heady times for Peter T. Caserta, president and chief executive of Spectrum Information Technologies Inc.
Last week more than 30 million shares of his small company in Manhasset, L.I., traded over the counter and gained better than 70 percent, closing the week at $6.98.
The reason?
The American Telephone and Telegraph Company agreed Tuesday to license Spectrum's patents for transmitting data over cellular networks.
Mr.
Caserta is scheduled to talk with the Rockwell International Corporation today about a licensing agreement; next week he meets with the International Business Machines Corporation.


In Sri Lanka, Partition Can Stop the Violence; Intervention Needed
To the Editor:
"The Tragedy of Sri Lanka" (editorial, May 5) focuses on the role of political Buddhism in the destruction of Sri Lanka.
Propaganda and news management have kept the dark side of Sinhala Buddhist ideology hidden from the rest of the world.


Monica Zangwill, Robert Markstein
Dr.
Monica Laurie Zangwill, a resident in internal medicine at the New England Medical Center in Boston, was married yesterday to Robert Loth Markstein, a business manager for the radiology group of the Beth Israel Hospital, also in Boston.
Rabbi H. Bruce Ehrmann performed the ceremony at the Royal Sonesta Hotel in Cambridge, Mass.
The bride graduated from Tufts University, from which she also received her M.D.
She is the daughter of Judith Zangwill of Washington and Dr.
Willard Zangwill of Chicago.
Her father is a professor of management of science at the Graduate School of Business at the University of Chicago.
Her mother is the director of the Kingsbury Day School in Washington.


Without Help, Trails Don't Stay Trails for Long


Critic's Notebook; After the Soaps, Others' Lives to Live
On a record breakingly hot afternoon last week, I raised the steam level by spending an hour with Oprah Winfrey, Phil Donahue and Geraldo Rivera.
They go head to head to head (which is not to say that is the body part in most frequent use), at 4 P.M. in New York City.
So I had to switch from Channel 7 ("Oprah") to Channel 4 ("Donahue") to Channel 2 ("Geraldo") and back and forth to keep track of what the three popular television presences were up to or down to.
This method of watching is recommended for the viewer who needs to fill in at least part of that desperate space between the soaps and the sitcoms but whose tolerance for any one of the practitioners does not exceed 20 minutes.
Also, this way you can finesse most of the commercials.


Longs Drug Stores Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to April 29


In Growing Piles, Dead Tires Haunt New York
New Yorkers have endured more than their share of latter-day urban plagues -- from graffiti and street crime to car alarms that go off in the middle of the night.
Now come tires, thousands upon thousands of them, in tumbledown piles in vacant lots, scattered beneath elevated highways like steel-belted doughnuts baking to a vulcanized doneness in the warm spring air.
Largely because environmental restrictions have raised the cost of disposing of them, discarded tires have increasingly become fixtures of the city's landscape in poorer neighborhoods in the South Bronx, Queens and Brooklyn, creating a visual blight that has begun to alarm residents and community leaders.


Brady (W.H.) Co. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Under Pact, Tobacco Ads Banned on Phone Booths
New York City took another step yesterday in its campaign to ban tobacco advertising from public property, announcing an agreement with the New York Telephone Company to prohibit such advertisements on thousands of telephone booths around the city starting next August.
The agreement banning tobacco advertisements from 4,268 phone booths on city property, 80 percent of them in Manhattan, is expected to be ratified today by the city's Franchise Concession and Review Committee, composed of Mayor David N. Dinkins, Comptroller Elizabeth Holtzman and the city's borough presidents, all of whom joined yesterday in applauding the pact.


RESULTS PLUS
TENNIS  A Birthday Trouncing  Top-seeded Steffi Graf spoiled Gabriela Sabatini's 23d birthday by beating the Argentine, 7-6, 2-6, 6-4, yesterday in the German Open final in Berlin.
The second-seeded Sabatini seemed to wilt in the third set, and Graf, the defending champion and now a seven-time Berlin champion, converted her first match point to win in 2 hours 18 minutes.
"Maybe it wasn't the right birthday gift," Graf said of her victory. (AP) First Title for Martin: Todd Martin defeated David Wheaton by 6-3, 6-4 to win the inaugural $225,000 America's Red Clay Championship, his first ATP Tour title, in Coral Gables, Fla.


Who's Got a Secret? Disillusioned Helper Is Battling the C.I.A.
Erwin Rautenberg did the Central Intelligence Agency a favor more than 36 years ago, a secret service for his country.
In return, he says, the C.I.A. sold him out after closing down a covert business it had operated in his name, leaving him adrift in a sea of legal and financial troubles.
Among them, he says, were hundreds of thousands of dollars in bills and liabilities amassed by the covert company.


Davies Deserved Break And Got Championship
Laura Davies overcame nervousness, an untimely rain delay and her own mercurial style today to win the McDonald's Championship.
By holing a six-foot par putt on the final hole, the long-hitting Davies beat Sherri Steinhauer by one stroke.
It earned the 29-year-old Englishwoman the $135,000 first prize and her fifth career victory on the Ladies Professional Golf Association tour.


Buckley Back With Pack
TERRELL BUCKLEY says he will quit playing minor league baseball in time to join the Green Bay Packers on July 17, the mandatory reporting date for veterans.
"My planning not to be there has never been a consideration," Buckley, an outfielder for the Class A Macon (Ga.) Braves, said Saturday.


Major Realty Corp. (NSC) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Virginia Women Take 2d Title in 2d Overtime
Kelly Cowan and Cherie Greer scored goals in the second overtime yesterday to give Virginia the women's N.C.A.A.
Division I lacrosse championship with an 8-6 victory over Princeton at College Park, Md.
In a game delayed by rain twice for a total of more than two hours, the scored was tied at 5-5 at end of the second 30-minute half.
Then each team scored once in the first three-minute overtime on goals by Lisa Rabane of Princeton and Kelly Daddona of Virginia.
The Tigers had an early 3-goal margin and led at halftime, 4-3.


College Torn By Shooting Tries to Heal
It looked like any other graduation day at Simon's Rock College: students and their families sat on lush lawns, sharing picnic lunches; Frisbees were flying and family dogs chased children about the flower-covered grounds.
But even as the ceremony began, college officials acknowledged that it was a bittersweet commencement this year, as students tried to reconcile their grief over the shooting deaths last December of a classmate and a professor with the joy of their own academic accomplishments.


DIALOGUE -- Are 1,000 Federal Judges Enough?; No. More Cases Should Be Heard.
The right of ordinary citizens to use the Federal courts is in jeopardy.
The threat comes from an unexpected source: the Federal judiciary itself.
There is a growing movement among Federal judges to freeze the number of judgeships at 1,000, when what is needed is just the opposite, a substantial increase.
The freeze, under consideration by the United States Judicial Conference, the policy-making arm of the Federal Judiciary, would turn the Federal courts into an elitist institution and advance the philosophical agenda of Chief Justice William Rehnquist and Justice Antonin Scalia.
For years, these conservative jurists have sought to limit public access to Federal courts through procedural rulings involving arcane issues such as standing, mootness and ripeness.


Poll Finds New Yorkers Unhappy With Schools
New Yorkers are overwhelmingly dissatisfied with the quality of the public schools in the city, but many express doubts over whether Schools Chancellor Joseph A. Fernandez should have been ousted, according to the latest New York Times/WCBS-TV News Poll.
Seventy-two percent of 1,273 adult city residents interviewed Tuesday through Friday said they were dissatisfied with "the quality of public schools in New York City," while 14 percent said they were satisfied.
Those who currently have children attending public school were almost as negative in their judgments: 67 percent expressed dissatisfaction with the public schools, while 28 percent said they were satisfied.


Blurred Vision on Health Reform
Shrouded in secrecy, Hillary Rodham Clinton's task force on health has officially revealed little about its deliberations.
And though many of its decisions have leaked, a clear picture has yet to emerge, largely because the task force hasn't made up its mind on many fundamental questions.
Holding up progress is an internal battle whose outlines were made clear last week by Ira Magaziner, a senior task force official, in remarks to a group of manufacturers.
On one side are those, like Mr.
Magaziner, who believe competition is the best tool for reining in health care costs while encouraging innovation.
On the other side are those who believe medical costs will spiral higher until Washington slaps price controls and regulations on insurers, doctors and hospitals.
The difference is so profound that it remains unclear whether the task force will emerge with a useful hybrid or a mishmash of conflicting ideas.


Despite Yugoslav Boycott, Traffic Into Bosnia Appears Steady
A pledge by Serbia and Yugoslavia to cut supply lines to Bosnian Serbs has slowed but not stopped traffic crossing into Bosnia and Herzegovina at this border checkpoint.
Yugoslav soldiers are posted at the Drina River crossings, but it remains uncertain whether a full embargo is being enforced.
While a soldier here let most large vehicles pass without inspection, he said all freight allowed to cross the border qualified as food or medicine, which are exempt from the embargo.


Amy Underberg, David Applebaum
Amy Singer Underberg, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Neil Underberg of New York, was married yesterday in Mamaroneck, N.Y., to David Paul Applebaum, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Stanley Applebaum of Todt Hill, S.I.
Rabbi Emily Korzenik performed the ceremony at the Beach Point Club.
Mrs.
Applebaum, 28, is an assistant treasurer at the Fuji Bank in New York.
She graduated from Cornell University and received an M.B.A. from New York University.
Her father is a senior partner at the New York law firm of Whitman &amp; Ransom.


1,500 Offer a Tribute to Tambo For His Leadership of the A.N.C.
One after another, ambassadors, politicians and celebrities walked up to the altar at the Cathedral of St.
John the Divine in upper Manhattan to praise a fallen comrade, Oliver Reginald Tambo, during a memorial service yesterday.
Mr.
Tambo, who died of a stroke on April 23 in Johannesburg at the age of 75, presided over the African National Congress for more than 25 years while the organization was banned and many of its leaders either jailed or exiled.


Past Holds Future at New Lyons Opera House
The posters are all over France: "Un Nouvel Opera -- Lyon." This is a play on words.
The phrase means "new opera," but it is also a recognition of Jean Nouvel, one of France's best-known if most controversial architects, who designed the striking new opera house that opened here this weekend with a mini-festival of premieres.
But "a new opera" is not quite accurate.
This weekend has been an important event in the cultural history of France, not just of Lyons, on several counts: architectural, musical, operatic, choreographic and political.
But overriding all was the French esthetic desire and national need to unite new with old, to create novelty from the very act of remaining true to tradition.


2 Women Found Dead in Bronx Apartment
Two young women were found shot to death yesterday in an apartment in a South Bronx housing project, the police said.
The body of Lourdes Cruz, 18, was discovered in a rear bedroom of her family's ninth floor apartment in the Mill Brook Houses at 169 Cypress Avenue near East 135th Street in the Mott Haven section, the police said.


Abortion Battle Lines Drawn in New York; Debate Rages On Outside of Clinics
Just hours after the dawn broke pink and chilly over Manhattan, Melanie D. and her boyfriend hurried down Broadway to keep an appointment Melanie had made for an abortion.
In front of the Upper West Side medical office, they were greeted by graphic posters of fetuses, three men praying and a woman handing out pictures of dismembered babies.
There were police officers, curious onlookers and women imploring the two to ignore the cacophony.
"The abortion was bad enough but I felt like I was caught in the middle of a circus," said Melanie, an 18-year-old college student who did not want her full name used.
"Somebody yelled something like 'you can keep your baby' and all I could think was no, you don't understand." Prayer Vigils and Pleas
The scene described by Melanie is played out every Saturday morning in front of about 20 clinics in the New York City area as protesters try to dissuade women from going inside to undergo abortions.
While the prayer vigils and shouted pleas to save "the unborn" have been fixtures of highly publicized abortion protests in places like Wichita, Buffalo and Atlanta, they have lately become a greater part of New York life in an escalating struggle to sway public opinion.


Angelica Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to May 2


When in Rome, Try Not to Play Courier
It was the battle that wasn't -- an explosive, well-balanced firefight that was smothered before it could ignite.
Playing with total concentration and focus, Jim Courier suppressed hard-serving Goran Ivanisevic today on his way to a one-sided 6-1, 6-2, 6-2 victory in the Italian Open final.
Courier, who also won last year at the Foro Italico, became the first player to win back-to-back Rome titles since Czechoslovakia's Jaroslav Drobny did it in 1950-51.


Samaranch Talks 2000
The question of human rights will be an important factor in deciding the site of the 2000 Olympics, International Olympic Committee President JUAN ANTONIO SAMARANCH said yesterday in Sydney, Australia.
Beijing is one of six cities vying for the right to host the 2000 Olympics.
Its bid has been widely criticized, however, because of human rights abuses by China's authoritarian government.


Bridge
For those who wish to add some new conventions to their bag of tricks, or want to understand what their opponents are up to, a newly published booklet will be very useful.
It is "Conventions at a Glance," by Pamela and Matthew Granovetter, and it is available for $10.95 including mailing from Bridge Today magazine: (216) 371-5849).
One of the hundred or so conventions listed is "Transfer Lebensohl," and an example is the diagramed deal.
The idea is that when one no-trump is overcalled, bids of two no-trump and higher show the next higher suit, so North's three-diamond bid showed heart length, with invitational values or better.
The good fit induced South to jump to four hearts, and the contract was played from the better side of the table.


Stewart &amp; Stevenson (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


The Talk of Hollywood; They're Extinct, but They May Rule This Summer
As private screenings go, the one last Monday afternoon at Universal Studios was definitely a hot ticket.
The top executives at the studio as well as Michael Ovitz, the chairman of Creative Artists Agency, trooped into a screening room to watch, for the first time, Steven Spielberg's "Jurassic Park."
The film, about a group of genetically produced dinosaurs who run amok in a theme park, will be opening on June 11 to considerable nervousness at Universal because of its cost ($60 million to $75 million) and because of the flood of competitive summer movies arriving over the next two months.
By the finale of the film, though, the audience was relieved, even pleased.


Blessings Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to April 24


Microsemi Corp. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to April 4


Turgeon's Wedding Date Now Has An *
Pierre Turgeon wants to back out of his June 5 wedding date.
It's not that the Islanders' star center doesn't want to marry Elisabeth St.
Jacques in Bermuda as planned.
It's merely that he'd rather continue in the Stanley Cup playoffs that evening.
If Turgeon's Islanders survive the Wales Conference final by eliminating the Montreal Canadiens, they will play Game 3 of the championship round against the Campbell Conference winner (either Los Angeles or Toronto) on the Saturday when the wedding is scheduled.


Books of The Times; Beyond Facts to the Realities of War
The Balkan Express  Fragments From the Other Side of War  By Slavenka Drakulic  146 pages.
W.
W.
Norton &amp; Company. $19.95.
"There mustn't be any more war," an old French peasant woman is reputed to have said to Aristide Briand in 1917.
"It disturbs too many people." Judging from what is now going on in the Balkans, war disturbs people so extremely that they tend to push its reality from their minds.


Nationalist Says Serbs' Rejection Of Pact Means the End of Bosnia
Radovan Karadzic, leader of the Bosnian Serbs, said today that the imminent failure of a referendum on a peace plan for Bosnia opened the way for a "Greater Serbia" that no outside military or political pressure could change.
"Bosnia never existed, and it will never exist," he said, offering the view -- common among Serbian nationalists -- that Bosnia, as it existed when it was part of the Yugoslav federation, was an artificial creation.


Longview Fibre Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Review/Pop; Dolly Parton Heads From the Mountains Up to Carnegie Hall
All of Dolly Parton's contradictions showed up in the opening to her concert on Friday night at Carnegie Hall.
As taped crickets chirped, a fiddler walked on stage to play what might have been a folk tune, backed by an electronic keyboard.
A banjo player turned up, and the tune shifted to bluegrass tempo; then it mutated into the show tune "Hello Dolly" as the singer made her entrance down the aisle in a dress that was all sequins.
Backwoods country gal turned glittering show-business pro, Ms.
Parton gets away with some of the tackiest pop gambits by flaunting her down-home roots.
She's a personality now, a creature of talk shows as well as back-porch sing-alongs.
Onstage she interspersed songs with well-crafted chat, from childhood tales of sleeping three to a bed to reminders of her movie career to slick punch lines: "It costs a lot to make a person look this cheap." But behind the trappings is a voice that still summons the twang, clarity and feathery ornaments of mountain music, when it's not too shrill.


CLINTON AIDES SEEK NEW REVIEW BOARD FOR DRUG PRICING
President Clinton's health policy advisers have suggested that the Government set guidelines for new drug prices, monitor compliance and reprimand companies whose prices are judged to be excessive.
But under heavy lobbying by the drug industry, the Administration has apparently backed away from the idea of trying to impose rigid, legally binding controls on drug prices.
Prominent Democrats, including the Senate majority leader, George J. Mitchell, have also expressed distaste for price controls in general.


Inside Post Offices, the Mail Is Only Part of the Pressure
The people who sort and carry the mail, sell the stamps and drive the trucks -- and even many postal managers -- say there is nothing mysterious about the conditions that have stirred 10 enraged workers to kill 34 co-workers and supervisors at post offices in seven states in the past 10 years.
The workers say one reason may be the nature of the job -- sorting letters on machines at a rate of one per second, lifting and throwing thousands of packages a day, making deliveries at a pace management sets.
The job, they say, fosters tensions as well as high rates of injury.


Cagle's Inc.  reports earnings for Year to April 3


Supermarket Dispute Continues in New Jersey and New York


Duke Graduates Urged to Help Others
H.
Keith H. Brodie, who will retire June 30 after eight years as president of Duke University, conferred degrees on 1,428 undergraduates and 1,553 graduate and professional students yesterday at the college's 141st commencement exercises.
The ceremony was held at Wallace Wade Stadium on the campus in Durham, N.C.
Senator Bill Bradley, Democrat of New Jersey, delivered the main address.
A Rhodes Scholar and professional basketball player before his political career, he was awarded an honorary doctor of laws degree.


Photo Center Founder To Retire Next Year
Cornell Capa, who founded the International Center of Photography in 1974 and has been its only director, has announced his intention to resign next year.
Mr.
Capa, who recently turned 75, said he would remain until June 1994 to allow the center's board to look for a successor.
"I'm a little tired after 19 years," Mr.
Capa said in an interview.
"I made an agreement with the board some time ago that when I decided to leave I would give them time to find someone to take my place."


Jones Intercable Investors L.P.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Danes Voting Again on Europe Union
Almost one year after Denmark threw the European Community into disarray by rejecting an ambitious blueprint for regional unity, Danish voters will have a chance to change their minds in a new referendum on the Maastricht treaty on Tuesday.
While approval seems likely this time round, it may not suffice to lift the region out of its current gloom.
Since the shock of the Danish vote last June, economic recession, rising nationalism and the war in Bosnia and Herzegovina have all emerged as bigger threats to European unity.


In Sri Lanka, Partition Can Stop the Violence; The Regional Bully
To the Editor:
"The Tragedy of Sri Lanka" (editorial, May 5) gives an unbalanced view.
Before independence Sri Lanka's large Sinhalese majority was dominated by the Tamil minority, in collusion with British colonial rule.
The Sinhalese assertion of majority status redressed an imbalance through a democratic process.


Stephanie Golob, Rafael Yuste-Rojas
Stephanie Ruth Golob, the daughter of Mimi and Norman Golob of Rego Park, Queens, was married yesterday to Rafael Marcos Yuste-Rojas, a son of Jose Luis Yuste and Victoria Rojas of Madrid.
Cantor Hilda Abrevaya performed the ceremony at the U.N.
Plaza-Park Hyatt Hotel in New York.
Ms.
Golob, 27, is keeping her name.
She is a doctoral candidate in political science at Harvard University.
She graduated summa cum laude from Yale University, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa.
Her father is the office administrator for the accounting firm of Friedman, Alpren &amp; Green in New York.
Her mother is the director of information services for Whitehall Laboratories in New York.


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY  WHAT TO DO WITH 4 MILLION TIRES?
An estimated four million tires are discarded -- legally and illegally -- in New York City each year.
As a result, the Sanitation Department is now finishing a survey to determine how many discarded tires are cluttering the city's streets and vacant lots.
Once the counting is done the department can turn to figuring out what to do with them.
Already the department is buying new shredders to help with the disposal and is considering a plan to attract tire recyclers to New York.
A1.
CAMPAIGN AGAINST TOBACCO ADS
New York City has taken another step in its campaign to ban tobacco advertising from public property, announcing an agreement with the New York Telephone Company to prohibit such ads on thousands of telephone booths around the city starting in August.
B3.


ABC's Sitcom Recipe Starts With 'Take Family of Four...'
It may not have been a winning theme for the Republican Party, but ABC has seen how successful "family values" can be in the television business.
And so when ABC presented its fall lineup of prime-time shows to advertisers last week, it sounded the family theme like a call to arms.
Ted Harbert, the president of ABC Entertainment, pointed out that the network's founder, Leonard Goldenson, created ABC expressly as the network that would be watched by the young postwar families.
In its programming, it always took children into account.
For last week's presentations, the network even added a new demographic chart to the standard array it always brings out at such events.
This one spelled out ABC's strength in this important category: Viewing in households that have families of four or more people.
Though the network has collected information on this grouping for some time, it had never before made it public, said Marvin Goldsmith, the president of ABC sales and marketing.
The reason for the change was obvious: While CBS won the overall household rankings last season, ABC dominated this narrower category.
With these large-family audiences ABC averaged a 7.6 rating, compared with a 6.3 for CBS, a 6 rating for NBC and a 4.9 for the Fox network. (Each rating point represents 931,000 homes).
Among shows returning next season, ABC had 8 of the 10 highest rated among families of four or more.
In putting together its list of new shows for the fall, ABC set out to "drive the point home," as Mr.
Goldsmith put it.
The new ABC schedule has the look of a family photo album.
The network is adding six new comedies about families of four of more, in the belief that big families like to watch shows about big families.
Not one new ABC comedy is set in a workplace, as NBC's "Cheers" or CBS's "Murphy Brown" are.
There are no comedies about adult relationships, like NBC's "Seinfeld" or "Mad About You." All the new ABC comedies have children as essential characters.
One, "Boy Meets World," is told from the point of view of an 11-year-old.
So many children work for the new shows on ABC next season that the network could use them to form its own Little League team -- and have enough left over to give an opponent.
Two shows with married parents have two children each.
Another married couple in another show has three.
The three other comedies center on single mothers raising families, and they have at least three children each (one has four).
So every family configuration on ABC adds up to that magic family of four or more.
ABC knows it can turn that magic into ratings -- and revenue.
Mr.
Goldsmith said the network's schedule was ideal for advertisers selling packaged goods, food products or anything that families consume.
"The people who watch our shows are the people who go out and buy products," Mr.
Goldsmith said.
"You're certainly not taking any risks by going after families," said Steve Sternberg, the senior vice president of broadcast research for Bozell Inc., the advertising agency.
"If you get the family, you get everybody."
ABC has learned this lesson through previous success.
The big hits on ABC are family-centered hits: "Roseanne," "Home Improvement" and "Full House." In the cases of the first two, family shows were built around a stand-up comedian.
But "Full House" has been constructed around a character played by twin girls who are now only 6 years old.
The series has proved to ABC that it can broadcast a show that basically appeals to children, but pulls in their parents as well.
In contrast, when ABC has strayed from the family theme in recent years -- with challenging dramas like "Civil Wars," "China Beach" and "Twin Peaks" -- the ratings suffered.
The competition acknowledges that ABC has all but cornered the family-viewing market.
David F. Poltrack, the senior vice president of research for CBS, said, "It's obviously an effective marketing strategy." But he asserted that ABC's strategy can have a down side.
"Most of ABC's viewing, especially in their 8 o'clock shows, is child-driven," Mr.
Poltrack said.
"The primary viewer for them is a child." In other words, the child picks the show that the family watches.
Mr.
Poltrack cited statistics showing that among households where a child is present, ABC owns 14 of the 20 highest-rated shows.
But in households without a child, CBS has 9 of the top 20, and ABC only 6.
Further, Mr.
Poltrack said, adults pay less attention to the shows their children select and often watch them only because they want to spend time with the children.
He added that in terms of qualitative ratings, research periodically conducted by the networks in which adults are asked which shows they like, they never choose children-oriented shows.
"This makes a difference with advertisers looking to reach adults with their products," Mr.
Poltrack said.
But Mr.
Goldsmith said ABC is planning shows for adult viewers as well.
It certainly seems to have one in a new series called "NYPD Blue," which raised the temperature in the room at the ABC presentation through its visceral presentation of a New York police officer's life, complete with steamy sex scenes and rugged language.
"The advertisers are taking a wait-and-see view on it," Mr.
Goldsmith said.
"But some are already excited by it." He said a movie company executive had already offered to buy commercials on "NYPD Blue" for upcoming films.
The other danger in the ABC family strategy would seem to be a trend toward blandness.
"If you look at those new comedies," Mr.
Sternberg said, "it looks like they were all shot on the same set."
And Betsy Frank, senior vice president of Saatchi and Saatchi Advertising, questioned whether ABC, in making a group of perfectly pleasant family comedies, might be cutting off an audience looking for something a little more challenging.
"There's nothing sophisticated among these shows," Ms.
Frank said.
"I wonder where all those quality dramas went."
They went where every television show goes that doesn't hit with big audiences or advertisers: the cancellation bin.


Equity and Convertible Debt Issues Expected This Week
The following equity and convertible debt offerings are expected this week:
Arrow Electronics, Melville, L.I., 5.1 million shares. Goldman, Sachs &amp; Co.
Audio/Video Affiliates Inc., Dayton, Ohio, 2 million shares. Prudential Securities.


Pentium Chips to Debut In Computer Products
The age of Pentium, the newest and fastest microprocessor created by the Intel Corporation, formally begins today when more than two dozen companies will announce a wide variety of products that contain the chip.
And in the same competitive pattern of the users of the older versions of Intel's wildly successful family of computer chips, which are the brains for millions of personal computers, this race will begin with a slow walk, not a sprint.
Shipments of the new chip will be limited most of the year.


Accounts
*
Bell Sports Inc., Campbell, Calif., to Mandelbaum Mooney Ashley, San Francisco, to handle the bicycle accessory company's Rhode Gear and Blackburn lines, previously handled by, respectively, Rossin Greenberg Seronick, Boston, and Mathews Design Group, Campbell.
Billings were not disclosed.


Pet Owners Walk Their Dogs for a Different Reason


Melanie Wingert And Jesse Stovin
Melanie Lynne Wingert, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert A. Wingert of Mechanicsburg, Pa., was married yesterday to Jesse Daniel Stovin, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
James J. Stovin of New York.
The Rev.
David S. Lothrop, a Presbyterian minister, performed the ceremony at Barbetta Restaurant in New York.
Mrs.
Stovin, 24, is an actress in New York.
She graduated summa cum laude from the University of North Carolina.


Optima's Promising Rescue Effort
With a blue cardigan casually covering his plaid shirt, Frank L. Skillern looks a little out of place sitting at the dark wooden table in a sober private dining room high atop the American Express tower.
"Fridays are dress-down days," he said apologetically, explaining that the policy had been instituted by Harvey Golub, who was named chief executive of American Express in February.


People
*
Ronald L. Lunde was named senior vice president and director of retail marketing at the Leo Burnett Company, Chicago, succeeding Thomas Dudreck, who was named a senior vice president and account director on the Philip Morris account.
Mr.
Lunde was previously president of the Lunde Company, Teaneck, N.J.


Belmont Beckoning, but There's No Stampede
The toll keeps mounting: Only 3 of the 12 horses who ran in the Preakness will definitely return for the Belmont Stakes, 3 others are interested but not yet committed and 6 won't be there.
And the defectors include Personal Hope and Too Wild, both of whom showed pulmonary bleeding during the Preakness and will be sent home to heal.
At the most, only 4 of the 19 horses who started the Kentucky Derby two weeks ago will end up running in all three Triple Crown classics.
And for the 15th straight year, no horse will sweep them.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A2-11  SERB DENOUNCES PEACE EFFORT


Former Cooper Union Chief Is Head of SUNY at Purchase
Bill Lacy, an architect and the former president of the Cooper Union for the Advancement of Science and Art in Manhattan, has been named president of the State University of New York at Purchase, university officials said today.
Mr.
Lacy succeeds Dr.
Sheldon N. Grebstein, 65, who announced last July that he would retire this summer after serving 12 years as president of SUNY Purchase, a center for the instruction and presentation of the arts in Westchester County and the surrounding area.


HOCKEY: Sports of The Times; Stanley Cup Dramas Are Not So Awful
AMIGHTY gnashing of teeth has been heard around North America since the baseball owners 'fessed up that they are planning an additional round of playoffs next year that will turn the World Series into the final round.
Purists are afraid that sacred baseball will become exactly like greedy basketball and profane hockey.
Gadzooks.


INSIDE
2 Ousted Board Chiefs Win Local School Races
Bronx voters returned to office the former presidents of two corruption-plagued local school boards, according to results of the May 4 election.
In a Manhattan district, a successful liberal slate included a lesbian, apparently the first openly gay candidate to win a board seat.
Page B1.
A Comeback for Yeltsin
Although Boris N. Yeltsin's referendum victory can be viewed as a dramatic comeback, he is not plunging ahead with major reforms.
Page A3.
A Darker Reading of Japan
The back-stabbing found in Japan's popular "economic novels" belies the nation's image of diligent workers and corporate consensus.
Page D1.
It's a Colt!
Genuine Risk, the 1980 Kentucky Derby winner, has finally delivered a healthy foal.
SportsMonday, C1.
Suicide Doctor Arrested
Dr.
Jack Kevorkian, acting without a medical license, was arrested after he attended the suicide of a 44-year-old man in Michigan, a state that recently passed legislation created to stop assisted suicide.
Page A12.


Israeli Right Threatens Resistance to Any Return of Land to Arabs
Although the Middle East peace talks have produced no tangible results, the specter of possible land concessions by Israel has driven the Israeli right to consider aggressive anti-Government resistance, reflected in a Likud Party convention that opened today on the Golan Heights.
There was obvious symbolism in Likud's choice of the main Golan town of Katzrin, even if only for a ceremonial opening before moving to Tel Aviv to consider an attempt by its new chairman, Benjamin Netanyahu, to concentrate party power in his own hands.


Honda Motor Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


F&amp;M Distributors Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to May 1


PULSE: Teen-Agers at Risk
Across the nation, increasing numbers of teen-agers are neither in school nor in the labor force.
Arrests of teen-agers for violent crimes have risen substantially.
Violent deaths are taking an ever greater toll.
The same troubling picture applies in this region, In New York, a teen-ager's likelihood of meeting a violent death increased at nearly three times the national average from 1985 to 1990 - though it remained less likely than in the nation as a whole.
From 1986 to 1991, the rate of teen-agers arrests for violent crimes grew slower in New York than in the nation.
And while more New York teen-agers dropped out of school and work between 1985 and 1990, a greater percentage of teen-agers in the region as a whole were enrolled or employed.


More for Your Dough In Big-Hole Bagels
To the Editor:
Re "Bagels Are Now Fast Food, and Purists Do a Slow Boil" (front page, April 25): Some years ago, my husband and I went on the Silk Road in China.
In the market in Kashgar, we were told to be sure and sample the "nan" or fried bread, a local delicacy.
They were sold hot, stacked on a pole, right from the oven -- they were bagels!
GAYLA HALBRECHT  Westport, Conn., May 3, 1993


Wolfgang Lotz, 73, Israeli Spy in Egypt
Wolfgang Lotz, an Israeli soldier who spied in Egypt from 1960 to 1965 while posing as a well-to-do German riding teacher and horse-breeder, died Thursday in Munich, the German newsmagazine Der Spiegel reported yesterday.
He was 73 and had lived in Germany since the 1970's after living in Tel Aviv.
Der Spiegel said the cause of death was heart trouble.


Dividend Meetings


CHRONICLE
EDWARD DAY, a retired Army colonel, wrote a letter to the Snapple Beverage Corporation about five months ago, telling the company, "Snapple is a super product, perhaps the only good that has ever come out of New York."
The company responded by sending him a sweatshirt and asking him for photos of himself and his house in Radcliff, Ky.
The colonel said the other day that he thought little about why until someone who feels differently about New York, former Mayor EDWARD I. KOCH, turned up on his doorstep in April.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; 2 magazine companies try getting personal by putting faces on their legions of readers.
NEW trade advertising campaigns for some of America's largest magazines eschew coolly rational facts and figures to paint warmly emotional portraits of their readers.
The campaigns, which begin appearing today, are the most recent in a spate of ads trying to take a personal tack in the typically statistics-laden realm of magazine sales pitches aimed at agencies and advertisers.
One campaign, for the magazine group of the Meredith Corporation, asserts that "If it has to do with home and family, it has to be in Meredith." The other campaign, for the Hachette Filipacchi Magazines monthly Elle, declares: "Elle is not a magazine. She is a woman."


Suzanne Roland, Lloyd R. Kahan
Dr.
Suzanne F. Roland, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Norman M. Roland of Great Neck, L.I., was married yesterday to Lloyd R. Kahan, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
Wallace C. Kahan of Poughkeepsie, N.Y.
Rabbi Mordeci Waxman performed the ceremony at the Stouffer Westchester Hotel in White Plains.
Mrs.
Kahan is a resident in radiology at the North Shore Hospital-Cornell Medical Center in Manhasset, L.I.
She graduated cum laude from Brandeis University and received an M.D. degree from the New York Medical College.
Her father is an endodontist in Great Neck and Huntington, L.I.
Her mother, Dr.
Marilyn Pearl, is a professor of radiology and the director of the department of radiology at the North Central Bronx Hospital.


Dance in Review
American Ballet Theater  Metropolitan Opera House
Glen Tetley's "Voluntaries" is a response to death.
Set to Poulenc's thundering Concerto for Organ, Strings and Percussion, "Voluntaries" is filled with images of contained anger and lyrical serenity.
New performers communicated those emotions in dancing that was exalted and elegiac in a performance by American Ballet Theater on Wednesday afternoon.


California's 'Reagan Country' Open Minded About Clinton
Standing on her front lawn barely out of earshot of her husband, Betty W. lowered her voice and told a secret.
"Yes, I did vote for Clinton," said the retired school secretary and longtime Reagan Democrat, giving only her first name because she feared scorn if her family found out.
"I didn't tell my husband. He voted for Ross Perot."
Now, on the eve of Bill Clinton's second visit to California since becoming President, Betty is a bit uncertain but still thinks she made the right choice.
"I don't know whether he's on the right track or not," she said.
"I just feel he's trying to do something."


Chronicling the Drama Of Japanese Business
The industrial image that Japan likes to present to the rest of the world is an economy in which diligent workers devote their lives to the company that employs them, management decisions are made by harmonious consensus and networks of affiliated companies work together for the common good.
But for a truer, darker view of what Japanese corporate life is really like, many Japanese turn to the nation's popular fiction, in particular what are called "economic novels." Here one finds a world of back-stabbing, board-room coups, pressure tactics, cheating and stifling working conditions -- in short, an unvarnished portrait of the nation's vaunted business system that is rarely found in newspapers and textbooks.


Corrections
Because of a computer typesetting error, the Nasdaq national market listings in the Business section yesterday omitted about 200 entries, between Environmental Technologies and In-Store Advertising.
The entries appear today in Business Day on page D8.


Reaching for Handshakes After Reaching a Goal


Cutting the Doctor Bill
To the Editor:
Your excellent May 4 article on health care reform and advocates of a single payer system failed to note the best argument for a single payer.
According to the General Accounting Office, such a system would save Americans some $67 billion a year by eliminating excessive administrative costs.
Other responsible analysts estimate savings of $70 billion to $100 billion.
EDWARD T. CHASE  New York, May 6, 1993


Abroad at Home; Foreign Policy Politics
President Clinton has wanted from the start to concentrate on the domestic issues that elected him.
To that end, I believe, he has decided to avoid political conflict on foreign policy as much as possible, giving ground to conservative opponents there so as to husband his strength for the domestic battle.
That tactic explains a number of areas where Mr.
Clinton has clung to past conservative policies.
Two current examples, important ones, are nuclear testing and Angola.


Croatian Guns Pound Besieged Muslims
Croatian guns pummeled crowded Muslim neighborhoods of Mostar on the left bank of the Neretva River today while Bosnian Serbs pounded the northern town of Brcko in an attempt to widen the only supply route between Serbia and swaths of Serbian-held land in Bosnia and Croatia.
On Saturday night, international aid workers and civilians here said, Croatian troops rousted 22 Muslim townspeople from their homes and loaded them on buses carrying 240 Muslim refugees.
The refugees, who were forced from their homes in nearby villages a year ago by Bosnian Serbs, had taken shelter in Mostar.


Penguins Court Johnston
EDDIE JOHNSTON, who had one of the worst records as a coach in Pittsburgh Penguins history, might be in line to replace the coach with the most victories in National Hockey League history.
Johnston, courted last summer for the Penguins' coaching job before General Manager CRAIG PATRICK brought back SCOTTY BOWMAN for another year at the helm, may rejoin the Penguins, The Pittsburgh Post-Gazette reported yesterday.


Eric Penn, 77, Director of British Royal Pomp
Lieut.
Col.
Sir Eric Penn, a British Army hero in World War II who later organized ceremonial events for Queen Elizabeth II and her family, died May 10 in London.
He was 77.
Sir Eric had a heart ailment, said his wife, the former Prudence Stewart-Wilson.


Maggie Hemingway, A British Novelist, 47
Maggie Hemingway, a British novelist, died on May 9, the British press reported late last week.
She was 47 and lived in London and in Deal, a seaside resort near Dover.
The cause was defective functioning of the blood-forming organs, The Daily Telegraph said.


Churches Risk Their Tax Exemption
To the Editor:
The election of local school boards in New York City has been notable for the participation of churches.
The city's Roman Catholic Church joined with the Christian Coalition to endorse slates of candidates and distribute voting literature.
Involvement of religious organizations in politics raises a substantial legal issue.


Bond Focus Shifting to Municipals
Amid the rubble of last week's disappointing inflation reports and the selloff in the bond market, tax-exempt municipal bonds look pretty good.
And the Clinton tax bill, which passed its first major Congressional hurdle when it was approved on a party-line vote by the House Ways and Means Committee on Thursday, makes these bonds look even more inviting.
Traders and analysts argue, and the statistical data seem to back them up, that there is both some good yield to earn and a nice chance for some capital gains in the municipal market, a possibility that is fading in the Government securities markets.


Essay; 'Focus' Hocus-Pocus
In the White House, when your rat ings start to slip especially when your "negatives" are abnormally high -- you put forward two reasons.
The first is that you are "failing to communicate." This admits no misdirection or wrongdoing -- merely that your press operation has flopped, or that the media are against you.


Laura Pearlman, John Kaufman
Laura Michelle Pearlman, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Stuart Pearlman of Scarsdale, N.Y., was married yesterday to John Robert Kaufman, the son of Jane S. Fishman and James M. Kaufman, both of New York.
Rabbi Steven A. Klein performed the ceremony at Tappan Hill in Tarrytown, N.Y.
Mrs.
Kaufman, 26, is studying for a master's degree in school psychology at the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill.
She graduated from Cornell University, as did her husband.
Her father is the president of Stuart Pearlman &amp; Company, communications consultants in New York.
Her mother, Regina Pearlman, is the office manager there.


More for Your Dough In Big-Hole Bagels
To the Editor:
In "The Dough Jones Index" (letter, May 7), Katherine Weber remembers her father's observation that you could gauge the economy by the size of a bagel.
However, a bigger hole doesn't mean less dough.


Emerging Battlefronts in Software Strategy Wars; Strong I.B.M. Move Against Microsoft
I.B.M.'s strongest challenge to the Microsoft Corporation and its dominance of the market in operating-system software for personal computers begins tomorrow.
Given Microsoft's huge lead and I.B.M.'s past troubles in the personal-computer software market, there is plenty of doubt about how formidable the competition from the International Business Machines Corporation will be.


Embracing Judaism As Personal Choice
His brows furrowed, Jhon Lewis listens to the teachings of Rabbi Stephen C. Lerner with an unshakable concentration.
A black yarmulke covers his head and an African kente cloth is wrapped around his neck.
He nods when the rabbi says: "You know you are very special. You need to work hard and overcome."


Reflectone Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Hornets Must Ask: Where Is Our Sting?
The Charlotte Hornets said all the right things after today's loss.
They said they wouldn't give up.
They said they believed they could win three consecutive games against the Knicks.
But losing Game 4 was a damaging blow for the Hornets.
Not only are they one game from elimination, but New York's defense appeared to frustrate the Hornets, who scored a series-low 92 points today.


Riddell Sports Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Mets Keep Trucking. Fumes Still Noxious.
The Transport King truck was idling outside the clubhouse in the basement of Olympic Stadium.
The bats were in their boxes, bags all but hoisted on shoulders.
The equipment manager was making his way through the dugout, going over his checklist for a quick escape to the airport.
The Mets trailed the Expos, 3-2, and 26 outs had been recorded.
No one was on base, and so everyone on the bench was already psychologically packed for the silent trip home and a series against the Pirates.
After all, the Mets, who almost don't win any games, definitely don't win close ones, and they hadn't won any of the 19 games in which they trailed after eight innings.


Market Place
IN many ways Houston Industries, the nation's eighth-largest utility, is the envy of its industry.
It is profitable, has not missed paying a dividend in its 72-year history, and increased that payment last year to $3 a share, providing a yield of 6 percent.
What is more, it serves about 3.7 million residents in the rebounding Houston area with fairly new plants that do not need expensive upgrading to meet stricter pollution levels.
And the nuclear plant of which it is a 31 percent owner has not become a noose around its neck as has been the case for other utilities.


No Headline
"In the military, you should obey orders, because it might save your life. But in the post office, it's reasonable for people to want to understand why they're asked to do something. In our society, people don't goose step. " DEAN BREWER of the postal workers union.  [ A15:2. ]


Leo Burnett Lays Off 52
Leo Burnett U.S.A. of Chicago said Friday that it was laying off 52 of its 2,293 American employees.
The cutback was the biggest since 1983, when 45, or 2.9 percent, of its 1,484 employees were let go.
James Oates, chairman and regional managing director of the agency, attributed the layoffs to economic conditions and reductions in client marketing staffs and budgets.
The agency generally shuns large-scale layoffs, even after losing accounts, though individuals are let go from time to time.


U.S. Is Unmoved by Bosnian Serbs' Referendum
The Clinton Administration appeared to be hunkering down today in the face of taunts from the leader of Bosnia's Serbs, adhering to its position that a referendum this weekend on the peace plan for Bosnia and Herzegovina would make little difference in United States policy.
Indications that the Bosnian Serbs had overwhelmingly rejected the plan drew little comment from the Administration.
And statements by the Bosnian Serbs' leader, Radovan Karadzic, that the plan was "dead" elicited little more than derision.


World Economies


John Treasure Jones, a Cunard Captain, 87
Captain John Treasure Jones, the last master of the Cunard liner Queen Mary, died Wednesday at Chandler's Ford in Hampshire, England.
He was 87 and had retired to Hampshire in 1968.
When the Queen Mary arrived at its home port of Southampton in September 1967 at the end of its thousandth and final trans-Atlantic voyage, after 33 years on the seas, Captain Jones addressed his crew and his fellow officers after a party, saying, "My heart is rather full. That celebration we have had was full of joy, not sadness."


Cushla Naegele, Victor Schwartz
Cushla Consuelo Helene Naegele, the daughter of Thomas F. and Rosemary Naegele of New York, and Victor Owen Schwartz, a son of Dr.
Alvin Schwartz and Shirley Schwartz of Greenbrook, N.J., were married yesterday.
Rabbi Gerald Goldman officiated at the home of the bride's parents.
Ms.
Naegele, 34, is keeping her name.
She is a landscape painter based in New York.
She graduated from Cornell University, as did her husband, and received a master's degree in painting from Brooklyn College.
Her father is a graphic designer in New York.
Her mother is a landscape painter.


Dance in Review
'Walter's Finest Hours'  Susan Marshall Downtown Art Company 64 East Fourth Street East Village Through Sunday
It is not surprising that the choreographer Susan Marshall turned to the dramatic theater in "Walter's Finest Hours," seen on Saturday night.
Dancers seem to be turning to drama these days.
But Ms.
Marshall's work has tended to be dramatic vignettes from the start.
What is a revelation is Ms.
Marshall's gifts as a writer and a director.
"Walter's Finest Hours" is a first purely theatrical effort but it has the confidence and sensitivity of long practice.


French Captor: A Man Desperate for Success
In the end, it appeared that Eric Schmitt's strongest motivation in taking 21 toddlers hostage in their classroom was his utter desperation to succeed at something.
A divorced, 42-year-old bankrupt businessman, unemployed and living on dwindling savings, he seemed to be at the end of his line when he informed the police shortly after bursting into the classroom on Thursday with a hood on his face and dynamite around his belt that he was ready to die.


Higher Teacher Salaries Mean Better Schools
To the Editor:
I find it astonishing that "Higher Salaries for Teachers?" (editorial, May 10) flatly rejects the findings and recommendations of a New York State-appointed independent panel of experts that investigated the United Federation of Teachers contract impasse.
Three respected, experienced arbitrators heard more than 40 hours of testimony from economists, educators and officials of New York City, the Board of Education and the teachers' union.
They studied more than 200 documents on city finances, past settlements and comparable wages.


Markets and Risks in Fighting Lead Paint Hazard
As the extent of lead poisoning among children becomes clearer and governments tighten rules on lead paint in homes and elsewhere, a whole new industry is springing up to sell technology, expertise and labor to deal with the problem.
And since the problem of crumbling lead paint -- which poses a risk to children who eat the chips or dust -- is most acute in older, urban housing, nowhere is the task bigger than in the metropolitan area, where New York City and other aging communities like Bridgeport, Conn., and Jersey City have millions of units of housing in which lead paint was used.


Economic Calendar
Listed below are the scheduled release dates for major economic indicators this week.
Monday  None  Tuesday  Housing Starts . . .
April  Wednesday  Merchandise Trade . . .
March  Thursday  Weekly Jobless Claims Friday  None


CHRONICLE
President F. W. DE KLERK of South Africa and NELSON MANDELA, president of the African National Congress, have been chosen as recipients of the 1993 Philadelphia Liberty Medal.
Mr.
Mandela and Mr. de Klerk will receive the medal and share a $100,000 award as part of the city's 11-day celebration of Independence Day, an international panel announced on Saturday.


Fred's Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to May 1


With Badillo Out, What Is Effect on Mayor Race?
NOTHING became Herman Badillo more in this year's mayoral race than leaving it.
His withdrawal informally signaled the beginning of a general-election campaign that culminates fully 25 weeks from tomorrow.
Doesn't Rudolph W. Giuliani have a lock on the election?


Canada Investigates Reported Ties of Rightist Militants and Military
What started as an allegation in March that a Somali man was killed by racist soldiers of a Canadian peacekeeping force has turned into a full-scale Defense Department inquiry into links between the military and white supremacists and other right-wing militants.
Altogether, four Somalis died in the custody of the Canadian Airborne Regiment, the equivalent of the American Green Berets.
The regiment is now returning after five months in Belet Huen, in northern Somalia, and five Canadian soldiers are under investigation in connection with those deaths.


Gendex Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Review/Film; In the Show-Biz Jungle, Seeking a Gentler Life
The millennium approaches, in the sense not of a golden age but of threatened apocalypse.
Just watch television for the signs.
On the news you have, live and in color, religious cultists and their children going up in the flames they so often envisioned being unleashed by their Babylonian enemies.
On prime-time entertainment, the four-hour movie "The Fire the Next Time" warned a few weeks ago that the entire planet hovered on the brink of global-warming annihilation.
And now, on ABC for four consecutive nights through Wednesday (this evening at 9), the six-hour "Wild Palms" is squinting warily at technology and doing a hallucinatory dance to the music of future anxieties.


Surprised by the Limelight, A Colonel's Gay Son Shines
Two days after he was "outed" before the nation by his own father, Scott Peck finished a strong defense of his homosexuality on the Larry King television program and was rewarded with a kiss from his lover, Bobby Hampson, as the two moved on to the next station and the next interview that would delve into a riveting story of father and son.
Mr.
King told Mr.
Peck he was impressive in his cause; Mr.
Hampson told him he was wonderful.
And Scott Peck, now buoyantly out of the closet, looked eager for the next encounter with mass public relations in a very busy week.


Dance in Review
Susan Rethorst  The Kitchen
The dancers in the two works that Susan Rethorst presented on Saturday night appeared to be always on guard, as if they expected something momentous to happen.
No apocalypse ever occurred.
Nevertheless, Ms.
Rethorst made her choreographic states of disquiet fascinating.
Each piece was a dance for eight people, but not the same eight.
The new "Grey Marie" had an all-female cast: Susan Braham, Maureen Ellenhorn, Jeanette Engler, Erin Fitzgerald, Cristina Latici, Jodi Melnick, Vicky Shick and Ms.
Rethorst.
The choreography made them look tense and alert.
Although this wariness was also contrasted with some slouches and shrugs, no one fully relaxed.


US WEST TO WORK WITH TIME WARNER
In a sweeping collaboration between a telephone company and a cable and media conglomerate, U S West and Time Warner agreed yesterday to merge their skills in building cable services that would offer consumers a panoply of entertainment and information services on demand.
Several executives close to the talks said U S West, one of the seven Bell regional holding companies, agreed to invest $2.5 billion for 25.5 percent of Time Warner Entertainment, a limited partnership controlled by Time Warner.
It operates the company's cable systems, Warner Brothers and the cable television channel Home Box Office.


The Picket Line Comes To the Checkout Line
THE advertisements blared "Buy one, get one free," so Arthur Graham drove to the Pathmark on Route 440 one recent afternoon for his weekly shopping.
But before he could fill his cart with soda and cereal and boneless chicken breasts, he found himself ensnared in a bitter labor dispute.
"Please support us!" Nicole Nesheiwat shouted at Mr.
Graham as he was about to stroll through the entrance.
She shoved a flier into his hand and stared into his eyes, searching for sympathy for the 250 union workers at the store who have been locked out of their jobs since the conflict at four supermarket chains flared more than a week ago.


Software Etc. Stores Inc.  (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to May 1


Blackman Turns Down Overtime
The crowd was screaming, the clock was ticking, the score was tied, and the Knicks were in danger of facing another overtime.
None of this unnerved Rolando Blackman.
With the ball in his hands, 20 feet from the basket, Blackman just did what the Knicks believed he would do when they traded for him last summer.
He sank a jumper.
And the Knicks took a huge step toward ending a playoff series that has tested them in every way.


Treasury Plans to Auction Only Bills During the Week
The Treasury's schedule of financings this week will be confined to the bill market, with only the regular weekly auction today of three- and six-month maturities on the calendar.
Traders said that by the close of the New York cash market on Friday, the rate on the outstanding three-month bill was 2.93 percent and on the six-month bill, 3.05 percent.


Parker &amp; Parsley Petroleum Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Islanders Crash Back to Earth
Late in the game today, after the Islanders started a little tiff with the Canadiens and tried to act tough, the sound system at the Montreal Forum blared Sinatra's "New York, New York" as the guilty players were sent to the penalty boxes and the locker rooms.
The Canadiens' fans sang along lustily with little respect.
Maybe it was their accent.
Or their phrasing.
Or their sarcastic tone.
Whatever the reason, they got their point across as they celebrated what turned out to be the Canadiens' easy 4-1 victory over the lethargic Islanders in Game 1 of the Wales Conference finals.


Small Business Gives Tax Break Mixed Reviews
On Friday, a day after the House Ways and Means Committee had approved a tax break for small businesses that buy new equipment, the managers of the Marvelous Market bakery convened to decide whether to spend $19,000 for a new bread oven.
The oven was the kind of investment that sponsors of the tax provision had intended to encourage, on the premise that such spending made small companies grow, increased productivity, and created jobs.


Edmund Burke Jr., 88, S.E.C. Commissioner
Edmund Burke Jr., a commissioner of the Securities and Exchange Commission during the Administration of Franklin D. Roosevelt, died on Thursday in Buffalo, his family said.
He was 88 and died of pneumonia.


Corrections
The picture captions with the continuation of a front-page article yesterdayabout manufacturers' paying more overtime instead of hiring more workers were reversed.
The top photograph was of Jerry Jasinowski; the other was Robert Cizik.


A Colt Is Born: Jenny Is A Mom
It's a boy for Genuine Risk.
The 16-year-old mare, who made racing history in 1980 when she won the Kentucky Derby, ended 13 years of misfortunes and miscarriages and weeks of suspense when she delivered a healthy chestnut colt Saturday evening at an equine hospital near her farm home in Kentucky.
The yet-unnamed colt arrived on the 360th day of Genuine Risk's pregnancy, 25 days later than expected, and he arrived with four veterinarians and a crew of foaling specialists in attendance.
They were marshaled because ultrasound monitors disclosed that the foal had developed a slow and irregular heartbeat that afternoon, raising the specter of even more misfortune.


In Sri Lanka, Partition Can Stop the Violence
To the Editor:
The United Nations working group on enforced or involuntary disappearances, reporting on Sri Lanka for 1983 to 1991, characterized killings on that unhappy island nation off the south coast of India as "by far the highest number ever recorded by the working group for any single country." But the United States news media give this tragedy little coverage.
"The Tragedy of Sri Lanka" (editorial, May 5) is a welcome change.


Cedric Messina Dies; TV Producer Was 72
Cedric Messina, a television producer whose work included plays by Shakespeare, died on April 30 in London, the British press reported last week.
He was 72.
The cause of death was not given.


Ever See a Billboard Lovely as the Moon?
To the Editor:
A classic science fiction story depicts ad men on the moon, writing "Coca-Cola" in huge fluorescent letters.
It was, at the time, an absurd and amusing satire on advertising.


Russian Irresolution: Yeltsin Victory Loses Steam
That Boris N. Yeltsin won a vote of confidence in the national referendum three weeks ago, nobody denies.
But what that means is a matter of sharp debate.
Ardent supporters of radical change, who had hoped that the President would seize on the victory to sweep aside the bothersome legislative opposition and to ram through sweeping market reforms, have been disappointed.


Will Jets and the Bengals Cool It?
First, the Cincinnati Bengals provided the Jets with a head coach.
Then, they sent them a quarterback.
But after some recent dealings in free agency, Cincinnati wants to exact a pound of flesh.
What was once a friendly, symbiotic relationship between the Jets and the Bengals has taken a nasty turn, driven by New York's efforts to build a winning team through free agency and Cincinnati's perception that it has been needlessly victimized.


Ousted Chiefs Due to Rejoin School Boards
Bronx voters returned to office the former presidents of two corruption-plagued community school boards who were removed from office recently amid accusations of wrongdoing, according to results of the May 4 school board election released yesterday.
The voters in Districts 9 and 12 in the Bronx also re-elected several other present and former board members who have been linked to corruption accusations.


DIALOGUE -- Are 1,000 Federal Judges Enough?; Yes. More Would Dilute The Quality.
America faces a crucial choice that will determine whether the Federal court system continues to serve its historic function or slowly deteriorates into a vast faceless bureaucracy.
Today in Washington, the long-range planning committee of the U.S.
Judiciary Conference -- the policy-making arm of the Federal Judiciary -- will begin hearings on setting limits on the number of Federal judges.
Ultimately, the decision will rest with Congress.


A Drawing Together in Grief for 5 Amish Children
A river of black horse-drawn buggies flowed over the hills near here today in a funeral procession that stretched back to another time when America was younger and the automobile was for most only a dream or a nightmare.
Five Amish children, who were killed on Thursday afternoon when they were struck by a car along the dusty shoulder of a dipping country road, were buried today in one of the largest gatherings of the Amish in recent years.


Cuomo Proposes a Law on Sexual Harassment
Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo proposed legislation today that would require employers to develop policies for investigating charges of sexual harassment on the job and for disciplining those found guilty.
The proposal, developed by a task force appointed by Mr.
Cuomo following the Clarence Thomas-Anita F. Hill controversy last year, would also provide new legal protections for people who file harassment charges and for companies that investigate the charges.


Bridge
The Grand National Team Championship for District 3, which includes New Jersey, Westchester and the Hudson Valley, ended on Sunday in Allendale, N.J.
The winners, by 35 imps after a second-half surge, were Luella Slaner of Scarsdale, N.Y., Fred Stewart of Accord, N.Y., Steve Weinstein of Upper Montclair, N.J., Larry Cohen of Little Falls, N.J., and Marty Bergen of Farmingdale, L.I.
They advance to the national playoffs in Washington in July.
The losing foursome consisted of Bill and Rozanne Pollack of Englewood Cliffs, N.J., and Mark and Stasha Cohen of Glen Ridge, N.J.


Elizabeth Montgomery, 91, Dies; Designed Stage Costumes and Sets
Elizabeth Montgomery, a costume and set designer and a founding partner of the design company Motley, died on Saturday at her home in London.
She was 91.
Miss Montgomery was born in Kid lington, Oxfordshire, and grew up in Cambridge, England.
She attended Westminster Art School in London, studying portrait painting with Walter Sickert.
In 1932, she and two other art students, Margaret Harris and Sophia Harris, founded a theatrical design group, which they named Motley, an allusion to the line "Motley's the only wear" from "As You Like It."


Parasites Hint Amazon River Once Flowed West
NEW discoveries about parasites are forcing biologists to take a more admiring view of creatures they had come to regard as degenerate hangers-on.
True, parasites often lack organs needed for independent existence, like eyes or intestines.
But the assumption that they are therefore simpler, regressive forms of life now seems to be quite erroneous.
Biologists are finding that these creatures are exceedingly complex.
And because of their intimate relationship with various hosts, they can provide surprising insights into a wide range of matters, from continental drift to the diet of ancient human civilizations to the health of modern ecosystems.


Medical Diagnostics reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


International Jensen Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28


Clearly Canadian Beverage Corp. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Thermo Instrument Sys.  reports earnings for Qtr to April 3


Berlitz International reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Roberts Pharmaceutical Corp. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Hearst Funeral Scheduled
Funeral services for William Randolph Hearst Jr., who became editor in chief of the media empire his father founded, will be held today at St.
Thomas Church at 1 West 53d Street in Manhattan.


Ross Stores Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to May 1


Carver Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Advanced Medical Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Bowl America Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 28


Kevorkian's Role in Latest Death Confounds Experts in Michigan
Two things are certain in the most recent suicide involving Dr.
Jack Kevorkian: A cancer patient died from carbon monoxide poisoning, and Dr.
Kevorkian was there.
What is not clear is whether a crime was committed under Michigan's new law banning the kind of assisted suicide that has made Dr.
Kevorkian a household name.


Moth Mothers Mate Often, Then Select the Father
IS there no end to the finickiness of the female heart?
It would seem quite enough that a female bullfrog requires of her suitors a night of aerobically draining serenades to prove their worthiness as lovers.
Or that a female pit viper first will watch impassively as males compete like frenzied, one-armed wrestlers for the privilege of wooing her, and then demand that the victorious male spend long hours rubbing her with his chin and flicking her with his tongue before agreeing to the big event.
Now scientists have discovered strong evidence that a female's discriminating taste in mates can continue even after intercourse is through.
Biologists studying an orange and black moth common to the Southeast, Mexico and the Caribbean have found that a female will mate with more than one male and then actively select from the various offerings the sperm of the biggest male she has dallied with -- the mate presumably bearing the most robust genes for her offspring.


Sundowner Offshore Services Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Overseas Shipholding reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Espey Mfg. &amp; Electronics reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Newborn Colt Has Surgery
The trials of Genuine Risk took one more turn yesterday when her newborn colt developed an intestinal blockage and underwent surgery at the equine hospital in Kentucky where he was born 36 hours earlier.
"I'm concerned, but not alarmed," Dan Rosenberg, the manager of the Three Chimneys Farm, reported by telephone from Midway, Ky.
"It's like your kid had a bad stomach ache. And it's not uncommon in foals. But the public attention puts this in a different plane. We're treating this as though the story has a happy ending."


Delphi Information Systems Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


TeleCom Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Personal Diagnostics reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Eastex Energy (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Court Won't Review Secrecy Order in Suit Involving the C.I.A.
The Supreme Court refused today to review a judge's secrecy order in a case brought by a businessman who had allowed the Central Intelligence Agency to use his company's name to veil the work of a covert aviation company.
Without comment, the court declined to hold a hearing on unsealing the secrecy order governing a suit by the businessman, Erwin Rautenberg, who runs an international freight company.


Corrections
An article on Sunday about Mayor David N. Dinkins's selection of Victor H. Gotbaum as a member of the New York City Board of Education misstated his affiliation with the City University.
Mr.
Gotbaum is a senior research scholar with the Center of Social Research at the Graduate School and University Center of the City University.
His connection with the Center for Labor-Management Policy Studies ended when the center closed in February.


Tele-Communications Inc.  (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Presley Cos.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Supporters of Gay Rights Win More School Races
After one of the fiercest ideological battles of the New York City school board campaign, candidates in District 15 in Brooklyn who favor the teaching of multiculturalism and tolerance for homosexuals overwhelmed opponents of that view, results released yesterday showed.
The same pattern followed yesterday in District 3 on Manhattan's Upper West Side, where all four candidates endorsed by New York's principal gay lobbying group, Empire State Pride Agenda, won election.


Ampal-American Israel Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Review/City Ballet; George Balanchine With a Difference, A Difference of Ives
It is not your everyday Balanchine masterpiece.
On a stage awash with a gray haze, seemingly legless figures inch slowly toward the center.
The lighting both obscures and clarifies an astonishing image: humanity wading through the morass of its own condition.
The textured drift of Charles Ives's music ebbs away, covered by the peal of chimes.
The dancers, who are actually on their knees, are visible only from the waist up.
Lilliputians?
No, people who need to be made whole and who are finally swallowed up in darkness.


O'Brien Environmental Energy reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Life Partners Group Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


CHRONICLE
Life on the road promoting a book has its ups and downs, said SUSAN STAMBERG, now on the circuit for "Talk," a compendium of interviews she conducted on National Public Radio, mostly for the program "All Things Considered." The collection has just been published by Turtle Bay/Random House.
Ms.
Stamberg found herself sharing a platform at a recent book-and-author luncheon in Los Angeles with former Secretary of State GEORGE P. SHULTZ and MARY HIGGINS CLARK, the best-selling mystery writer.
Ms.
Stamberg said the other evening that she was thrilled when Mr.
Shultz told her at the lunch that she was in his book, "Turmoil and Triumph: My Years as Secretary of State" (Charles Scribner's Sons, 1993).


Observer; Half-Baked
From last year's diary, a few ideas that meant to become columns but didn't know how:
A book title: "Why Does 1940 Now Seem Like Only Yesterday While 1890 Seemed Like the Dark Ages in 1940?"


Verily Pertinacious But Unmendacious
Listening to WFAN Radio's Walt (Clyde) Frazier pounce and pronounce and dance and prance his prolix path through Sunday's Knicks-Charlotte Hornets game was the equivalent of watching a crazed thesaurus bungee-jumping off a Mexican cliff.
Listening to TNT's Hubie Brown call the Houston Rockets-Seattle SuperSonics game reminded me that Brown is the player piano of basketball analysts: some time ago, he swallowed every pro playbook known to man and all you have to do is turn him on and the Hubie rolls indefinitely.


Gymboree Corp. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to May 2


Schools Can't Learn a Thing From Post Office
To the Editor:
In "Our Students, Still at Risk" (Op-Ed, May 3), William Kristol and Jay P. Lefkowitz use the Postal Service as their analogy for so-called parental choice in schools.
They laud the introduction of new technologies and methods (private fast delivery, fax and other telecommunications improvements) for forcing the post office to improve its service.
They seem not to understand the nature of the changes, and they make a major error in assessing the effects.
We have, in essence, done no more than introduce deeper measures of stratification and class bias into the transmission and receipt of information -- and this is another example of one of the more important subtexts of what we have called "progress" for the last two centuries:


Wilpon Won't Dismiss New CBS Bid
Fred Wilpon, the co-owner of the Mets, said yesterday that CBS's bid to continue as baseball's television network for two years, through 1995, must be considered alongside major league baseball's proposed revenue-sharing joint venture with ABC and NBC.
"Of course it's on the table," Wilpon said.
"They made a legitimate offer and we have to look at it."


E-Z Serve Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 28


Astrotech International reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Trebelhorn to Australia
TOM TREBELHORN, the Cubs' bench coach, has signed a one-year contract to manage the Perth Heat in the 1993-94 Australian Baseball League season.


Last Round for Holmes?
Will LARRY HOLMES be stepping into the ring for the final time tonight?
That question will only be answered for sure if the former heavyweight champion loses to PAUL POIRIER in a scheduled 10-rounder at Casino Magic in Bay St.
Louis, Miss., tonight.
Otherwise, the 43-year-old Holmes (57-4 with 39 knockouts) won't know if he's continuing his comeback, which began in 1991.


Cybertek Corp. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


U.N. Official Warns Europe on Ethnic Strife
The departing chief of the United Nations refugee program in the former Yugoslavia has warned that ethnic conflicts like those in the Balkans could erupt in other parts of Europe.
Interviewed last week as he prepared to take up a new post in Brussels, the refugee official, Jose-Maria Mendiluce, said his 19 months here had taught him that "people can be transformed into hating and killing machines without too much difficulty."


CHRONICLE
This has not been a good year for nannies in the news.
Now comes word, from Reuters, that MIRELLA CANESE, who worked for Charlie Chaplin and his wife, Oona O'Neill Chaplin, for more than 20 years after the couple emigrated to Switzerland from Hollywood, has auctioned off some of their possessions in Geneva.
The items that went on the block included a violin played by the actor in the silent-movie classic, "The Vagabond," which fetched $33,000, and a 1964 Bentley limousine, Mr.
Chaplin's last car, which failed to attract a buyer at its reserve price of $310,000.
Ms.
Canese's decision to sell the objects, ranging from the luxury automobile to bow ties, which mostly were either given her by Mrs.
Chaplin or were thrown out by Mr.
Chaplin, angered the couple's eight children.
They issued a statement on the day of the sale saying that they could "give no guarantee on the authenticity or origin of the object."


Data Measurement (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Telefonica de Espana reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Toys 'R' Us Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to May 1


Books of The Times; North America's History, One Person at a Time
Wilderness at Dawn  The Settling of the North American Continent  By Ted Morgan  Illustrated. 541 pages.
Simon &amp; Schuster.


CareNetwork Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Mellow Lion Of Literature Stalks Vienna
In an autobiographical poem, Robert Schindel describes himself as a changeling, a child secretly exchanged for another in infancy.
The Viennese writer became a changeling when he was four months old, in the midst of World War II.
It saved his life.
Now he is not only an acclaimed poet, with four volumes of verse published in the last seven years, but also the writer of a best-selling novel, "Geburtig," which may be translated either as "Born Of" or as "Native To."


Comcoa Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to April 18


Serb Is Taking Sincerity Test
Covered trucks that roll across the Drina River from Serbia into Bosnia conceal a mystery that much of the world is anxious to solve.
If the trucks contain only food and medicine, President Slobodan Milosevic of Serbia may be keeping his promise to cut off his long-time allies, the Serbs of Bosnia.
If they contain military or industrial supplies, he is trying to fool the world once again.


New Yorker Writer Says a Disputed Paragraph Merged 3 Remarks
Janet Malcolm testified today that she had merged three different conversations into a small part of one paragraph in her New Yorker profile about Jeffrey M. Masson that contained a disputed quotation ending with his saying, "I was like an intellectual gigolo."
Ms.
Malcolm also told the Federal court where she is being sued for libel that she did not know what "intellectual gigolo" meant and had never tried to find out.


A Retail Upswing
Younkers Inc. operates a chain of 53 department stores in the Midwest.
This month, it reported that April same-store sales rose 3.3 percent.
Recently, the company's stock price has approached its March high of $35.
Yesterday, it rose 4 percent in Nasdaq trading.


Standard Brands Paint Co.  reports earnings for Year to Jan 31


Jazz Discussion Postponed
Lincoln Center Off Stage has announced that its discussion event with the jazz singer Betty Carter, scheduled for tomorrow, has been postponed to June 10 at 6 P.M.
It will take place in the Stanley H. Kaplan Penthouse of the Samuel B. and David Rose Building, 165 West 65th Street, at Lincoln Center.
The discussion, which will focus on preserving jazz traditions and cultivating young talent, will be followed at 7 P.M. by an informal wine and cheese reception with Miss Carter.
Tickets are $14.
Information: (212) 721-6500.


McClain Industries reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Business Records Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
6.50
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
3.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.38
2.94
3.81
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
2.99
2.93
3.60
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.09
3.05
3.68
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
5.69
5.64
6.94
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
6.96
6.94
7.81
TELEPHONE BONDS
7.90
7.90
8.75
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
5.95
5.86
6.62
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Care Group Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


On Baseball; Leyland's New Era, Mets' Old Burdens
One day in the middle of spring training, Jim Leyland was discussing the division his team had dominated the previous three seasons.
The Cardinals and the Phillies, he said, would be the surprise teams, each with a chance to finish first.
The Expos, too, might win.
But he said: "The Mets are the only team capable of running away and hiding. The Mets might win by 20 games if these guys are all healthy."


Media Logic Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Jury Faults CUNY Officials in Jeffries Lawsuit Decision
The Chancellor of the City University of New York and five other officials were responsible for depriving Dr.
Leonard Jeffries of his right to free speech, a Federal jury ruled yesterday.
The six officials named by the jury were among 15 defendants in the bitter court battle.
During the trial in Federal District Court in Manhattan, witnesses testified that the six officials wanted Dr.
Jeffries removed as chairman of the City College black studies department because of a 1991 speech widely criticized as anti-Semitic.


Review/Fashion; In the Wind A Return To Fur
Furriers are smiling again.
As the fashion shows introducing their new styles for next winter begin this week, furriers say they see the light at the end of the tunnel.
Five years ago, a worldwide recession and sporadic attacks by animal-rights activists interrupted a 15-year growth in sales.
A cold winter, a mild upturn in the economy and the reappearance last winter of women wearing furs have contributed to the feeling that the worst is over.
"I'm not just cautiously optimistic, I'm very optimistic," said Ken Wagner, the head of Wagner Furs, for whom Oscar de la Renta has designed for 18 years.
Early-season sales were up 27 percent from last year, he added.


Nuvision Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Lexington Precision Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Doing Science on the Network: A Long Way From Gutenberg
A POTENT catalyst to scientific advance is quietly working its way through the world of research, promising to speed the pace of innovation and discovery.
In science, as in many other realms, computer networks are having a revolutionary influence.
In forging intimate new ties among researchers around the globe, the computer is rapidly replacing old intellectual traditions with new ways of doing science.
Worldwide, up to four million scientists are thought to be wired into the rapidly expanding maze of interconnected networks, which now number 11,252 and are known as the Internet, or sometimes just the net.
Thousands of scientists hook up for the first time every day.


Onex Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Katy Industries reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Hillary Clinton Urges Graduates to Celebrate Their Differences


Prism Entertainment reports earnings for Year to Jan 31


Mexican Chief Proposes Fully Free Central Bank
The President of Mexico today proposed a constitutional amendment that would free the nation's central bank from his control and allow it to independently manage the money supply.
If the amendment is approved, Mexico would join Chile as the only Latin American nations with central banks that are officially protected from political interference.


Patterns
On Restarting Halston
In his offices at CMT Enterprises Inc., a private-label producer and manufacturing consultant, the designer Randolph Duke has a book about Roy Halston Frowick's life.
And as Mr.
Duke has proved with the line he's creating for QVC, he is a quick study.
On display are samples of Mr.
Duke's "five easy pieces" for QVC: black cotton tube skirt, T-shirt, body suit, stretch pants and a giveaway scarf, all for a total of $79.
A sort of design phoenix of his generation, Mr.
Duke has reinvented his career with ingenuity, and his studio is a library for future projects.
The book on top is about design's tragic hero, Halston, the prisoner of Seventh Avenue.
There is also a board of sketches, clearly inspired by one man's work.
Mr.
Duke is one of many contenders for a project that has become the fashion equivalent of reuniting the Beatles: restarting the Halston fashion label, which Revlon retired in August 1990, several months after the designer died of AIDS.


No Headline
"It's not the diplomatic life you read about in the books with chauffeurs and big parties. In this business, whenever there is a crisis everyone has to focus on solving the crisis. Of course, that puts you behind on everything, so you're permanently in crisis." -- KRESIMIR COSIC, Croatia's Deputy Ambassador to the United States.  [ A1:5. ]


Pomeroy Computer Resources reports earnings for Qtr to April 5


Tiffany &amp; C0.  reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Medical Schools Gaining An Unexpected Popularity
In spite of expectations of reduced earnings for doctors and restrictions on professional autonomy under the health-care changes expected to be proposed by the Clinton Administration, people are applying to medical school in record numbers.
According to the Association of American Medical Colleges in Washington, applications for the 1993-94 school year are at an all-time high.
Final tabulations of applications for next year will exceed the record of 42,621 set in 1974-75, the association says.
There are now 16,500 places available.


Giants Add Center
The Giants claimed center BLAKE MILLER off the waiver wire yesterday.
He becomes the fourth center on the Giants' roster.


Review/Music; Presto! A Vanished Opera Reappears
Emmanuel Chabrier's bad luck in life has outlived him into the 20th century.
Through one calamity or another, his deft, witty and deeply lyrical operas seemed to vanish from the stage almost as soon as they appeared.
And so it is that "L'Etoile" came to New York over the weekend as a relative stranger.
In Friday's performance by the L'Opera Francais de New York at Gould Hall, it showed itself swift, compact and original in spite of Christopher Alden's marginally vulgar rendition of it.
Chabrier, a well-to-do esthete and Government functionary, quit his job for composing in 1880, three years after "L'Etoile" appeared at the Bouffes-Parisiens.
Unsuccessful on the stage, sunk in debt and long afflicted by health problems, Chabrier died 14 years later.
He was friend to every major literary and musical figure of his time and became a tireless devotee of Wagner.
The general public knows his name and his orchestra piece "Espana," but not much else.


Sports of The Times; Jordan Tunes In On Knicks
"I JUST met maybe the only person in America who doesn't know who Michael Jordan is," said the visitor as his host opened the door of a hotel suite here Sunday afternoon.
"You did?" said the genuinely curious host, a basketball player for the Chicago Bulls named Michael Jordan.
"Who's that?"


Schultz Sav-O Stores Inc.  (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to April 24


Xerox Has New Flat Screen That Could Hold a Computer
The Xerox Corporation has reached a breakthrough in video screens that could achieve photographic clarity in products combining a computer and television in a flat panel no thicker than a pad of paper, company officials said today.
Xerox says computer-chip circuitry can be embedded in the flat-panel screens.
The company plans to demonstrate the technology at a conference on Wednesday in Seattle.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Building a Future for Cable TV Via the Telephone; Britain Offers Encouraging Experience
In towns across England, U S West and other American telephone companies have been getting a sneak preview for the past several years of their industry's rapid convergence with the entertainment business -- and they very much like what they see.
Just how much was clear in U S West's decision, confirmed by the companies in New York today, to invest in Time Warner's cable and film operations.
The deal brings together for the first time on a large scale in the United States two industries that have been feeling each other out in what amounts to a huge test market here in Britain.
A Less-Regulated Environment
"The decision to do the Time Warner deal had as a fundamental basis an understanding of these converging businesses," said Dick Callahan, the president of U S West International, which offers both phone and cable television service in Britain.
"It would have been very difficult to make the kind of deal we made -- and certainly the size of deal we made -- without the base of history and experience we have gained in the U.K."


Julia Knickerbocker, Leader in Promotion Of Books, Dies at 56
Julia Knickerbocker, a leader in the field of book publicity, died on Sunday at the Robert Janker Clinic in Bonn.
She was 56 and lived in Manhattan.
She died of heart failure after fighting cancer for two years, said her sister, Miranda de Kay.


Natural Wonders Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to May 1


Roadmaster Industries (NSC) reports earnings for Qtr to April 3


John Gutheil, Partner In Law Firm, Dies at 48
John Gutheil, a senior partner of the New York law firm of Parker Chapin Flattau &amp; Klimpl, died on Wednesday at Phelps Memorial Hospital Center in North Tarrytown, N.Y.
He was 48 and lived in Ossining, N.Y.
He died of cardiac arrest, the firm said.


NIXON TAPE SHOWS A VENDETTA OF '72
The clashing styles of Caspar W. Weinberger and George P. Shultz that were so much a part of the Reagan Administration policy battles had an earlier life in the Nixon White House, according to a new batch of tape recordings of Mr.
Nixon's conversations released today.
According to the tapes released by the National Archives, Mr.
Nixon wanted to retaliate against the Massachusetts Institute of Technology by refusing to renew the school's Government contracts.
The university's offense is unclear, but the tapes hint that it had to do with a lack of support for Mr.
Nixon's policy in Vietnam.


Coach of the Year? Riley. His Goal? Team of the Year.
Pat Riley has won coach-of-the-year honors before.
Pat Riley has won championships before.
And Pat Riley is smart enough to have reached a conclusion:
Awards are nice. Championships are much more gratifying.


Chess
An opponent's resignation can usually be taken as praise for your play, yet sometimes the praise can be faint indeed.
Consider the game between Ben Finegold, a Southfield, Mich., international master, and Dmitry Gurevich, a Chicago grandmaster, from the King's Island Open in Ohio, April 2 to 4.
In the 243-player, Swiss-system tourney, Gurevich won first prize, $1,600, with a perfect 5-0 score.
Gurevich said, "Ben resigned because he didn't see the best defense." That became clear in a discussion of the play immediately afterward.


Shooting at Staten Island Bar Leaves 8 Injured
Eight people were wounded, four of them critically, in a shooting inside a Liberian social club on Staten Island last night, the police said.
Officers said the shooting was apparently drug related.
The shootings took place inside the club at 575 Targee Street in Park Hill about 9:30 P.M., the police said.
The club, which people in the neighborhood said opened only recently, is in a small strip shopping center across the street from the Park Hill Houses, a six-building apartment complex about a mile south of the St.
George Ferry Terminal.


Defense in Glen Ridge Case Asks Court to Continue Bail
Lawyers for three former Glen Ridge athletes facing 15-year sentences for sexually assaulting a mildly retarded friend filed appeals today asking that their clients be allowed to remain free while they seek to overturn their convictions.
Defense motions filed with a New Jersey appeals court argued the three were entitled to continued bail during the appeals process because "substantial" legal questions arose in their five-month trial, including prayers in the jury room, the first use of testimony about "rape trauma syndrome" in a rape trial in the state, and a prosecutor's singing "The Sound of Silence" in his closing arguments to the jury.


Advanced Marketing Services Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Her Father's Daughter and Her Party's Luminary; Molinari Finds Herself on National Stage in Republican Spotlight, on Her Own Terms
A blur slides across Independence Avenue toward a side entrance to the Cannon House Office Building.
A momentary pause and it takes shape.
The Representative from Staten Island applies her warmest grin.
"Hi. Remember me? Congresswoman Susan Molinari."
A smile from a startled guard, then she's gone, skipping the drill of the metal detector, swinging through her office doors, scooping up a pile of papers and heading for the phone with the look of a slightly hyper college student running late for class.


Morgan Keegan Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


International Family Entertainment Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Canadian Occidental Petroleum reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Nordstrom Is Exploring Sales on Interactive TV
Nordstrom Inc. said today that it was exploring selling merchandise by late 1994 on an interactive cable television system, in which shoppers could ask to see specific goods.
"We'd like to be one of the leaders in this field," said Kurt Dahl, the head of a company group that has studied the feasibility for more than a year.
"I haven't seen evidence any other retailer has done as much research on this as Nordstrom."


Q&amp;A
Sensitive Teeth
Q.  How does toothpaste for sensitive teeth work?
A.
Teeth often become sensitive when the gum recedes because of age, disease or too-vigorous brushing, Dr.
Conrad A. Naleway, a researcher at the American Dental Association, wrote in Pharmacy Times, a publication for pharmacists.
The newly exposed dentin is more porous than the rest of the tooth surface and opens new pathways to the nerves inside the pulp.
The resulting sensitivity to things like hot and cold may go away by itself, but some over-the-counter treatments can help.
How well they work is hard to measure, and how they might act is largely speculative, Dr.
Naleway said.
Chris Martin, manager of public information for the dental association, said ingredients in toothpastes recognized by the association's Council on Dental Therapeutics as effective in diminishing discomfort included potassium nitrate, strontium chloride, sodium citrate and stannous fluoride.
One respected theory of how these agents work, as described by Dr.
Naleway, is that the pain is caused by movement of fluid filling the tiny tubes in the dentin that open into the pulp chamber.
The fluid might either stimulate the nerves near the dentin-pulp border or stimulate the bony cells of the tooth so that they somehow simulate receptors in the pulp.
Under this theory, the pain might be stopped or lessened by some means like blocking the tubules, coagulating material in them, or blocking the nerve impulse.
Cyanide Poisoning
Q.  How does cyanide kill?
A.
Cyanide kills by asphyxiating the cells of the body, said Dr.
Margaret F. Dietert, associate professor of biology at Wells College in Aurora, N.Y.
Cyanide competes with oxygen in the body's cells, she said.
The enzyme responsible for using oxygen has more affinity for cyanide than it does for oxygen, so the presence of cyanide starves a cell for oxygen.
Cells' respiratory pathways use the oxygen in a complex process to break down glucose to produce energy for vital cell maintenance, Dr.
Dietert said.
The last step adds oxygen to hydrogen to make water.
If the last step does not occur, high-energy molecules of a substance called ATP, adenosine triphosphate, are not made.
Cells use the energy from ATP to maintain their semipermeable membranes, which control their chemical balance.
Without maintenance, cell membranes lose their integrity and the cell eventually dies.
If enough cells in the body die, toxic symptoms or death will result.


Clinton Stumps For His Program In '92-Like Blitz
Rock music blared from loudspeakers on stage in New Mexico.
The audience was packed with the mandatory shrieking school children who were bused in from all over the state.
The visiting politician toured a local point of interest and pronounced himself awed by machines that made good props for his message of the day.
The feel of a campaign rally was in the air today, possibly more than at any other event since President Clinton took office, as he visited a high school in Los Alamos, N.M., to promote his economic program and toured the laboratory where the atomic bomb was made -- and where the machines of war are now being used for peaceful purposes.


Hughes Supply Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


McGrath RentCorp (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Clinton Asks About Effect Of Security
Expressing concern about the size of the police presence assigned to him in New York City last week, President Clinton asked Mayor David N. Dinkins whether the turnout was hurting the Police Department's ability to protect the rest of New York City.
"The President said he was concerned about whether the deployment would affect the city's ability to patrol our streets," Jennifer Kimball, a spokeswoman for Mr.
Dinkins, said yesterday.


Sony-Nickelodeon Pact
Sony Music and MTV Networks have reached an exclusive long-term agreement between Nickelodeon, MTV's children's cable channel, and Epic Records, a unit of Sony Music, to manufacture and distribute home video and audio products based on Nickelodeon programming.


Crown Crafts Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 28


U.S. TO STAY AWAY FROM TALKS AT U.N. ON WAR IN BOSNIA
The United States said today that it would not attend a Security Council meeting of foreign ministers on the war in Bosnia.
Underscoring a rift with its European allies, the United States said it could not support pushing ahead to implement a peace plan that relied on the cooperation of Bosnian Serbs, who appear strongly opposed to the idea.


Dow Advances by 6.92 in Subdued Trading
The stock market was largely subdued yesterday after two straight days of decline and closed modestly higher.
Traders may be holding back, waiting to glean how the Federal Reserve Board would react today to last week's discouraging inflation reports.
A cut in interest rates before the summer seems out of the question now, so many traders would be relieved if the Fed simply did nothing.
A rise in rates would rattle already-nervous traders.


Subway Service Disrupted
Subway service on the M, N and R lines was expected to be disrupted this morning because of a derailment last night of a train on the R line at the Whitehall station at the southern tip of Manhattan, the Transit Authority reported early today.
Officer Anthony Taliercio, a spokesman for the Transit Authority, said no trains are expected to be picking up or discharging passengers at the Whitehall Station in Manhattan and the Court Street and Lawrence Street stations in Brooklyn.
The derailment involved one car of an eight-car R train as it was pulling out of the Whitehall station.
Passengers exited at the station platform.
No injuries were reported.
The derailment led to an interruption of service between the Canal Street and Lawrence Street stations.


Corporate Management Group Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


NEWS SUMMARY
International A2-9  U.S.
TO AVOID U.N.
MEETING  The U.S. said it would not attend a Security Council meeting on the war in Bosnia.
Underscoring a rift with its European allies, Washington said it could not support pushing ahead with a peace plan that required the cooperation of Bosnian Serbs who are overwhelmingly against it.
A1  HOW SINCERE IS SERBIA'S LEADER?
News Analysis: If the trucks crossing from Serbia to Bosnia contain only food and medicine, Serbia's President may be keeping his promise.
If the vehicles contain military or industrial supplies, he is trying to fool the world once again.
A1


Justice Inquiry Will Now Examine Assault on Cult
The Justice Department said today that a senior official had erred when he said last week that its investigation of the handling of the Branch Davidian cult near Waco, Tex., would forgo a detailed examination of the decision to assault the sect's compound on April 19.
The head of the investigation, Philip B. Heymann, had said in an interview reported in The New York Times on Sunday that investigators would not look closely at the decision by Attorney General Janet Reno and William S. Sessions, director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation, to assault the compound with tanks and tear gas.


Theater in Review
Washington Square Moves  Primary Stages 354 West 45th Street Clinton By Matthew Witten; directed by Seth Gordon; production stage manager, Christine Catti; production manager, Andrew Leynse; assistant director, Laurel Springer; set by Bruce Goodrich; lighting by Deborah Constantine; costumes by Amanda J. Klein.
Presented by Primary Stages Company Inc., Casey Childs, artistic director.
WITH: Angela Bullock, Bert Goldstein, Dion Graham, Dawn McClendon, Joe Quintero, Ascanio Sharpe and Jack Stehlin.


Yankees Work Out Their Frustration
For the first six innings tonight, the Yankees took the field muttering.
They cursed their inept display.
There were anxious runners perched on the bases.
Every inning, some were stranded.
Scoring chances arrived and disappeared rapidly.
The routine was remarkable.
The Yankees had collected a dozen hits and Jimmy Key was cruising past the Minnesota Twins, but the outcome remained in doubt because 10 Yankee runners had been left on base.
Finally, in the seventh, the Yankees inflated their skinny two-run lead, redeemed themselves and obscured their earlier futility.


Corrections
A front-page picture caption yesterday about the commencement at Hofstra University misidentified the graduate greeting her family.
She was Patricia Smith of the Bronx.


Corrections
The About New York column on Saturday about daring and imaginative stunts, like the commandeering of the A train, misidentified the man who scaled the World Trade Center in 1977.
It was George H. Willig, who has been called the human fly; he climbed the southern tower.


Today's Man Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to May 1


Judge Rules Maradona Must Have Drug Trial
A judge has ruled that MARADONA and his former manager, GUILLERMO COPPOLA, must stand trial in Italy on drug charges, the Italian news agency ANSA reported yesterday.
Maradona left Italy and his Italian club Napoli in 1991 after a 15-month suspension for cocaine use.
The Argentine has recently been playing in Spain.


Commission to Save Whales Endangered, Too
The International Whaling Commission has been struggling for years to make sure that the world's great whales do not become extinct.
But the commission, which held its annual meeting in Kyoto last week, now has to worry about its own survival as well.
Formed by a 1946 convention, the organization is being pulled apart by irreconcilable differences between whaling and anti-whaling nations.
In addition, the commission's original mission, to set quotas for whaling, is out of sync with the desires of the majority of its members, which now oppose whaling on ethical grounds.


On My Mind; Dismantling the War
Before it is too late, Americans should realize that the concept of the war against drugs is in danger of being dismantled and the result will be creeping legalization.
If that is what they want, fine -- they can get it by just keeping silent.


Transactions
Baseball  American League
KANSAS CITY ROYALS -- Placed Curtis Wilkerson, infielder, on the 15-day disabled list.
Recalled David Howard, infielder, from Omaha of the American Association.
TEXAS RANGERS -- Placed Manuel Lee, shortstop, on the 15-day disabled list retroactive to May 15.
Recalled Benji Gil, shortstop, from Tulsa of the Texas League.
Assigned Dan Smith, pitcher, to Port Charlotte of the Florida State League on medical rehabilitation assignment.
TORONTO BLUE JAYS -- Placed Luis Sojo, infielder, on the 15-day disabled list retroactive to May 10.
Recalled Domingo Cedeno, infielder, from Syracuse of the International League.
National League
COLORADO ROCKIES -- Recalled Darren Holmes and Lance Painter, pitchers, from Colorado Springs of the Pacific Coast League.
Sent Mark Knudson, pitcher, and Gerald Young, outfielder, outright to Colorado Springs.
Football  National Football League
NEW YORK GIANTS -- Claimed Blake Miller, center, off waivers from Detroit.
NEW YORK JETS -- Re-signed Ken Whisenhunt, tight end.


Drama Desk Honors 'Kiss' and 'Angels'
"Kiss of the Spider Woman" won the Drama Desk award yesterday for best musical and "Angels in America: Millennium Approaches" won the award for best play.
"Tommy" won the most awards -- six -- for the 1992-93 theatrical season, followed by five each for "Spider Woman" and "Angels in America."
"Tommy" won the awards for director of a musical (Des McAnuff), choreography (Wayne Cilento), orchestration (Steve Margoshes), set design (John Arnone and Wendall K. Harrington), lighting (Chris Parry) and sound (Steve Canyon Kennedy).


Foote, Cone considers adding a second network to fuel growth.
SEEKING to accelerate its comeback from lagging billings and profitability, Foote, Cone &amp; Belding Communications is giving more consideration to establishing a second agency network.
"We're looking at the possibility of a second brand," Bruce Mason, chairman and chief executive at Foote, Cone, said in a telephone interview from the company's headquarters in Chicago.


Becker and Coach Part
BORIS BECKER and his coach, GUNTER BRESNIK, have parted, leaving the fourth-ranked player without a coach one week before the French Open begins.
Becker's manager, ION TIRIAC, said yesterday that the 25-year-old Becker and Bresnik ended their partnership by "mutual agreement."


Account Director For Mercedes Quits
The account director on the Mercedes-Benz of North America account at Scali, McCabe, Sloves of New York has left the agency after a year.
Scali said yesterday that Philippe R. Defechereux, its executive vice president and group account director on that important account, had left to "pursue other opportunities." Mr.
Defechereux was hired last May with much fanfare from Volkswagen A.G. of Wolfsburg, Germany, where he had been worldwide marketing director.


Orbit International (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Jean Philippe Fragrances (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Review/Television; New Made-for-TV Murders Of Assorted Loved Ones
Relationships are murder. Literally. At least in based-on-fact television movies.
The latest illustration can be found in "When Love Kills: The Seduction of John Hearn," a two-part four-hour movie on CBS at 9 tonight and tomorrow.
Adapted from a portion of Ben Green's 1992 book "The Soldier of Fortune Murders," this excursion into pathetic lives stars Gary Cole ("Midnight Caller") as Hearn, a decorated Vietnam veteran drifting through a series of jobs and marriages in and around Columbia, S.C.
Devoted to his young son (Jon Paul Steuer), John yearns for some financial security.
In 1985 he tries to start a bodyguard service and runs an ad in Soldier of Fortune magazine.


Fresh Perspectives On the D.A.R.'s Rebuff of Marian Anderson
The death of Marian Anderson on April 8 has revived a half-century-old dispute over the role played by the Daughters of the American Revolution in refusing her request to sing at Constitution Hall, then the largest auditorium in Washington, on Easter Sunday in 1939.
After being turned down by the D.A.R., which owns Constitution Hall, Miss Anderson presented a legendary song recital standing on the steps of the Lincoln Memorial.
The event was a dramatic personal triumph, and a milestone in the civil rights movement.
The story of her rejection and ultimate triumph was recounted in obituaries published and broadcast around the world last month.
Two days later, the D.A.R., a conservative organization of women who trace their ancestry to the American Revolution, issued a statement to the press and some of its members seeking once again to absolve itself from the taint of racism.


Kmart Says Earnings Drop Was Caused by Weather
The snows of late winter and early spring have melted but not so their effects on the Kmart Corporation.
The country's second-largest retail chain yesterday cited the unseasonably bad weather as a major factor in an 80 percent decline in first-quarter earnings.
Also contributing to the steep drop were a pair of one-time charges, $10 million for an early redemption of bonds and $17 million for the application of new accounting rules for income taxes and retiree benefits.


Two Wheels to Work?


Bus Accident in Lincoln Tunnel Causes 30 Injuries and Long Delays


Administration to Freeze Growth Of Hazardous Waste Incinerators
Reacting to protests about the burning of toxic chemical wastes in Ohio, Arkansas and over a dozen other states, the Clinton Administration plans to bar the development of new hazardous waste incinerators for 18 months.
The policy, developed under Carol M. Browner, the Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency, calls for freezing the capacity of the nation's hazardous waste incinerators, forbidding them to burn more than the current level of roughly three million tons of chemical byproducts a year, E.P.A. officials said today.
Major Issue in Ohio
There are 184 hazardous waste incinerators in the United States.
Under the order, no new ones could be built unless old ones were closed.
This would probably result in a temporary halt in the development and construction of new incinerators, the officials said, giving the agency more time to develop tougher health, safety and environmental requirements for existing plants.


Harper Group Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Golden Gate Guardian Ends a Long Mission
It is difficult to imagine an enemy submarine slipping under the Golden Gate Bridge for purposes more damaging than a wild night on the town for crew members.
But for the last 217 years, the Presidio has been what the Army calls "the guardian of the Golden Gate," a military post first for Spain, then for Mexico and finally, for more than a century, for the United States.


I.B.M. Official Talks of Goal
I.B.M.'s software operating system for personal computers needs roughly to double the number of customers using it in the next year or so to establish itself as a genuine rival to the offerings of the Microsoft Corporation, the head of I.B.M.'s personal computer software unit said yesterday.
The International Business Machines Corporation is announcing a new version of its OS/2 software today.
This entry will compete head-to-head with Microsoft's Windows NT program, which will be brought out later this month.


Newborn Countries Tackle Embassy Life in Washington
The Croats are buying the Austrian Embassy, the Kazakhs just bought a big house and the Czechs share space with their former half, Slovakia, which is not to be confused with Slovenia, which wants to buy its own.
With 19 new countries recognized by the United States in the last 18 months, Washington is seeing the biggest explosion of new embassies here since the end of most European colonialism in Africa in the mid-1960's.


International Aluminum reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


States Turn Entrepreneurial To Augment Tourism Funds
It may not be as catchy as "Virginia Is for Lovers" or as imitable as "I
New York." But in a quest for higher name recognition and tourist dollars, Kentucky recently licensed its new logo -- a stylized horse incorporated in the word "Kentucky," followed by the tagline "What you've been looking for."
As a result, a line of T-shirts, sweatshirts, golf shirts and caps bearing the logo is being shipped to gift shops in most of Kentucky's state parks.
If the merchandise proves popular, it will also be sold in retail stores throughout the state.


Southwest Gas reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Orbotech Ltd. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Atco Ltd. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Why Average Retirement Age Has Dropped
To the Editor:
A May 3 article reports on a study for the National Institute on Aging, having to do with family aid to the elderly, which was found to be strong.
You report that a second study on health and retirement, conducted for the same agency, was intended to help answer questions about why and when people retire.
"The average age of retirement," you state, "has precipitously dropped in recent years, and no one knows why."
If no one knows why, then it would seem that we have a lot of unobservant people.
It is not difficult to understand why people are retiring early.
During the last few years, numerous businesses and government agencies have been offering preretirement incentive packages as a way of reducing the number of employees.
In the company I work for there have been five such plans in the last five years.
Part of the restructuring, reorganization and downsizing programs in a number of large American corporations has been to encourage employees to take early retirement.


Administration Seeks Ways to Ease Africa's Wars and Debt Burden
The Clinton Administration, after fixing its foreign policy focus on Russia, the former Yugoslavia and Haiti, is beginning to turn its attention to Africa.
The development comes as civil rights leaders and the Congressional Black Caucus have been lobbying for a greater emphasis on the continent.
Administration officials say that they are starting to look at such issues as Africa's crushing debt and the civil war in Angola, an 18-year conflict that has been as brutal as that in the Balkans and has lasted far longer.


CV Reit Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Schools Can't Learn a Think From Post Office; Decentralization's Fault
To the Editor:
"The School Mess, Getting Worse" (editorial, May 1), commenting on a report for the New York City schools that details blatant corruption in a Bronx school district, holds no surprise for me.
I can only wonder why it took so long to discover that "the present system of school governance undermines education."
In 1968, as president of the Board of Education, I wrote the minority report against decentralization.
I called it a political answer to a failing education system, arguing: "local autonomy in school, as in other government affairs, inevitably will lead to ward politics, to corruption and to inefficiency." The press and some community organizations criticized me.


Rival Catholic Politicians Talking Peace in Ulster
The two most influential Roman Catholic political leaders in Northern Ireland, who have long been vehement enemies, have begun to discuss the possibility of a framework for peace that would end the violence here between the Irish Republican Army and British forces.
More than 3,000 people have been killed by civil strife in this predominantly Protestant British province since 1969, including 28 in Northern Ireland this year and 3 killed by I.R.A. bombs in England.
The rate is lower than in previous years.


Steps to Avoid Own Side's Fire Studied by U.S.
UNITED STATES military planners hope that in future wars, innovative technology will reduce the toll of Americans accidentally killed by their own side.
But since the Persian Gulf war, where the toll of "fratricidal" casualties reached 17 percent, progress has been slow.
Now, as tension mounts in the Balkan states, the Army has assigned high priority to achieving "quick fixes" as well as longer-range strategies for reducing accidental casualties, including changes in both technology and training.


U.S.-KOREAN TALKS SOUGHT ON A-PACT
American and North Korean diplomats met quietly in New York today to begin planning for high-level talks intended to resolve the dispute caused by Pyongyang's withdrawal from the treaty to halt the spread of nuclear weapons, State Department officials said.
Although the details remained to be worked out, the officials said it now appeared that North Korea would agree to take part in such talks, which the Clinton Administration regards as the most promising route toward ending the two-month-old dispute.


Defense Software reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Biding Time on the Undercard
The only man to have defeated both Riddick Bowe and Lennox Lewis -- the owners of the various heavyweight titles -- wants America to understand that he is not just strutting.
"A lot of fighters talk," said Jorge Luis Gonzalez.
"But I won't lose to Bowe or Lewis."
Gonzalez, who has a 14-0 mark with 13 knockouts, is on the undercard of Bowe's title defense against Jesse Ferguson on Saturday night.
Gonzalez will face Dwayne Hall of Syracuse in a 10-round bout.


Opto Mechanik Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Gotham Apparel Corp. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Hail the Conquering Horse: Prairie Bayou Is a Star
When he arrived at Belmont Park on Sunday to take up residence for the Belmont Stakes on June 5, he was the acknowledged star of his class, and nobody was making fun of his name or his pedigree.
He was Prairie Bayou, the big and gawky gelding, the underdog of winter who has grown into the top dog of spring, and he arrived back in the Big Apple with the best chance of capturing the fancy, and maybe even the passion, of the public before he eventually departs.


So You Think Raising Children Isn't Work?
To the Editor:
"Not Necessarily for White, Middle-Class Girls Only" (The Week in Review, May 2) reports that Take Our Daughters to Work Day excluded full-time mothers at home.
"Was this insulting to mothers who don't work?" wonders a psychologist interviewed.
"I think it was."
What is insulting is her reference to women at home raising children as "mothers who don't work."


Review/Cabaret; Style That's Texas Eclectic
Late last Tuesday's opening-night show of his new cabaret act at Rainbow and Stars, Billy Stritch reminisced about growing up in Sugarland, Tex., a small town that he left only three years ago to come live and work in New York.
Since he left home, he said, a lot of things have changed.
His two sisters have had three babies between them, and his father has bought a new van.
If Mr.
Stritch's patter betrays a streak of starry-eyed ingenuousness, he is a musical talent of unusual range and sophistication in a style that might be described as all-purpose mix-and-match eclectic.
Typical of Mr.
Stritch's way of blending idioms is his rock-and-disco-flavored version of "I Gotta Right to Sing the Blues." His arrangement for a quartet that includes himself on piano, Doug Katsaros on synthesizer, David Finck on bass, and Dave Ratajaczak on drums finds an exact middle ground between Broadway bump-and-grind blues and harder-edged modern pop.


Budget Chief Resigns to Run Health Group
Patrick J. Bulgaro, the director of the State Division of the Budget for a year and a half, announced today that he was resigning to become president of a nonprofit health-care group here.
In his new job with the Center for the Disabled, which is to begin Oct. 1, Mr.
Bulgaro will run a group that operates residential and outpatient programs for more than 11,000 people with cerebral palsy, multiple sclerosis and other disabilities.


By Design; The New Backpacks
The backpack has its pros and cons.
While good for the posture, it is tempting to pickpockets.
It may leave your hands unfettered to hold on to an umbrella or a subway pole, but you have to unharness it to reach keys or tokens.
Still, once a person cottons to a backpack, its capaciousness and convenience far outweigh that of a tote or a handbag.
Prada, the Milanese leather company that made backpacks chic as well as practical, has a slightly scaled-down nylon version that comes in colors like hot orange, ice white and deep purple.
It costs $235 at Barneys New York.
Also $235 is Mark Cross's nylon backpack with solid leather straps and a handle.
It is nicely proportioned and beautifully made.
The brilliant red version is particularly arresting.


COMPANY NEWS
FIDELITY NEW YORK FSB, Garden City, L.I., has been released from restrictions imposed by the Office of Thrift Supervision after it raised $59 million from a stock offering on May 3.
ISS INTERNATIONAL SERVICE SYSTEM INC., New York, a subsidiary of ISS International Service System A.S. of Denmark, has agreed to buy National Cleaning Group Inc. from Nu-Swift P.L.C.


Henry Arthur, 89, Harvard Professor Of Business Ethics
Henry Bradford Arthur, professor emeritus at the Harvard Business School and an expert on agribusiness and business ethics, died on Sunday at his home in Belmont, Mass.
He was 89.
He had been ill for a long time, the business school said yesterday.


Ampex Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Chung to Join Rather As CBS News Anchor
In what network executives called an attempt to "change the dynamic" of the all-male network evening newscasts, CBS will divide the anchor duties on its evening news starting June 1, when Connie Chung will become the co-anchor of the broadcast with Dan Rather.
It is the first time CBS has divided the anchor role of its evening newscast.
Ms.
Chung will be only the second woman ever to have one of the main anchor jobs on network news.
Barbara Walters was a co-anchor of ABC's network's evening newscast for less than two years starting in 1976.


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY  A FATAL CASE OF DOMESTIC VIOLENCE
The killing of Danielle Almonor two months ago carried a sobering message that made the loss all the more painful.
The slaying took place in Brooklyn Family Court.
The man accused of the crime is her husband.
Regardless of the legal outcome, Mrs.
Almonor has joined the 2,000 to 4,000 women who are killed each year by their present or former male partners.
At least another two million are seriously beaten.
A1.
MIXED RESULTS IN SCHOOL RACES
After some fierce ideological battles for seats on New York City school boards, the results appear to be mixed.
B3.


Treatment for 'Bubble Boy Disease'
Two babies born with defective immune systems have been injected with genetically altered blood cells in an effort to cure the fatal condition, scientists said today.
The gene therapy used cells taken from the babies' umbilical cords.
An alternative treatment for the disorder, popularly known as "bubble boy disease," exists but requires expensive injections all the patient's life.


LDDS Communications (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Nord Resources reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


INSIDE
700 Die in Battle Over Kabul
Fighting between guerrilla factions has killed 700 people and wounded over 3,000 people in the Afghan capital during the last week.
Page A5.
Cutting Friendly-Fire Deaths
The military hopes that new technology will reduce the toll of Americans accidentally killed or hurt by their own side.
Science Times, page C1. 2 Chairs at the Anchor Desk
CBS will divide anchor duties on its evening newscast for the first time, when Connie Chung joins Dan Rather on June 1.
Page C18.


Louis Falco Memorial
A memorial tribute to the choreographer and dancer Louis Falco is to be held tomorrow at 5 P.M. at the Cathedral of St.
John the Divine, 1047 Amsterdam Avenue, at 112th Street, Morningside Heights.
Excerpts from Mr.
Falco's works will be performed.
Mr.
Falco died on March 26 at the age of 50.


Penn Treaty American Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Hartford's Hour on Gun Control
Reeling from routs in Virginia and New Jersey, the gun lobby now faces an unexpected battle in Connecticut.
In Virginia, the powerful National Rifle Association failed to kill Gov.
Douglas Wilder's measure limiting handgun purchases to one a month.
In New Jersey, similar bullying failed to block a ban on semiautomatic weapons.
Now Connecticut, long a gun-loving state, weighs a comparable prohibition.
The drive to impose a ban on semiautomatic assault rifles in Connecticut has gained particular momentum this year as police who feel outgunned by street criminals add their voices to the clamor for gun control.
If the gun lobby loses in the Connecticut Legislature, that would palpably improve chances for passage in Washington of Federal gun controls.
Such are the larger stakes as Connecticut's 36 state senators vote this week on banning the sale of semiautomatic weapons.
Gov.
Lowell P. Weicker Jr. and the state's lower house support the measure.


Sylvan Foods Holdings Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Death Toll From Allies In Warfare May Be 15%
UNITED STATES Army analysts have concluded from a new study of historical medical records and other evidence that some 15 percent of the casualties sustained in modern wars have been fratricidal, and that many of the Americans who would be called upon to fight a future war would again be exposed to lethal fire from their own side.
Military leaders formerly believed that the average fratricidal casualty rate in past wars was about 2 percent, although fratricidal casualties in the Persian Gulf war were known to be about 17 percent of the total.
But a newly disclosed analysis by the Army's Office of the Surgeon General has caused a sensation among Pentagon planners: it appears that the "normal" rate of fratricidal casualties in recent American wars has been closer to 15 percent than 2 percent.


Perceptron Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Applebee's International (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 28


Interpool Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Quest Medical Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Thermo Power reports earnings for Qtr to April 3


Scope Industries reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Dr. Lewis Katoff Psychologist, 39
Dr.
Lewis Katoff, a clinical psychologist on the staff of the Gay Men's Health Crisis, died on Saturday at his Manhattan home.
He was 39.
The cause was AIDS-related complications, the organization said.


Security Tag Systems (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Yonkers Plans Review Board In Police Cases
Responding to charges that the Yonkers Police Department has abused its powers, the Mayor and Police Commissioner have decided to create an eight-member committee to review complaints of police brutality and misconduct.
The planned board will not be as independent as New York City's all-civilian complaint review board.
Still, for Yonkers, a city of 188,000 with a tradition of almost unquestioning support for its police force, the creation of such a panel is a significant break with the past.


Bertucci's Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to April 17


2d Trial Begins for Officer in '89 Miami Shooting
Nearly four and a half years after the killings of two young black men plunged Miami into racial violence, opening arguments in the second trial of the Hispanic police officer charged with manslaughter in their deaths began here today with a sharp debate about police behavior and responsibilities.
As his mother, wife, brothers and children looked on, the suspended officer, William Lozano, heard himself described by his lawyer, Roy Black, as a conscientious cop who was "put in a terrible no-win situation, a situation every police officer dreads."


Speed and Clarity at a Low Cost
APPLE COMPUTER INC. has revamped its family of printers in recent months, including several new laser models.
But the really hot news is at the bottom end of the line, where Apple has significantly improved its low-cost Stylewriter for the Macintosh.
"The new Canon printer engine they use is much faster, and it has great print quality," said Charles LeCompte, editor of the Hard Copy Observer, a newsletter that covers the printer industry.
"People who have a Stylewriter will notice a big improvement."


Trico Products Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


International Leisure Enterp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


BUSINESS DIGEST
Companies
Two former Manufacturers Hanover vice presidents were indicted and charged with using improper influence and inside knowledge to buy Colombian Government debt at a discount and reap hundreds of thousands of dollars in personal profit.
The indictment revealed the existence of an investigation into the largely unregulated foreign debt market by the Manhattan District Attorney and the Federal Reserve.  [ Page D1. ]
Time Warner's chairman, Gerald M. Levin, has reassured both Wall Street and his own managers of his ability to bring together an unwieldy group of egos allied in the merger of Time and Warner Communications in the six months since the death of Steven J. Ross, his predecessor.  [ D1. ]


Welfare Agency Took Missing Boy, Police Say
A Bronx mother who had reported her 10-year-old child missing Friday night found out only yesterday that the boy had been taken from school Friday by the city's Child Welfare Administration, the police said.
School officials acknowledged yesterday that they should have done more to contact the mother, Carol Rockhead, when they could not reach her by telephone.
Sheila Jack, a spokeswoman for the Child Welfare Administration, said she could not comment on the agency's role in the case because of state confidentiality rules that protect families' privacy.


IRT Property Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Energy Tax Will Save Us Money and Health
To the Editor:
"The White House Struggles to Save Energy Tax Plan" (front page, May 10) tells how a host of special interests are seeking to kill President Clinton's proposed energy tax.
Such a tax would not only help cut the deficit, reduce air pollution and simplify tax collection; but paradoxically, it would also do so at a lower overall tax level than otherwise, because it would reduce government expenses for cleaning up pollution.


First Central Financial reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Lebanon Suspends Opposition Papers; Crackdown Denied
Prime Minister Rafik al-Hariri met with leaders of Lebanese news organizations on Sunday and told them that he had no intention of cracking down on the press, even though the Government had temporarily suspended two opposition newspapers after accusing them of violating the country's press law.
As Safir, a leading daily newspaper, was suspended for one week last Wednesday for publishing what it called the text of a proposal by Israel on withdrawing from its buffer zone in southern Lebanon.


6 DAYS OF FIGHTING KILL 700 IN KABUL
For a sixth straight day, Kabul was torn by gunfire and rockets today as guerrilla factions battled for control of pieces of the ravaged capital of Afghanistan.
Since the fighting rekindled, at least 700 people have been killed and 3,000 more wounded, according to the International Committee of the Red Cross in Kabul.


Theater in Review
Last Nite at Ace High  Negro Ensemble Company La Guardia Performing Arts Center 31-10 Thomson Avenue Long Island City Queens Through Sunday  By Kenneth Hoke-Witherspoon; directed by Douglas Turner Ward; set by Michael Green; costumes by Judy Dearing; sound by Richard Turner; lighting by Shirley Prendergast; production manager, Sandra L. Ross.
Presented by the Negro Ensemble Company, Mr.
Ward, artistic director; Susan Watson Turner, producing director.
WITH: Jeannie M. Collins, Maggie Cooke, O. L. Duke, William J. Marshall, Brian Shnipper, Iris Little Thomas, Leonard Thomas, Douglas Turner Ward, Ed Wheeler, Curt Williams, Darryl Williams and Michael Wright.


Turgeon Is Skating In Direction of Game 2
Pierre Turgeon switched sweaters three times during the Islanders' practice this afternoon.
Black, white, black again.
He played with the best of his teammates, and he played with the second-stringers long after the regulars had left the ice.
What was most encouraging for the Islanders, though, was not the way Turgeon played and not the fact that he was taking slap shots with a good deal of force.
It was, instead, Turgeon's simple ability to pull those jerseys on and off -- his arms stretched high in the air -- without the slightest grimace of pain.


Bomb the Serbs. Now.
Now that the Bosnian Serbs have defied the international community by burying the Vance-Owen peace plan under the rubble of new artillery attacks, President Clinton and our allies must take further steps, including military force, to stop the genocidal slaughter of civilians.
But there are deep divisions in Congress and in our military -- not only over what these steps should be but also over why the U.S. should get involved at all.
The reasons, in fact, are far more crucial to our national interests than than those that led us to send 500,000 soldiers to defend the dictatorship and the oil of Kuwait.


Gerber Products Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Being Superintegrated
IT has been said, no doubt by an Apple partisan, that Microsoft Windows makes a PC almost as good as a Macintosh.
Well, Clarisworks for Windows makes a PC almost as good as a Macintosh running Clarisworks.
Claris of Santa Clara, Calif., is the software subsidiary of Apple Computer Inc.
But getting in bed with the enemy has always been a popular choice, especially one as well-armed as the Microsoft Corporation.


Stifel Financial reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Hero, Wounded in a Subway Mugging, Downplays His Bravery
Clearly more awed by the news media than the knife-wielding subway mugger he vanquished last week in defense of a woman and her toddler, a 24-year-old Hunter College student emerged from his hospital bed yesterday and disavowed the hero's mantle with the aw, shucks gallantry of a real-life Gary Cooper.
"What I did doesn't make me a hero," Christian Fetterolf, who had been stabbed four times, told reporters and a battery of television cameras at New York Hospital: a gaggle that had gathered to hear him recount his struggle with the mugger in a station at 59th Street and Lexington Avenue last Wednesday.


Torborg and the Tea Leaves: Is Something Up?
The subject of the manager's status is in the air.
It has seeped into private conversations among players.
It has fueled debate at Shea.
It happens in New York when your club has a nearly $39 million payroll and a 12-24 record.
The owners of the Mets are aware of it all, and if they aren't yet prepared to act, they are talking -- and sounding less certain of what to do.
"We're all accountable," said Fred Wilpon, who owns the Mets along with Nelson Doubleday.
"And we're doing everything we can to make changes that are appropriate changes. We're considering everything."


ADT Ltd.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Israeli Leads Delegation to India Seeking Economic and Arms Ties
Foreign Minister Shimon Peres of Israel arrived here today on the first official visit in 40 years by an Israeli leader to India, which has long espoused the Palestinian cause.
He spoke of the range of economic and technological areas where the two sides could cooperate.
"We have been waiting for this moment for 40 years," Mr.
Peres told a gathering of India's industrial barons soon after he laid a wreath at the memorial to Mohandas K. Gandhi, who led the Indian independence movement against Britain more than 50 years ago.


Pages Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Devon Energy reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Turner Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Treasury Prices Continue Decline
Inflation fears continued to drive Treasury prices lower yesterday, and the yield on the 30-year bond inched closer to 7 percent.
As a result, more and more traders and investors were talking about the end of the bond market rally of 1993.
Short-term interest rates, meanwhile, moved sharply higher as investors wondered whether the Federal Reserve would push up rates to curb any increase in inflation.
The Fed's monetary policy committee -- the Federal Open Market Committee -- is to meet in Washington today to set that policy for the next six weeks.


Keeping Hope Alive at a Harlem Field
The white apartment building that stands at the corner of 100th Street and First Avenue is said to house a crack den and be a frequent target of raids by New York City's anti-drug enforcers.
Down the street and one block over, the shell of a burned-out Associated Food Store barely stands, a testament to the fact that what had been the only large grocery store in this immediate area of Manhattan had not been replaced since its demise last February.


Monro Muffler Brake Inc.  (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Studies Offer a New Understanding of Myopia
WRESTING clues from Chinese peasants, chickens fitted with goggles and children living in Cambridge, Mass., researchers are gradually deciphering the nature and cause of nearsightedness.
Their newest findings, reported at two recent eye research meetings, suggest that nearsightedness, or myopia, has a strong genetic component but also that mother was right: close-up visual activity like reading or playing video games seems to promote nearsightedness in many children.


Kuhlman Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Hillary Clinton Gives Plea for Unity at Penn
Accepting an honorary degree from the University of Pennsylvania, which has experienced racial tension in the last year, Hillary Rodham Clinton urged students today to "repair the social contract" and uphold the idea of colleges as "havens for free speech and free thought."
"What we have to do here at this university and in this country is to find a way to celebrate our diversity and debate our differences without fracturing our communities," she said.


Turning Loopy Over Language
It would take a Swift or a Voltaire to do justice to the battle between the "language police" and outraged Anglophones in Quebec.
At issue is a law requiring that commercial signs be written only in French in Canada's Francophone province.
So vexed was an English-speaking undertaker in southern Quebec that he took his grievance to the United Nations, and lo, its Commission on Human Rights has ruled that the French-only law conflicts with the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights.


Bosnian Serbs Display Victims Killed by Muslims


Leading Conservative Democrat Criticizes Clinton
Representative Dave McCurdy of Oklahoma, one of President Clinton's earliest supporters and a leading conservative Democrat, accused Mr.
Clinton today of betraying the spirit of his Presidential campaign and governing like a traditional liberal.
Mr.
McCurdy warned in a series of interviews that a growing number of Democratic members of the House had told him that they opposed Mr.
Clinton's proposed tax increases, a movement that Mr.
McCurdy suggested could torpedo the Administration's economic package.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Building a Future for Cable TV Via the Telephone; Time Warner Chief Proves Deal Maker
In the nearly five months since he took over as chairman of Time Warner, after the death of Steven J. Ross, Gerald M. Levin has quietly wooed the support of two key constituencies: Wall Street and his own managers.
He has brought together an unwieldy group of egos, allied in the merger of Time and Warner, and, in an era of technological chaos, has, for better or worse, charted an aggressive path to the future.
The biggest commitment to that vision was the deal formally announced yesterday under which U S West, one of the seven regional Bell operating companies, will invest $2.5 billion in Time Warner to bring programming to subscribers over a cable superhighway.


Critic's Notebook; Early Cannes Favorite: A Post-Freudian Romance
An inflatable, rather pudgy-looking Arnold Schwarzenegger, 75 feet tall and 20 feet wide, lately seen in Times Square, rides a barge 1,000 yards offshore here, looking like some sort of soft sentinel who is seriously disoriented.
He faces not the sea but the hotels along the Croisette.
Depending on how much air has been pumped into him, his rubber gun is less often pointed straight up than it is drooping, thus aimed at the heart of Cannes, which has been his host for the last five days.
This is just one of the ways in which things become turned around at this 46th Cannes International Film Festival.
Mr.
Schwarzenegger doesn't have a film at the festival, though he has been its biggest attraction to date.
He's here promoting his new film, "Last Action Hero," which he describes as "an action-film for the 90's," meaning, he says, that he plays "vulnerable" and the body count is modest.


My Invitation? Uh . . . Smile for the Camera!
IF passion makes art, Richard Hooper is an artist, a visionary who has done for celebrities what Andy Warhol did for the Campbell soup can.
But his targets would probably call him something less flattering.
Mr.
Hooper's paintbrush -- some might say weapon -- is an autofocus camera, small enough and light enough to be taken apart and hidden in his dinner jacket as he crashes the country's most exclusive events to make celebrity snapshots.


Craftmatic/Contour Ind.  (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Pentagon Study Urges Cuts in Arms Programs
The Pentagon has more programs to build warplanes and ships than it can afford, and must quickly move to cancel some, a new study says.
The study, made public today, was carried out by a group of private experts at the request of Defense Secretary Les Aspin, who wanted an independent audit of the Defense Department's budgetary assumptions.
Mr.
Aspin is conducting his own review of military programs, and the study is expected to influence his planning.


ICN Biomedicals Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


SNC Group reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Bulls Win in 4, And Three Guesses Who Cut the Net
Before the game against the Cleveland Cavaliers, Michael Jordan was asked if Cleveland had a chance.
"Slim," he said.
Jordan proved to be an excellent prognosticator and, as usual, a sterling clutch player, leading the Chicago Bulls to a 103-101 victory over the Cavaliers.
Jordan sank an 18-foot fallaway jump shot at the buzzer for the winning basket, giving the Bulls a sweep of their four-of-seven-game Eastern Conference semifinal series.
They now meet the winner of the Knicks-Hornets series in the finals.


Designs Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to May 1


ECI Telecom Ltd. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


To Stop Drug Sales, Bridgeport Barricades Its Streets
As a huge crane dropped concrete barriers across the intersection of Maple and Brook Streets this morning, neighbors spilled out of their houses or pulled the drapes back and peered into the street.
They shared the same hope: that the roadblock and others like it would deter out-of-town drug buyers and end the gunfire that plagues this troubled city's East End.


Thermo Electron reports earnings for Qtr to April 3


Speizman Industries reports earnings for Qtr to April 3


Supreme Court Roundup; High Court to Decide if Jurors Can Be Barred on Basis of Sex
Seven years after the Supreme Court first ruled that race could not play a part in jury selection, the Justices agreed today to decide whether the same principle of equal protection also bars the exclusion of potential jurors on the basis of their sex.
The Court accepted an appeal from an Alabama man who was the defendant in a civil case brought by the state to establish that he had fathered a child and was responsible for paying child support.
After the state used its peremptory challenges to exclude nine men from the group of potential jurors, a jury of 12 women heard the evidence and, despite the man's denial, declared him to be the father.


S. Van Rensselaer, 88, Retired Bank Executive
Stephen Van Rensselaer, a retired vice president of Citibank, died on Sunday at North Shore University Hospital in Glen Cove, L.I.
He was 88 and lived in Locust Valley, L.I.
His wife, Lillie, said he had had a long illness.


Courthouse Death: One Family's Tragedy -- A special report.; When Passion Explodes Into a Deadly Rage
It was dramatic -- a woman killed by her estranged husband in Brooklyn Family Court, a bullet fired into the back of her head as she sat on a bench waiting for their case to be called.
To legal and social-services professionals who knew her, the death of Danielle Almonor two months ago carried a sobering message that made the loss all the more painful.


Terex Corp.  reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Mets Just Keep Clunking Along to the Tune of Defeat
The inning was a descent into disorder.
A one-run game degenerated into a blowout in the top of the ninth last night at Shea Stadium after a double by Orlando Merced transformed a 5-4 contest into a 7-4 Pittsburgh lead that would become a 9-4 defeat for the Mets.
There were boos.
There were chants of "Jeff Must Go!" as Manager Jeff Torborg trooped back and forth to the mound to try and stem the latest flood of runs and failure.
There was bitterness and bewilderment as the Mets had their loss total for 1993 (24) neatly double their collection of triumphs (12).


JWP to Sell Data Business to Management
JWP Inc., seeking to refocus its business and cope with high debt, said yesterday that it had agreed to sell its Information Services subsidiary to a management buyout team for an undisclosed amount.
The sale is part of the previously announced plan of JWP to restructure around its core mechanical and electrical services business.
The subsidiary, which provides personal computer-related hardware, software and integrated services to large institutional and corporate clients, had 1992 sales of $1.7 billion, about 36 percent of JWP's estimated 1992 revenue.


Calprop Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Centocor Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


RESULTS PLUS
TENNIS  Germany Upsets Czech Team  Germany upset the top-seeded Czech Republic yesterday as the $1.75 million World Team Cup tournament got under way in Dusseldorf, Germany.
Germany's doubles team of Michael Stich and Patrik Kuhnen defeated Petr Korda and Cyril Suk, 3-6, 7-5, 6-2, for a 2-1 victory against the Red Group favorite.
In the singles, Korda, No. 6 in the world, beat the 10th-ranked Stich, 7-6, 6-1, and stomach cramps forced Karel Novacek to withdraw against Carl-Uwe Steeb of Germany while leading, 6-3, 2-4.
In the other Red Group match, Sweden blanked France, 3-0. (AP) Raymond Advances: Florida's Lisa Raymond opened defense of her N.C.A.A. singles title yesterday with straight-set victories in the first and second rounds of the Division I women's championships in Gainesville, Fla.
Raymond, the top-ranked amateur in the world, defeated Stanford's Kristine Kurth, 6-3, 6-1, in the first round.
In the second round, Raymond fended off a pair of set points in a first-set tie breaker against Southern Cal's Suzi Italiano before storming to a 7-6 (9-7), 6-0 victory to advance to the round of 16. (AP)


Who Can Fix the City's Schools?
The results of this month's local school board elections in New York City are dribbling in.
They're disheartening.
Several board members who have been tainted by allegations of corruption and other scandals were returned to office.
Taken together with the selection of Carol Gresser of Queens as the new president of the central board, this sorry election is proof positive of a school system that's broke and needs fixing.
Gov.
Mario Cuomo, Mayor David Dinkins and the Democratic State Assembly now seem to be in broad agreement on an agenda for changing the way the system is run.
But the Republican State Senate stands in the way of reform.
It's up to the six Republican Senators in the New York City delegation to push mightily for an agreement.


Schools Can't Learn a Think From Post Office; A System So Bad
To the Editor:
The low voter turnout in New York City's school board election provides us the worst of all possible worlds:
*
A system so bad that you cannot responsibly give endorsements to any of the 543 candidates in 32 districts.


Insurers Notice the Greenhouse Effect
To the Editor:
You report that insurance companies are withdrawing coverage from areas at risk from hurricanes and other weather disasters because of high payouts (Business Day, May 4).
Another reason is that insurers are worried about global warming.
As emissions of carbon dioxide and other greenhouse gases heat up the atmosphere, Earth's climate will change significantly, giving rise to more frequent and severe windstorms and other disasters, playing havoc with coverage based on historic weather patterns.
The industry is taking this threat seriously.


S.I. Doctor Convicted in Attempt To Kill His Wife With Insulin
A doctor from Staten Island was convicted yesterday of trying to kill his wife by injecting her with three massive doses of insulin while she was a patient at the Brooklyn hospital where he worked.
A jury in State Supreme Court in Brooklyn deliberated less than two hours before finding Dr.
Medhat Shenouda guilty of sending his wife, Georgette, into a coma with insulin injections over several days last July at Brookdale Hospital Medical Center.
Mrs.
Shenouda recovered.


Seacor Holdings Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Pulaski Furniture (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to April 18


Swift Energy reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Perrigo Co. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Market Place; E-Systems, a cold war company, is seeking new uses for its skills.
LIKE other military contractors, E-Systems Inc., a spying company, is trying to come in from the cold -- and Wall Street is wary.
During the cold war, its electronic systems eavesdropped on the Soviet Union and other adversaries, gathered intelligence and analyzed and distributed billions of bits of data for the Central Intelligence Agency, the National Security Agency, the military and foreign governments.


2 Indicted on Insider Charges in Debt Trading
Two former vice presidents of the Manufacturers Hanover Trust Company were indicted yesterday, charged with using improper influence and inside knowledge to buy Colombian Government debt at a discount and reap hundreds of thousands of dollars in personal profit.
The indictment, handed up by a Manhattan grand jury, revealed the existence of an investigation into the largely unregulated foreign debt trading market by the Manhattan District Attorney, Robert M. Morgenthau, and the Federal Reserve.
Prosecutors described the case as the first handled by Mr.
Morgenthau's office involving the foreign debt market.
They said it was an outgrowth of his office's investigation of the Bank of Credit and Commerce International.


Kent Electronics reports earnings for Qtr to April 3


Balkan Update
Serbian nationalist leaders, buoyed by a referendum in BOSNIA AND HERZEGOVINA that appeared to have gone largely in their favor, said in PALE that outside powers should set aside the peace plan and accept the inevitability of a separate Serbian state in Bosnia.
Russia's Foreign Minister, Andrei V. Kozyrev, met with President Slobodan Milosevic of SERBIA in BELGRADE and said he hoped the United States would yet agree to a Security Council meeting to carry out the plan.


Making Playoffs Wasn't Enough for Hill
The Indiana Pacers, recently knocked out of the playoffs in the first round for the fourth consecutive year, dismissed BOB HILL as coach yesterday.
The Pacers' president, DONNIE WALSH, said he already had a list of possible successors, but would not disclose any names.


Srinagar Journal; From the Editor's Chair, a Bleak View of Kashmir
These days, on his way to work, Khwaja Sana Ullah Bhat picks his way past a tangle of blackened beams, heaps of charred and cracked bricks, and a sandbag bunker where a soldier cradles an assault rifle, all before he can reach the unmarked heavy steel door that leads to his office.
Then he worms his way through a maze of hallways, weaving by empty desks that jut into passages, past a heat-coil burner and, finally, into a dim chamber where he sinks into the creaky high-backed editor's chair of The Daily Aftab, or The Daily Sun.


Russian Official Insists Serbia Still Backs Vance-Owen Peace Plan
Insisting that the President of Serbia still backed the international peace plan for Bosnia and Herzegovina despite its rejection by Bosnian Serbs, Russia's Foreign Minister said today that he hoped the United States would yet agree to a Security Council meeting to carry out the plan.
The Russian Foreign Minister, Andrei V. Kozyrev, met with President Slobodan Milosevic of Serbia here after seeing the Croatian President, Franjo Tudjman, in the Adriatic resort of Split.
Mr.
Kozyrev said that the Croatian leader agreed to accept an international monitoring force along the Croatian-Bosnian border.


Corrections
A report in the Patterns column on the Fashion page yesterday drew an incorrect conclusion about Hillary Rodham Clinton's new hairstyle.
Although she visited the Waldorf-Astoria last weekend, her hair was cut by Frederick Fekkai, whose salon is at Bergdorf Goodman, not by Kenneth Battelle at the Waldorf.
The column also referred incorrectly to the author of "The Beautiful People," in which Mr.
Battelle is quoted.
She is Marylin Bender.


The Left in the 90's, Musing on Irving Howe
To the Editor:
Michael Weinstein's May 10 Editorial Notebook on Irving Howe recalls how in the late 1960's the socialist writer-editor "railed against the stupidity and irrationality of the student left because such traits tarnished the glorious tradition he represented."


The Pop Life
Woody Allen's Career
Even at the height of his legal battle with Mia Farrow, Woody Allen showed up at Michael's Pub in Manhattan to play his clarinet with the New Orleans Funeral and Ragtime Orchestra on Monday evenings, a routine he began more than two decades aqo.
Mr.
Allen describes himself as a "completely amateur player," "not a real musician" and "not a particularly good musician at all." Now those who are curious about this film maker's musical talents can judge for themselves.
Mr.
Allen can be heard on a new album, "The Bunk Project" (Music Masters).
This album of traditional New Orleans jazz features the New York Jazz Ensemble under the direction of Eddy Davis, the banjo player, with Mr.
Allen on clarinet, and was recorded over several jam sessions at Harkness House in Manhattan.
The other musicians include Simon Wettenhall and Peter Ecklund, on trumpet; Dan Barrett and Graham Stewart, trombonists; Cynthia Sayer and Todd Robbins, pianists; Greg Cohen and Brian Nalepka, bassists, and John Gill, Giampaolo Biagi and Paul Keim, drummers.


A Name Game Played for Keeps
To the Marriott Corporation, its pending plan to divide into two new companies, Marriott International and the Host Marriott Corporation, is a way to unlock the unappreciated values in its business operations.
But to Don M. Compton, the Marriott proposal was the inspiration for a speculative lark that has turned into a forced march through the maze of justice in Delaware.
Along the way, Marriott has sued him, a half-dozen lawyers have spurned him, and a Delaware judge has stripped him of his right to a corporate name he believes is justly his.


The Joy of Eggs (in Moderation, of Course) Is Rediscovered
THIS menu celebrates the arrival of warmer weather with a meal that begins with a gratin of eggs and tomato.
When I was a child, we had eggs more often than meat at our house.
It was an economic necessity, I suppose; yet, I remember these egg dishes with fondness.
Nowadays, my family eats far fewer eggs because of concerns about high cholesterol.
We still enjoy them occasionally, however, and especially like them in this gratin, which can be served as a first course.


A Rookie's Final Lesson
A half an hour after Charlotte had been eliminated, the Hornets' locker room was a buzz of interviews and the sound of a trainer barking orders, exhorting the players to get dressed and catch a plane back to North Carolina.
"Let's get going, let's get going. C'mon Zo, you're not going to make it."


Punishing China on Trade Hurts Wrong People; Population Control
To the Editor:
I share Prof.
John H. Herz's concern in his May 6 letter on population control that "it would be a tragedy if the excesses connected with the Chinese effort jeopardized President Clinton's intended reversal of American policy that denied funds for family planning abroad." But what is "the path of radical population stabilization" on which Professor Herz hopes the United Nations will set third-world countries?
Can even a zero-growth program alleviate the population problem in countries such as India and Bangladesh?


Russian Judges Suspend Treason Trial, Citing Bias
The treason trial of 12 former Soviet leaders accused of carrying out the failed hard-line Communist coup attempt in August 1991 took another twist today as the presiding judges suspended the proceedings indefinitely on the ground that the chief prosecutor is biased.
Meeting after a monthlong suspension that was due to the sudden illness of a defendant, the three military judges accepted a defense motion that the prosecution team had been tainted by the misconduct and bias of Russia's chief prosecutor, Valentin G. Stepankov, and the prosecutor's deputy, Yevgeny Lisov.


It's an Inside Job for Suns As Barkley Leads Late Run
Charles Barkley finally found shots he could make tonight: three-footers.
After four games of roaming the perimeter, the strongest of the Phoenix Suns asserted his tired self in the second half to clear out room underneath.
With his team trailing the San Antonio Spurs by 1 point halfway through the final period tonight, Barkley notched 13 straight points -- including consecutive 3-point plays with a fouling David Robinson draped on top of him.
Lethargic for much of the first half, Barkley became so giddy that he eventually dropped in a 3-point shot from 28 feet to secure the 109-97 Suns victory.


Question of Censorship Shadows Catholic Paper
A small item in this week's issue of The Catholic Transcript, the newspaper of the Archdiocese of Hartford, reports that Archbishop Daniel A. Cronin will soon move into a mansion owned by an order of Catholic priests and live there rent free.
What the article doesn't say is that the move comes a year after a public outcry led the Archbishop to drop plans to buy a $430,000 home with six bedrooms and a swimming pool.


A Case Against Rain


At Libel Trial, Speaking Style Becomes the Focus
Nearing the end of her testimony in Federal court here, Janet Malcolm today described Jeffrey M. Masson's exuberant speaking style, which she said caused her to rearrange some of the "chaotic" and "contradictory" things he said in order to create a coherent narrative.
Ms.
Malcolm characterized Mr.
Masson's habitual torrent of words as "full of images and force," a delight to a writer of profiles like herself.
"But things came out in a rather chaotic, contradictory way," she testified.
"He's trying to tell too many things at the same time. You had to work hard to get the story straight because he was all over the place."


Review/Ballet Theater; Paying Tribute to MacMillan With a Celebration of His Work
American Ballet Theater's annual gala took the form of a tribute to Sir Kenneth MacMillan on Monday night, an occasion more dignified than festive but very much a celebration of the British choreographer's work.
The benefit at the Metropolitan Opera House focused particularly on MacMillan's connection with Ballet Theater.
When he died in London on Oct. 29 at the age of 62, he was no longer an artistic associate with the company, as he had been from 1984 to 1989.
But as was obvious in the program's danced excerpts, his choreography remains a vital part of Ballet Theater's repertory; on May 28, his "Manon" will have a company premiere.


Dozens Are Hurt in Bus Crash on Staten Island
A charter bus carrying 53 people on their way home from an outing in Atlantic City crashed into a concrete abutment on the Staten Island side of the Verrazano-Narrows Bridge during a rainstorm last night, the authorities said.
Almost every passenger was injured, but none of the injuries appeared to be serious.
"It is not believed that any of the injuries was life-threatening," said Catherine Sweeney, a spokeswoman for the Triborough Bridge and Tunnel Authority.


Drummond Aims to Dethrone the Kings of Sprinting
The presence of the others glowed so fiercely, they commanded the entire oval.
When Jon Drummond lined up to sprint against Carl Lewis and Leroy Burrell, he saw only what others saw: Lewis and Burrell.
"I was just this little light shining in the background," Drummond said.
"A utility man."


500 FOREIGN POLICE READIED FOR HAITI
After a delay of several days caused by a strongly negative initial reaction to the idea in Haiti, senior diplomats here say they are completing plans for an international police force whose deployment in Haiti they say will soon be proposed before the United Nations Security Council.
Diplomats involved in the planning of the force, which would number about 500 officers, to be drawn mostly from French-speaking countries, say the police deployment is a key element in efforts to bring about a negotiated settlement of Haiti's long political crisis.


Girl, 6, Hit by Car and Critically Injured on the Way to School
A 6-year-old girl whose mother was walking her to school on the Upper West Side yesterday morning was critically injured when a van forced a car up onto a sidewalk, hitting the girl, the police said.
The driver of the van, who was ticketed for making an unsafe lane change, had a history of moving violations and was involved in a personal injury accident in August, the police said.
He had accrued eight license suspensions over several years, which he resolved by either paying outstanding tickets or scheduling court appearances.


UNITY FOR EUROPE SURVIVES KEY TEST AS THE DANES VOTE
Danish voters today strongly ratified the Treaty on European Union that they had narrowly rejected last June, keeping alive the prospects for greater economic and political unity.
The Danes' clear endorsement of the treaty -- 56.8 percent to 43.2 percent -- was a boon to the spirits of the European Community, which had been badly shaken over the past year by mounting opposition to closer union.
The community's efforts have been strained by a deepening economic recession and the war in Bosnia.


2D TRIAL ALLOWED IN SKINHEAD CASE
An 18-year-old skinhead whose probation in the murder of a black man ignited racial protests may be tried on conspiracy charges, a state district judge ruled Monday.
But lawyers for the teen-ager, Christopher W. Brosky, said today that they would appeal the decision because it amounted to double jeopardy, the constitutional prohibition against trying a person twice for the same crime.


A 6-Year-Old Girl Is Critically Injured in an Accident


Hewlett Net Tops Wall St. Expectations
The Hewlett-Packard Company, propelled by its revitalized computer business, reported second-quarter earnings yesterday that surpassed Wall Street's highest expectations -- no small feat given the computer industry's recent financial doldrums.
Investors flocked to the company's shares, which rose $5.125 to close at $84.75 yesterday on the New York Stock Exchange, where Hewlett-Packard was the third-most-active stock.


No Headline


Review/Music; Some Beats And Voices Of Surinam
Ai Sa Si, a band from Surinam that made its United States debut on Friday night at S.O.B.'s, calls its music kawina, after a drum used by slaves.
In the band's music, that drum has multiplied into an array of percussion that includes three shakers, small and large lap-held drums, congas and a board that is mounted horizontally on a stand, played with metal tubes and well splintered from constant use.
The only other sounds come from six voices, with solo lines answered by richly harmonized major chords.
One lead singer had the husky fervor of a gospel singer, another, the soaring clarity of a salsa sonero.


Rita Dove Named Next Poet Laureate; First Black in Post
Rita Dove, a Pulitzer Prize-winning writer whose works evoke the history of her country and memories of her family, was named today the nation's next poet laureate.
Ms.
Dove is the first black poet to hold the position; at 40, she is also the youngest to be chosen.
In choosing Ms.
Dove, the Librarian of Congress, James H. Billington, remarked on her relative youth.
"I take much pleasure in announcing the selection of a younger poet of distinction and versatility," he said.
"Having had a number of poet laureates who have accumulated multiple distinctions from lengthy and distinguished careers, we will be pleased to have an outstanding representative of a new and richly variegated generation of American poets."


New-Home Starts Rose 6.7% in April
Home building perked up in April, particularly in the Northeast.
It was another sign that the economy has regained some momentum after a harsh winter and that the modest housing recovery is still alive.
But despite the lowest mortgage rates in nearly two decades, nobody is counting on another 1980's-style housing boom.


Review/Theater; Product of a Lifelong Obsession With Parapsychology
For Alan Jay Lerner, "On a Clear Day You Can See Forever" was intended to be the culmination of his lifelong obsession with parapsychology.
Mr.
Lerner, an author and lyricist, meant the title to be taken literally.
Despite his knowledge of the subject and his vast theatrical experience, the show was victimized by a series of miscalculations, all of which are still evident in the revival of the musical at the Harold Clurman Theater.
Income from ticket sales to the Opening Doors production goes to Broadway Cares/ Equity Fights AIDS.
The history of "Clear Day" included a switch in composers (from Richard Rodgers to Burton Lane), four different directors and a change of leading man (from Louis Jourdan to John Cullum).
Songs were excised and new ones written right up until the opening on Broadway in 1965 (when the show had a record breaking top ticket price of $11.90).
Mr.
Lerner wrote 93 choruses for one song before he was satisfied with it.
Through all the travail and the second guessing, there was a single constant, Barbara Harris as Daisy Gamble, the 20th-century woman with an 18th-century past.


Interest-Rate Concerns Push Dow Lower by 5.54 Points
Chilled by the uncertainty of future interest rates, stock market investors returned yesterday to the trading range that has characterized the market for the last several weeks.
The Dow Jones industrial average fell slightly, while other major indexes were mixed in relatively heavy trading.


Father Hopes Son Straightens Out
A Little League slugger in Walnut Creek, Calif., hit for a new cycle of sorts this past weekend -- stroking two home runs and smashing foul balls into his father's camcorder and the family car.
TRAVIS LOWE, 12 years old, in his first at-bat for the Walnut Creek Little League Athletics on Saturday, sliced a foul that broke the grille of the family station wagon.
On the next pitch, Lowe popped one over the fence in left-center field.


Executive Changes
ALTEON INC., Northvale, N.J., a pharmaceutical development company, appointed Jere E. Goyan, its senior vice president for research and development, to the positions of president and chief operating officer.


Review/Jazz; Though He Left Cuba, He Stayed With the Piano
Every once in a while, a Cuban musician manages to leave Cuba and start a career elsewhere.
There's always the same sort of publicity flurry, based on the musician's abilities in the jazz and Afro-Cuban idioms and the political and personal bravery it often took to escape.
Usually their careers dwindle after a few years as the escape story loses its potency and as the musical limitations become clear.
The latest arrival is Gonzalo Rubalcaba, a 30-year-old Cuban pianist who has moved to the Dominican Republic with the blessings of the Cuban Government.
Mr.
Rubalcaba has been playing jazz festivals abroad for the last seven years and has had a remarkably fertile recording career, making Latin jazz, jazz and fusion albums for a variety of labels.
It's easy to see why a record company might smell money around Mr.
Rubalcaba.
Not only is Afro-Cuban music blooming in popularity, but Mr.
Rubalcaba is a classically trained virtuoso pianist.
And even if he does have the blessing of the Cuban Government, he's still performing under a severe limitation: because of stipulations imposed by the United States Government he can't accept a penny of his earnings.
Art appearing under adversity is always a draw, even in a post cold-war world.


Market Place; Cloud for Allstate's Public Offering
In many ways it looks like a wonderful new stock offering: Shares in one of America's great corporate names will soon be for sale and, analysts say, at a very reasonable price.
But Allstate Insurance's plan to go public in the next few weeks -- in the biggest initial public offering ever in the United States -- could be clouded by a problem that was highlighted yesterday at a public meeting in Florida.
Hundreds of angry, jeering Floridians questioned the nation's second-largest insurer of cars and houses on how it could in good conscience drop the homeowners' policies of hundreds of thousands of its longtime customers.


Funeral Service Is Held for Hearst


Bridge
The National College Bridge Team Championship was played in Memphis during the weekend and resulted in a victory for Yale.
The Yale players, Tony Tang, Douglas Koltenuk, Malik Magdon-Ismail and Matt Hastings, defeated Stanford in the final by 12 imps.
They had qualified from regional competition along with Kentucky, Swarthmore and Michigan.
On the diagramed deal from the final both teams reached a shaky four-spade contract.
South had a rebid problem when the one-spade response was raised.
Most players consider a three-heart bid to be forcing, although this South hand is ideal for a nonforcing treatment.
North could then pass with a minimum hand including three spades and five hearts.


Treasury Bond Yield Above 7%
Interest rates surged yesterday, with the yield on the 30-year Treasury bond jumping above 7 percent.
As a result, many investors may switch their focus to how much higher interest rates might go rather than how much lower.
While 7 percent itself is not an important number economically, it can be seen as the psychological threshold between a market rally and a selloff, especially given the new concerns about inflation, worries about the fate of President Clinton's economic program and guessing over whether the Federal Reserve will now move to raise short-term interest rates to combat renewed inflation.


METROPOLITAN GOLF REPORT
Dodge Open
Bruce Zabriski lost his exempt status on the PGA Tour last season and is back on the Metropolitan area circuit.
That is not good news for the other professionals in the tristate area.
The 36-year-old Zabriski, an assistant at the Oyster Bay Golf Club on Long Island, staked a strong claim for a third title in the $125,000 Dodge Open yesterday at the Rockaway River Country Club in Denville, N.J.


Congress Gets Briefing On Bank Subsidy Plan
The Clinton Administration today told lawmakers for the first time the details of its plan to create a scaled-down Federal fund to subsidize community development banks, which lend and invest in needy neighborhoods.
At a briefing for Democrats on the House Banking Committee, senior Administration officials described a new Community Banking and Credit Fund that would provide hundreds of millions of dollars in capital and technical assistance to specialized financial institutions promoting business, housing, and employment opportunities in deprived communities.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Companies
Upstart airlines like Kiwi and Reno are looking healthy, thanks to the demise of larger carriers and cutbacks by the majors.
Also, the supply of idle airline workers and aircraft is plentiful, and the Transportation Department is protecting the new carriers from anticompetitive practices.  [ Page A1. ]
Marriott's plan to divide into two new companies has become a David-and-Goliath legal issue over who has rights to the name to be used for one of the new entities.  [ D1. ]


Question of Censorship Shadows Catholic Paper
A small item in this week's issue of The Catholic Transcript, the newspaper of the Archdiocese of Hartford, reports that Archbishop Daniel A. Cronin will soon move into a mansion owned by an order of Catholic priests and live there rent free.
What the article doesn't say is that the move comes a year after a public outcry led the Archbishop to drop plans to buy a $430,000 home with six bedrooms and a swimming pool.


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY  BIGGER TURNOUT IN SCHOOL RACES
Acknowledging that it had erred in its early estimates of the number of voters who cast ballots in the elections for New York City's community school boards, the Board of Elections now says the turnout was the largest in two decades of school voting.
A1.
A RACIAL DIVIDE IN SUPPORT FOR DINKINS
Black New Yorkers continue to express overwhelming approval of Mayor Dinkins's stewardship of the city, while whites overwhelmingly disapprove, according to the latest New York Times/WCBS-TV poll.
A1.


Departures of Veteran Legislators Threaten to Hamper the Suffolk County Legislature
The Suffolk County Legislature, once known for innovation but now hampered by financial problems, is losing several veteran lawmakers.
The departures threaten to sap the Legislature of budget expertise as the county is recovering from a fiscal crisis that threatened its ability to meet its payroll.


Former Police Officer Stabbed While Intervening in an Attack
The nervous commuters watched from a distance on the Bronx subway platform.
They saw a young woman trying to avoid a tall, slim man who was following her.
They heard her loud objections.
But they stayed back, either not sure what was happening or too fearful to intervene.
Finally, witnesses said, a man who turned out to be a former New York City police officer rushed in.
For the second time in a week in New York's subways, a savior became a victim.


Book Notes
Milestone 500
When his first book, "The Road Less Traveled," was published by Simon &amp; Schuster in 1978, Dr.
M.
Scott Peck said, "Ten percent of me thought the book would make me famous, and 90 percent of me figured it would be a failure."
"I had some dreams of glory," the author, a psychiatrist from Connecticut, said of his book of psychological and spiritual inspirations.
"But they seemed like dreams."


Shea Is Silent Enough To Hear a Job Drop
The upper deck was hardly inhabited.
Perhaps as many as three concession stands would have been enough to handle the night's action.
The crowd, maybe 6,000 at best, was right out of September 1991 or 1992.
The nightmare of 1993 assumed its most frightening form at Shea Stadium last night.
Anger has given way to boredom; failure has produced disdain.
The Mets, their season in deep hemorrhage at 12-25, were beaten silly again, this time by 10-8 by the Pittsburgh Pirates.


Turgeon and Lebeau Centers of Attention
He sat, his body aching, and watched his team plow through the playoffs without him.
Stephan Lebeau, the Montreal center, hurt his ankle in Game 5 of the Canadiens' first-round series with the Quebec Nordiques, and waited impatiently for it to heal.
Not many have noticed.
Lebeau is a key player for the Canadiens.
But he is not Pierre Turgeon.
And so while the hockey world anxiously awaited daily bulletins on the Islanders' star player, the other injured French Canadian center in this series -- Lebeau -- sat quietly on the sideline.


CHRONICLE
Just before the class of '68 entered Vassar College in 1964, its members were asked to read three books: "A Room of One's Own," by Virginia Woolf; "The Second Sex," by Simone de Beauvoir, and "The Feminine Mystique," by Betty Friedan.


A Mexican Non-Peso Bond Is Rated Investment Grade
Signaling both confidence in the short-term ability of Mexico to pay its debt, and the lengths to which its Government will go to raise its rank in the financial world, Mexico for the first time won an investment-grade rating on non-peso denominated bonds.
But the rating does not come from one of the two best-known American ratings companies, and its significance is expected to be limited.


Puerto Rico Tax Break Fattens the Banks
To the Editor:
"Puerto Rico Fighting to Keep Its Tax Breaks for Business" (front page, May 10) misses an important point in describing the role of banks in the island's economy.


Sports of The Times; Forum Worth Extra Goal To Les Habs
WHEN you walk into the Forum, they do not require that you take off your shoes or genuflect or wear ritual robes.
But they do not mind if you are intimidated.
The Canadiens are so formidable in their own building that they even survived a journey into that twilight zone known as Islander Country.
The locals finally shook off the visitors, 4-3, at 6 minutes 21 seconds of the second overtime late last night, to overcome one of the superb overtime records in any sport.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
6.50
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
3.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
2.88
3.34
3.75
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.00
2.99
3.52
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.10
3.09
3.61
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
5.74
5.69
6.83
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.02
6.96
7.76
TELEPHONE BONDS
7.95
7.90
8.68
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.00
5.95
6.61
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Clinton Aide Advocates Trade Shift
Labor Secretary Robert B. Reich has urged President Clinton to rethink some aspects of American trade policy, arguing that foreign companies that employ Americans in factories in the United States are more worthy of support than American-based companies with factories overseas, Congressional aides said today.
By contrast, Mickey Kantor, the President's trade representative, has praised a 1991 agreement on computer chips with Japan that specifically helps American-owned companies there.
He has cited this pact as a model for future agreements.


Corrections
A chart yesterday listing movie box-office receipts included an incorrect figure, provided by the Exhibitor Relations Company, for total revenues through May 16 for "Benny and Joon." The total was $17.4 million, not $7.4 million.


Cambodia: The Critical Tests
Next week's elections in Cambodia won't look like the peaceful democratic exercise prescribed by the 1991 Paris peace accords.
More than a year of U.N. supervision -- at a cost of close to $4 billion -- has failed to disarm the competing military factions, secure all of Cambodia's territory or prevent intimidation of potential voters.
Still, Cambodia is in many ways better off today than it was before the peace agreements, and better off than it would have been without U.N. involvement.
Foreign forces have been withdrawn, more than 360,000 refugees repatriated and millions of dollars in development aid committed.


Belle Is Suspended for Three Games
Outfielder ALBERT BELLE of the Cleveland Indians was suspended for three games and fined $1,000 by American League President BOBBY BROWN yesterday for charging Kansas City pitcher HIPOLITO PICHARDO in a game May 13.
Belle, leading the league with 13 home runs and tied for the lead in runs batted in with 38, appealed the suspension and will remain eligible to play until a hearing is held on May 31.


Literary Piracy Is Charged in France
Jacques Attali, the flamboyant French technocrat who faced intense criticism last month for his lavish spending as president of the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development, has been accused of taking more than 40 passages in his new book from a planned work by Elie Wiesel and President Francois Mitterrand.
The allegation, from Mr.
Wiesel and the Paris publishing house of Odile Jacob, could have a devastating effect on the bank president.
He was pushed close to resignation last month when it was disclosed that the bank, established two years ago to aid Eastern Europe, had spent twice as much on itself as it had disbursed in loans.


Irving Howe Memorial
A memorial gathering for Irving Howe will be held at 7 P.M.
Monday in the Kaufmann Concert Hall of the 92d Street Y, at 1395 Lexington Avenue in Manhattan.
Mr.
Howe, the literary critic, founding editor of Dissent magazine and author of "World of Our Fathers," died on May 5 at 72.


Campus Journal; School Tied To Tobacco Now Scorns Smoking It
It has been 29 years since Clemson University dropped the word "Agricultural" from its name, but its ties to agriculture remain as strong today as they were when the college was established in 1889.
Greenhouses, barns and four working farms are spread across 4,800 acres alongside the sprawling campus, a mix of high-rise dormitories, modern classroom buildings and grand old edifices.


Said Bey Kryeziu; Albanian Exile, 82
Said Bey Kryeziu, a prominent Albanian exile in New York and a guerrilla leader in World War II, died on Sunday at New York Hospital.
He was 82 and lived in Manhattan.
The cause of death was heart failure, the family said.


Parking Rules
Because of Ascension Day, alternate-side parking rules will be suspended in New York City tomorrow.
Other regulations remain in effect.


Waymer's Death Is Linked to Cocaine
DAVID WAYMER, the 34-year-old defensive back who died on April 30 after taking cocaine at his farm outside Mooresville, N.C., died of an irregular heartbeat caused by cocaine, according to an autopsy report issued yesterday by Dr.
PATRICK LANTZ, the medical examiner who had found cocaine in Waymer's system shortly after his death.


HOME DEPOT (N)
Home Depot Inc. posted its 29th consecutive record quarterly earnings in the first period, as if thumbing its nose at skeptical analysts and investors who have hammered its stock lately.
The company, which is the biggest in the highly fragmented home-repair market, also announced that it would take its first step toward plumbing international markets by opening a store in Vancouver, British Columbia, late next year.
Home Depot plans to open five stores in that area by the end of 1995.


60-Minute Gourmet
THERE are as many so-called original recipes for oysters Rockefeller as there are types of oysters.
One account has it that the dish first surfaced at Antoine's in New Orleans in 1899.
It was said to have been devised by Jules Alciatore, a grandson of the restaurant's founders.
According to the story, a shortage of snails from Europe had the restaurant in jitters, and Mr.
Alciatore was experimenting in the kitchen, looking for a substitute.
At that time, oysters were never cooked at all, let alone fancied up with a sauce.
He did so, making a sauce of watercress, scallions, celery, anise, spinach and other seasonings.
It was a big hit, and he named it after America's richest man, John D. Rockefeller.


A New Editor Is Appointed For The Observer of London
The deputy editor of The Guardian, Jonathan Fenby, has been named editor of The Observer, Britain's oldest Sunday newspaper.
Mr.
Fenby's appointment was announced late last week by the Guardian and Manchester Evening News P.L.C., which is buying The Observer and related publications from Lonrho P.L.C. for almost $41.5 million.


Critic's Notebook; The Debut: Grand Rite Of Passage Now Passe
Every week, depending on the season, 5 or 10 musicians undergo the age-old ritual known as the "New York debut." They come in all varieties: young performers from foreign countries, backed by generous compatriots; local students, with enthusiastic friends and relatives in attendance; wealthy amateurs, renting a hall to suit a whim; music teachers, performing in New York to fulfill a tenure-track requirement.
Some do well, some not; very few go on to pursue solo careers.
Over the past week I attended a broad sampling of debuts: four pianists, two cellists, a clarinetist and a violinist.
There were, as usual, a few bright moments and surprises.
Benjamin Breen, a young violinist from Australia, played sonatas of Prokofiev and Brahms with a passionate if not always accurate tone; William Hagenah, a proficient young clarinetist, fashioned his own intriguing cadenza to Rossini's "Introduction, Theme and Variations"; and Sevgi Topyan displayed cool expertise in the Beethoven Piano Concerto No. 2. (The last two appeared in a concert with the newly formed New York Debut Orchestra, at Alice Tully Hall; Mr. Breen played at Weill Hall.)


Marion Merrell Dow Adds Generic Drugs
Marion Merrell Dow Inc., a troubled pharmaceutical company that has been losing ground in the drug price wars, announced yesterday that it had agreed to buy the generic drug business of the Rugby-Darby Group Companies Inc., the country's largest maker of low-priced versions of drugs whose patents have expired.
The announcement was made at Marion Merrell Dow's shareholder meeting in Kansas City, Mo., where the company is based.
Marion Merrell Dow closed at $16.75, down 25 cents, on the New York Stock Exchange, before the announcement.


No Headline
"We have taken a decision of historic importance. We have taken a step toward bringing Europe closer to ordinary citizens, to make it more open, even more democratic." -- PRIME MINISTER POUL NYRUP RASMUSSEN of Denmark.  [ A1:6. ]


Ulcer Drug Tied to Numerous Abortions in Brazil
In Brazil, a nation where abortion is illegal, hundreds of thousands of pregnant women have induced abortions by taking a drug intended to treat stomach ulcers, two new studies report.
The studies, which appear in the current issue of The Lancet, a medical journal published in Britain, shed new light on the shadowy world of abortion in Brazil, Latin America's most populous nation.


Anti-Fur Demonstrators Get a Poor Reception at Fashion Show


Hewlett Net Tops Wall St. Expectations
The Hewlett-Packard Company, propelled by its revitalized computer business, reported second-quarter earnings yesterday that surpassed Wall Street's highest expectations -- no small feat given the computer industry's recent financial doldrums.
Investors flocked to the company's shares, which rose $5.125 to close at $84.75 yesterday on the New York Stock Exchange, where Hewlett-Packard was the third-most-active stock.


Proposed Settlement Would Cripple Klan Faction
A proposed settlement in a suit against a faction of the Ku Klux Klan would strip it of cash and the rights to its name and symbols and turn them over to a group of 50 plaintiffs who were attacked during a march in 1987.
The settlement, which was reached on May 7 and is awaiting approval by the Federal District Court here, would also bar the group from using its mailing lists and the name of its newsletter, the Klansman, through which it sells merchandise like T-shirts, bumper stickers and jewelry.
The merchandise would also be turned over to the plaintiffs.


Bertram Bonner, 93, A Realty Developer And a Philanthropist
Bertram F. Bonner, a real-estate developer and philanthropist, died on Saturday at his home in Princeton, N.J.
He was 93.
The cause was cancer, the family said.


Even George and Dave Can't Outshine the Yanks
George Steinbrenner slumped in his seat.
The television picture showed him sitting uncomfortably in a luxury box at the Metrodome and then flashed to Dave Winfield in the batter's box.
The drama was unmistakable.
Steve Farr had walked three batters to load the bases in the ninth inning and was precariously protecting a 5-3 lead as Winfield strode to the plate.
This meeting was more than the Yankees against the Twins.
It was even more than Farr against Winfield.
It was Winfield's chance to beat George.


Jeffries Wins $400,000 In Damages
A Federal jury ordered officials of the City University of New York to pay Dr.
Leonard Jeffries $400,000 for violating his free speech rights by removing him as chairman of the black studies department at City College after he made a 1991 speech widely criticized as anti-Semitic.
The jury assigned damages individually to each of six officials who were found to have violated Dr.
Jeffries's rights.
He had named 15 officials in his lawsuit.


The New Poet Laureate


Mine Workers' Union Expands Strike to West Virginia


Brooklyn Fire Leaves Infant Dead and 4 People Hurt
In one of those cases that haunt firefighters, leaving them wondering what else they might have done, a 5-month-old girl was killed and four other people were seriously injured as flames raced through an apartment building in Brooklyn yesterday morning.
Firefighters rescued the infant girl's brother and grandmother, crawling, blinded, through flame-filled and smoke-choked rooms.
But they could not get to the baby, trapped behind a wall of fire.


Hollywood is Hawking a Family Film on a Home Shopping Network.
"FREE WILLY" is the sort of movie that could easily get lost in the glut of 60 films the Hollywood studios will be unreeling this summer, a third more than in 1992.
Without known stars or special effects, the film, about a rebellious boy's plans to free a captured killer whale, lacks the blockbuster potential presented by other summer releases like Steven Spielberg's "Jurassic Park" and "Last Action Hero," starring Arnold Schwarzenegger.


2 Agencies Adding Stakes in Businesses
Two large agencies said yesterday that they had agreed to acquire interests in two businesses outside of advertising.
The Interpublic Group of Companies said that its E. C. Television division, together with Paul Talbot, president of Interpublic's closely held Fremantle Corporation, would acquire a minority interest in Atlantis Films Ltd., a Toronto-based producer and distributor of television programming.
Terms were not disclosed.


Agassi And Seles Won't Be In Paris
Two of the players labeled most likely to succeed at the French Open this year, Monica Seles, a three-time champion, and Andre Agassi, a two-time finalist, announced yesterday that they would not be competing in Paris when the second Grand Slam of 1993 gets under way Monday on the red clay at Roland Garros Stadium.
Their withdrawals, both attributed to injuries, have left the prestigious event bereft of its most indomitable contender in Seles and its most controversial one in Agassi, who waged -- and won -- a public fashion war with tournament officials over his garish attire in 1990 while also managing to fight his way to the final.


Study Fails to Link Dietary Fat and Breast Cancer
A new study has failed to find a clear-cut connection between dietary fat and breast cancer.
But researchers and commentators cautioned that it was too early to rule out a link.
In the study, being published today in The Journal of the National Cancer Institute, researchers analyzed the body fat of 380 women newly found to have breast cancer.
The findings were then compared with a similar fat analysis of 176 women with benign breast disease and 397 women without any breast disease at all.
Since the makeup of body fat represents dietary habits going back at least two years, the analysis is believed to reflect people's dietary habits more accurately than a simple question put to them about what they eat.


Hotel Profits for 1992 Show A Slow but Steady Recovery
In a sharp, unexpected turnabout, more than half the nation's hotels turned a profit last year -- the first time since 1989 that more than 50 percent were profitable.
A study released yesterday by the accounting firm Coopers &amp; Lybrand, a leading consultant to the United States hospitality industry, showed that 51.5 percent of hotels were profitable last year, up from 39.9 percent in 1991.


Not All Pasta Sauce Has to Be Red
THE traditional vegetable sauce for pasta is made from tomatoes.
But when you think about it, why couldn't other vegetables make equally appealing toppings?
A novel topping may be one way to get children to eat their vegetables and enjoy them.
A creamy carrot sauce would look very handsome on spinach noodles, and there is a wonderful alternative to cream that provides the same rich texture with very little fat and far fewer calories.
It is a mixture of yogurt and ricotta cheese, beaten smooth in the food processor.
Its only drawback is that it cannot be heated or it will separate.
No problem here, as only the carrots are cooked.


Corrections
A note in the Business Digest in some editions yesterday misstated the reason for the omission of the mutual funds table from those editions.
It resulted from computer malfunctions at The Times, not problems in transmission from The Associated Press.


When Disabled Students Enter Regular Classrooms
Merari Vazquez's fellow second and third graders are learning about perimeters.
Measuring is hard for Merari, who is mentally retarded and does not speak.
But she is part of the group, and her classmates need to find a way she can work with them.
They coax her to lie down on a big pad, using her to do their measuring.
Merari is part of a bold but hotly debated educational experiment: teaching even severely handicapped children in regular public-school classrooms instead of separate ones.
The idea goes far beyond "mainstreaming," which usually involves milder disabilities; at schools like Merari's, no heads turn at children using wheelchairs, feeding tubes or oxygen tanks.


Worley Is Reinstated by N.F.L.
Pittsburgh Steelers running back TIM WORLEYwas reinstated yesterday after a one-year drug suspension that forced him to sit out the 1992 season.
Worley, a first-round draft choice and the Steelers' leading rusher in 1989, was initially suspended for four games in 1991, apparently for drug use.
After missing two league-mandated drug tests in February 1992, he was suspended on April 29, 1992, for a year under the N.F.L.'s substance-abuse policy.


12 Agencies Compete For Kia's Account
Kia Motors North America in Irvine, Calif., said yesterday that it had selected 12 agencies to compete for the Korean auto maker's United States account.
Kia, which plans to enter the American market later this year, estimated billings at $30 million.
Greg Warner, Kia's executive vice president and chief operating officer, said the agencies were Ammirati &amp; Puris; Bloom FCA; Jordan, McGrath, Case &amp; Taylor; McCaffrey &amp; McCall, and Rosenfeld, Sirowitz, Humphrey &amp; Strauss, all of New York; Carmichael Lynch and Fallon McElligott, both of Minneapolis; Tatham Euro RSCG of Chicago; GSD &amp;M of Austin, Tex.; Lord, Dentsu &amp; Partners and Stein Robaire Helm, both of Los Angeles, and Kresser/Craig of Santa Monica, Calif.


Review/Pop; The Accent Is Country, But Not Every Song
Marty Stuart kept insisting he was pure country when he played at the Beacon Theater on Monday night, as part of the "Country Takes Manhattan" festival.
He started with "Me and Hank and Jumpin' Jack Flash," in which he envisioned Hank Williams encouraging him.
Portraits of his heroes (including Williams, Elvis Presley and Sitting Bull) were illuminated above the stage.
Later, he sang "Now That's Country," actually a blues, which touted his background, and his finale was "Blue and Lonesome," by Bill Monroe and Hank Williams.
"You can't get more country than that!" he crowed.
Actually, Mr.
Stuart is a country rocker, closer to rockabilly than to Mr.
Monroe's bluegrass.
He has the twangy guitar, the Elvis-gone-shag hairdo, the onstage confidence, the amiably rocking songs, the sinewy backup band and even the props and backdrops to be a country-rock star.
Mr.
Stuart poses like Presley, leaning forward with his knees together and holding a hand in the air.
All that's missing, unfortunately, is a voice that could make his songs sound either blue or lonesome.


U.N. VOWS TO HOLD VOTE IN CAMBODIA
The head of the United Nations peacekeeping operation in Cambodia said today that elections beginning this weekend would not be canceled even though the United Nations now expects the voting to be marred by terrorism, including possible attacks by Khmer Rouge guerrillas on polling stations supervised by the United Nations.
In a blunt prediction of election violence, the chief peacekeeper, Yasushi Akashi, said in an interview that the Maoist group was almost certain to mount attacks when the five-day voting period begins on Sunday and that "we do not exclude the possibility of bombardment, rocket attacks, even on some cities -- not so much to do damage as to create a panic."


Personal Health
THERE are few dispassionate voices when it comes to opinions about genetically engineered foods, and the dispute over crops redesigned in modern biotechnical laboratories instead of farmers' fields is likely to continue to simmer.
Do such foods represent valuable improvements or safety threats to consumers?
Lest a novelist's wild imaginings of genetically engineered monster dinosaurs, soon to be a major motion picture, or an amorphous anti-science hysteria sway your thinking, it is important to understand both the real benefits and possible risks inherent in this sci-fi-come-true ability to make overnight changes in genetically determined characteristics of foods.


Food Notes
Bertolli Settles a Suit
Bertolli USA has settled a class-action suit brought in California by Beverly Blatt, who charged the company with making false health claims about the benefits of olive oil in an advertisement that ran in 1990.
She claimed the ad falsely said that olive oil reduced blood pressure and blood sugar and that it reduced cholesterol more than other cooking oils do.
Bertolli denied the charges.
The Alameda County Superior Court expressed no opinion on the merits of the lawsuit.


New Round of Networking; Push to Put TV Program in New York Schools
Three years after the Board of Regents banned Channel One from New York State public schools, Whittle Communications is once again seeking entree to the nation's second-largest student audience, this time through a combination of silk-glove lobbying and classic end-run politics.
Rejected by the Regents because of the two minutes of commercials contained in Channel One's daily 12-minute newscasts, Whittle has now taken its case to the Legislature, asking it to give local school districts the right to circumvent the ban.
The Assembly and Senate Education Committees are considering bills that give each of the state's 718 school districts the freedom to show Channel One, which is aimed at high-school students.


INSIDE
A Clinton Shift on Bosnia
The Clinton Administration has shifted its campaign on the Balkan war, setting a limited goal of containing the fighting in Bosnia.
Page A10.
A Federal jury ordered City University of New York officials to pay Dr.
Leonard Jeffries $400,000 for violating his right to free speech.
Page B1.
Abortion in Brazil
Blocked from legal means, thousands of women used a widely available ulcer drug to induce abortions, a study finds.
Health, page C13.


Ending Long Hostility, U.S. Plans Ties With Angola's Government
Ending years of hostility by American governments that included support of a guerrilla insurgency, President Clinton has decided to recognize the Angolan Government, Administration officials said today.
Last September, the Government in Luanda won a United Nations-certified election that pitted it against the guerrilla group that has fought a lengthy civil war.
But the group, the National Union for the Total Independence of Angola, known by its Portuguese acronym, Unita, renewed its attacks after the vote.
Recently the Angolan Government accepted peace proposals from the United States and the United Nations during negotiations in Abidjan, the Ivory Coast.
Unita has so far rejected the peace plan.


CHRONICLE
How else could admirers, friends and parishioners of the Rev.
JOHN GARCIA GENSEL mark the 50th anniversary of his ordination?
And how but with jazz could they celebrate the 50th wedding anniversary of Pastor Gensel and his wife, AUDREY GENSEL?
As minister to the world of jazz, Pastor Gensel established the jazz vespers that have been held every Sunday for 27 years at St.
Peter's Lutheran Church, Lexington Avenue and 54th Street.
He has tended to the needs of countless musicians, officiating at their weddings, baptizing their children, and conducting their funerals.


For Crusader Against Waste Incinerator, a Bittersweet Victory
On Monday, she was arrested after chaining herself to a concrete block in front of the White House to protest President Clinton's decision to approve the opening of the nation's newest hazardous waste incinerator, in East Liverpool, Ohio.
Before that, Terri Swearingen, a 36-year-old nurse and mother from the Ohio Valley, had spent months helping to prepare a petition to the Environmental Protection Agency, detailing weaknesses in Federal hazardous waste law.
It urged the Administration to revoke the new plant's license and laid out a formula for toughening the health and safety requirements for approving new toxic waste incinerators.


LACROSSE REPORT
Army
The Cadets (12-3) are approaching their national tournament game against No. 1 North Carolina (12-1) at Chapel Hill on Saturday with considerable enthusiasm and confidence, according to their coach, Jack Emmer.
"They think they can win," Emmer said yesterday.
"There's no question that Carolina is the best team around, with great speed and depth. But if we can put some pressure on their goalie, it could be interesting.


HBO Eyes Bowe-Lewis While It's Worth $30 Million
HBO is attempting to get Riddick Bowe and Lennox Lewis, the two reigning heavyweight champions, together for a $30 million fight before the star quality fades from either one.
"I'm being practical," said Seth Abraham, the president of Time Warner Sports, HBO's parent company.
"If either champion has another lackluster performance after this, it will affect the eventual fight between them."


Japan Watches Intently as a Slaying Trial Begins
Two worlds are colliding in criminal court here this week, the result of a shooting last fall that reinforced a cultural gulf between the United States and Japan.
The scene in court today told the story.
On one side was 31-year-old Rodney Peairs, on trial for manslaughter, getting moral support from a large contingent of family members; on the other was Masaichi Hattori of Nagoya, Japan, the father of a 16-year-old exchange student shot by Mr.
Peairs.
Stoic in a gray business suit, Mr.
Hattori kept track of the proceedings with the help of a translator seated beside him.


New York's Blacks Back Dinkins But Whites Don't, Poll Indicates
Six months before the mayoral election, black New Yorkers continue to express overwhelming approval of Mayor David N. Dinkins's stewardship of the city, while whites overwhelmingly disapprove, according to the latest New York Times/WCBS-TV poll.
In the meantime, his support among Hispanic New Yorkers has faded so much that they are now evenly divided in their views of him and are shaping up as a crucial swing vote, according to the poll.


Wine Talk; Mondavi on Wall St., Wine in the Limelight
WHEN the time comes to write the history of the wine business in the 1990's, the turning point may well prove to be the Robert Mondavi Winery's first public offering of shares of stock.
If the sale goes well, as wine industry analysts are predicting, it will be a sign of market confidence in an industry that has had little to get excited about for close to a decade.
Proceeds from the sale of 3.7 million shares will be used to repay bank debt and clear the way for a new line of credit.
The offering is scheduled for early June.
The Napa Valley winery, eighth largest in production in the country, has said it expects to spend $70 million in the next four years, $20 million of it to replant vineyards destroyed by phylloxera.


'Light' New York School Vote Was Really the Heaviest Ever
Acknowledging that it had erred in its early estimates of the number of voters who cast ballots on May 4, the New York City Board of Elections said yesterday that the turnout had in fact been the largest in the more than two decades of voting for the city's community school boards.
The new figures showed the biggest increases in some of the districts most profoundly roiled by the citywide warfare over the teaching about sexuality and related matters.
Over all, election officials said, these elections, the most contentious in years, drew nearly twice as many voters as four years before.
Miscounted by About 35%
Two days after the voting, Board of Elections officials reported that about 313,000 voters had cast ballots.
Yesterday, however, they released figures showing that at least 425,000 voters had cast ballots, indicating that their early reports were off by about 35 percent.
The new turnout estimate represents 12.5 percent of the eligible voters.


House Democrats Rush To Extinguish Rebellion
House Democratic leaders scrambled today to quash a move by three of their party's conservatives to add strict controls on Medicare and Social Security spending to President Clinton's economic package.
Speaker Thomas S. Foley of Washington continued to predict that the House would pass the Administration's package of $246 billion in new taxes and $97 billion in spending cuts before the end of the month.
But other leaders expressed concerns that defections among the always fractious Democrats might still snowball.


Departures of Veteran Legislators Threaten to Hamper the Suffolk County Legislature
The Suffolk County Legislature, once known for innovation but now hampered by financial problems, is losing several veteran lawmakers.
The departures threaten to sap the Legislature of budget expertise as the county is recovering from a fiscal crisis that threatened its ability to meet its payroll.


Punishing China on Trade Hurts Wrong People
To the Editor:
There must be more productive ways for President Clinton to pressure China on human rights issues than by not extending most-favored-nation trade status, which you propose in "Favor Freedom in China" (editorial, May 10).


Books of The Times; Two Visions of Vietnam, At War and Afterward
Slow Walk in a Sad Rain  By John P. McAfee  239 pages.
Warner Books. $18.95.
Paradise of the Blind  By Duong Thu Huong  Translated by Phan Huy Duong and Nina McPherson. 270 pages.
William Morrow. $20.
The Vietnam War continues to haunt and guide American military thinking, from Somalia to Bosnia.
When puzzled by conflicting policies about whether to intervene in warring corners of the world, it sometimes makes sense to turn to fiction for another perspective.
Novelists, particularly those who have experienced war, allow their feelings to show without the pretense of fairness; war remembered isn't a cool surgical strike but a heated emotion whose business, in the end, is fighting and dying.


U.S. Petroleum Data
In millions of barrels except refinery utilization
May 14
May 7
May 15
1993
1993
1992
Gasoline production, daily
7.2
7.4
7.1
Distillate production, daily
3.1
3.0
2.9
Gasoline stocks
218.5
220.5
216.0
Distillate stocks
99.5
98.9
90.5
Crude imports, daily
7.2
6.5
5.8
Product imports, daily
1.9
1.5
2.1
Crude stocks
351.8
346.3
353.7
Crude production, daily
6.9
6.9
7.1
Refinery utilization (%)
89.1
89.9
89.3
Source: American Petroleum Institute


Public &amp; Private; Quote Unquote
As journalism students learn, often to their chagrin, hard-and-fast rules in the business are relatively few.
Usage shifts from paper to paper.
"Off the record" means different things to different people.
Reporters are guided by common sense and some internal perception of fair and unfair, right and wrong, an accurate picture of events.
Some reporting is a matter of interpretation: one reporter describes a facial tic as a grin, a second as a grimace.
Some is not.
A name is a name.
A quote is a quote.


New City Ballet Director
Gary MacDougal has been appointed general director of the New York City Ballet.
Mr.
MacDougal is a director and chairman of the finance committee of United Parcel Service and a director at the Union Camp Corporation.
He is also a director of the Non-Traditional Casting Project, which encourages the casting of minorities and the disadvantaged in theater.
Though there have been executive directors at City Ballet over the years, Mr.
MacDougal takes on a title last held by Lincoln Kirstein, who founded the company with George Balanchine and became general director emeritus in 1989.


Otis Fellows Dies; Columbia Scholar In French was 84
Otis Edward Fellows, a professor emeritus in the humanities at Columbia University and a scholar of 18th-century French literature, died on Saturday at his home at the Regency Park retirement community in Portland, Ore.
He was 84.
His daughter, Lisa Fellows Andrus, said the cause was congestive heart failure.


Punishing China on Trade Hurts Wrong People; Faulty Jobs Argument
To the Editor:
In "China Steps Up Spending To Keep U.S. Trade Status" (front page, May 7), I was dismayed to see the assertion quoted that failing to renew most-favored-nation status for China would cost 150,000 American jobs.


Review/Music; Something for Everyone And From Different Years
The American Composers Orchestra has found a programming pattern that is comfortable and generally pleasing, except to the extent that a listener is tempted to rebel against predictability, even if only in program structures.
Most of its concerts offer a couple of recent works (one short, one full length) and some oldies (one from the 1960's or 70's, and one composed from the 1920's to the 40's).
The pieces do not always sit easily beside each other, but there is something for everyone.
It was a fairly motley program that Paul Lustig Dunkel conducted on Sunday afternoon at Carnegie Hall.
The curtain raiser was "Snake Alley" (1989), by David Dzubay, a composer in his late 20's.
Like many young composers, Mr.
Dzubay writes in an eclectic style, which is essentially tonal, but which raids atonal techniques when they suit the work's thrust.
In a way, this is a comic-book piece, painted mostly in bright primary colors and describing an exotic and sometimes scary journey through an alley in Taipei.
There are moments when Mr.
Dzubay's techniques seem simplistic and manipulative, but so what?
For the most part, this is a vital piece that holds one's interest.


Violence in the Post Office
The United States Postal Service has developed a reputation for violence.
Over the last decade 10 rampaging workers have killed 34 co-workers and supervisors at post offices in seven different states.
The most recent episodes -- two on the same day -- occurred earlier this month.
A former postal worker in California and a worker in Michigan each killed a colleague; they wounded three others between them.


Review/Music; The Cream Of Folk, Reunited For a Cause
Pete Seeger has always had a gift for cutting to the essence of things in an easygoing, unpretentious way.
"There are as many kinds of folk songs as there are folks," he observed in the opening moments of "Folksongs U.S.A.," a benefit concert for the 92d Street Y on Monday evening that reunited many stars of the folk-music movement of the 1940's, 50's and 60's.


He Flies Planes at Kiwi, And Often Cleans Them
Paul Staley, a pilot for Kiwi International Airlines, usually reports for work at the company's Newark headquarters a day early, so he can do volunteer work for the carrier -- helping reservations agents by answering phones, processing tickets for accounting, and aiding the sales staff by visiting travel agents.
There is never any shortage of work at the office in the top floor of a building off Route 1, overlooking Newark International Airport.


School Where Toddlers Were Taken Hostage Reopens


Corrections
An article on Monday about the Duke University commencement misidentified the university official who presided.
Thomas A. Langford, the provost, substituted for H. Keith H. Brodie, the retiring Duke president, who was ill.


Gay Congressman Offers a Plan On Homosexuals in the Military
A homosexual Congressman today proposed a compromise to allow gay men and lesbians to serve in the military and be open about their sexual orientation off duty, so long as they keep it private while on duty.
The Congressman, Representative Barney Frank, Democrat of Massachusetts, said in a telephone interview that he would prefer completely lifting the ban on homosexuals in the military, but that "we don't have votes for that in Congress."


Gotbaum Is Dinkins's Pick For a School Board Seat
Mayor David N. Dinkins yesterday appointed Victor H. Gotbaum, a retired labor leader who dominated the city's municipal unions for two decades, to fill the remaining seat on the seven-member New York City Board of Education.
Citing Mr.
Gotbaum's skills at building consensus, Mr.
Dinkins predicted, "he will be a tremendously positive influence on a board that is, frankly, very difficult to deal with."


Trading Therapy for Art To Forge a Community
FOUR years ago, Diana McCourt and Jane Wilson struck up a conversation at a coffee shop on the Upper West Side.
And with one thing leading to another they moved from friendship to social revolution.
"We realized we had a lot of experiences and interests in common," said Ms.
McCourt.
Both women had been active in school board and health campaigns.
Ms.
McCourt was phasing out her custom carpentry business and Ms.
Wilson had sold her corporate catering company.
Ms.
Wilson recalled, "I was looking for some new way to be in the world."


China Is Sowing Discontent With 'Taxes' on the Peasants
The worst part about being a peasant like Luo Qingguo is not the pangs of hunger or the sooty shack in which his family lives.
The real torment comes when the tax collectors show up on shiny new motorcycles and confiscate rice and cash, leaving Mr.
Luo unable to feed or clothe his four children.
"They don't get enough to eat," an embarrassed Mr.
Luo said.
"There is no money to buy them a pair of pants."


Hush, Hush, Sweet Charlotte: It's Knicks vs. Bulls
The Knicks will not see the Charlotte Hornets until next season.
That's plenty soon enough as far as New York is concerned.
Thanks to the Knicks' resiliency, and a major performance by Charles Oakley (21 points and 11 rebounds) in Game 5, New York has advanced to the Eastern Conference final for the first time since 1974.
The Knicks wrapped up the series, four games to one, with a scintillating 105-101 victory over Charlotte at Madison Square Garden last night.


Clinton Trying to Claim West Coast as His Turf
From his morning jog on the Pacific shore near San Diego to his afternoon visit to a basketball court in riot-torn South-Central Los Angeles, President Clinton set out today to make the West Coast his political stronghold, much as the South was for President Ronald Reagan.
But success is far from assured because of the faltering economy here and the sustained popularity of Ross Perot.


Fresh, Low-Fat, Healthful Food (On a Plane?)
AS planes settle into their cruising altitudes for the high travel season this summer, vacation-bound travelers may be surprised at what flight attendants dispense from the food carts.
There could be pizza from Pizzeria Uno on American Airlines, Muslim dinners for some passengers on Kiwi International Air Lines, kosher hamburgers for children on El Al, salt-free grilled tournedos for a passenger with high blood pressure flying in Air France economy class and a choice between Western and Indian meals on Air India.


Argonauts Willing to Talk With Ismail
BRUCE McNALL is willing to negotiate a new contract for RAGHIB (ROCKET) ISMAIL to play for the Toronto Argonauts, but says Ismail's multimillion-dollar personal services deal with him has ended.
McNall, who owns the Argonauts, said yesterday the $18 million, four-year contract he signed with Ismail two years ago would be replaced with a football contract that could be worth more than $500,000 a season if the speedy wide receiver failed to sign with the N.F.L.'s Los Angeles Raiders.


Newest Airlines Find Conditions Ripe to Succeed
In the life cycle of airlines, the season is changing from winter to spring.
After a decade that saw far more airline deaths than births, 15 new airlines, including Kiwi International and Reno Air, have begun flying.
Conditions are fertile for the upstarts largely because of the demise of Pan American World Airways, Eastern Airlines and Midway, among others, and cutbacks by majors like American, Delta and United.
Laid-off pilots, mechanics and flight attendants are eager to get back to work -- even at a fraction of their former pay.
Planes sitting idle in the Arizona desert can be leased cheaply, underused hubs and routes are available and passengers are eager to buy cut-rate tickets.
New Federal Policy
And importantly, Secretary of Transportation Federico F. Pena has warned the industry that anticompetitive practices will not be tolerated, and his department has been working with the Justice Department to make sure that new carriers -- in addition to the 15 already flying, 11 more are planned -- are not knocked out before they have a chance.


A Channel for Culture To Be Offered to Cable
Think of it as C-Span for the intelligentsia, ESPN for mind games or MTV for fans of heavy reading.
The Public Broadcasting Service, together with its two flagship stations, WGBH in Boston and WNET in New York City, announced yesterday that it was starting a cable channel devoted exclusively to cultural affairs.
The new channel, called Horizons TV, will show events like university lectures and debates, museum symposiums, public readings and forums on the arts.


DAYTON HUDSON (N)
As it warned Wall Street two weeks ago, the Dayton Hudson Corporation yesterday reported a 14 percent decline in first-quarter earnings.
The company said sales have been weak since the middle of February.
"Consumers are very cautious," said Kenneth A. Macke, chairman and chief executive of Dayton Hudson, which operates the Target and Mervyn's chains as well as three department store chains.
"Part of that is due to pervasive economic concerns, such as uncertainties about job security, tax increases and the cost of health-care reform."


Executive Leaving DDB Needham
DDB Needham Chicago said yesterday that David Jenkins, an executive vice president who has shared the position of executive creative director with Bob Scarpelli, would leave that agency by "mutual decision" effective at the end of this month.
Upon Mr.
Jenkins's departure, Mr.
Scarpelli, 40, will serve as sole executive creative director.


If Torborg Is Out, Is Green Stepping In?
The suspicion that Jeff Torborg will be replaced as manager of the Mets has led to an oppressive atmosphere at Shea Stadium.
Torborg, judging from his public remarks in the last 72 hours, will not be shocked if that happens, and people close to the manager have hinted that the toll of losing has grown so great that Torborg might even be relieved by a dismissal.
One senior official with the Mets yesterday refused to rule out the chance that a change could be made as early as this weekend.


Knicks Advance to Eastern Conference Finals


Fastest PC Is Poised to Enter a Market in Flux
The Digital Equipment Corporation, the troubled computer giant with a spotty record in the desktop market, is about to introduce the world's fastest personal computer.
Will anybody buy it?
Digital, which has poured more than $100 million into developing the Alpha AXP chip that powers the machine, is betting yes.


CBS's Bid Includes Asterisk
CBS's last-gasp, $120 million bid for a two-year extension of its network rights to major league baseball may be worth considerably less because of several restrictions, a member of baseball's television committee said yesterday.
Eddie Einhorn, an owner of the Chicago White Sox, said CBS's offer would be reduced by "the financial impact they suffer if we put the first round of playoffs on cable" -- referring to a proposed new round of wild-card divisional playoffs -- "and whatever impact there is from a work stoppage."


COMPANY NEWS
GENERAL MOTORS said it would suspend production of the Geo Storm until 1995.
The Storm has been built since 1990 in a joint venture of Chevrolet and Isuzu of Japan.
No other Geo models will be affected.


Joe Parkin, 70, Foundation Head
Joe L. Parkin, a former insurance company executive and president of the Retirement Research Foundation since 1986, died on Sunday while playing golf in the Chicago suburb of Highland Park.
He was 70 and lived in Evanston, Ill.
The cause was a heart attack, said the foundation, a charitable organization endowed by the founder of Bankers Life and Casualty Company.


Hearings Begin for Justice Department Nominee


Executive Suspended In Train Ride
Perhaps Andrew Favilla, like so many other railroad executives, just wanted the thrill of driving a locomotive.
Perhaps, as one Metro-North official asserted yesterday, he was educating himself to better do his job as the commuter rail's superintendent of train operations.
In either case, or both, Mr.
Favilla knowingly violated Federal regulations when he drove a Metro-North inspection train from Stamford to Grand Central Terminal at midday on April 1, officials said.
Even though he oversees Metro-North's daily operations, and has gotten behind the controls before, Mr.
Favilla, 36, is not licensed to drive a train.


Fed Approves Chemical as Underwriter
The Chemical Banking Corporation received permission yesterday to enter the bond underwriting business, a first step in its plan to become a leading participant in junk bonds, one of the most volatile areas of Wall Street.
William B. Harrison Jr., the vice chairman of Chemical, said he hoped the company would be among the top four underwriters of junk bonds within three years.
He justified the goal by saying that since its merger a year and a half ago with Manufacturers Hanover Trust, Chemical has been the largest lender to big corporations.
This year Chemical has arranged 75 large loans totaling $33 billion, half again as much as the second-ranked bank, J. P. Morgan &amp; Company, according to Loan Pricing Corporation, a New York consulting firm.


Corrections
An article in Business Day on Friday about the surge in gold prices misstated the day on which a record was set for "open interest" in call options on gold futures -- that is, for the number of such options that were not exercised, not closed out and not allowed to expire.
The record, on the Commodity Exchange in New York, was set last Wednesday, not Thursday.


Time to Discipline the Democrats
Representatives Dave McCurdy, Charles Stenholm and fellow moderate-to-conservative Democrats are disgruntled.
They're threatening to vote against President Clinton's economic plan because, they contend, it betrays the "New Democrat" logo of the campaign in favor of the party's liberal penchant for tax-and-spend.
The threat is serious and, if mismanaged, could cripple the Clinton Presidency.
Voters put Mr.
Clinton and a Democratic Congress in office with the expectation that the Democrats would behave like a party -- ending gridlock and enacting the President's economic package.
The leadership credentials of both the President and his party will surely suffer if he and the party's Congressional leaders cannot soon whip their colleagues into line.


Metropolitan Diary
The scene: A subway car on an A train headed uptown.
Cast of characters: Conductor, motorman and Jay G. Baris, who hears the following dialogue over the intercom.
Conductor, in buoyant, upbeat voice: This is the A train going express through Gotham City.
Motorman: Huh? Going through where?
Conductor, in deflated, not-so-upbeat voice: This is the A train, making express stops to 208th Street.
Motorman: Oh. O.K.
. . .
Dear Diary:
When my mother left Manhattan, she found herself missing many of the New York delights she was accustomed to.
A Yiddish newspaper is particularly hard to come by in the rural Connecticut spot where she now lives, and so my sisters and I decided to give her a subscription to The Forward, that venerable holdout from the days when New York had three Yiddish daily newspapers.
I phoned The Forward and explained to the motherly sounding woman who answered that I wanted to buy a gift subscription for my mother.
"We don't do gift subscriptions," she returned crisply.
"We'll set up an ordinary subscription for your mother and then you write her a nice letter and tell her it's a gift. She'll love to hear from you."
So I did, and I think she did, too. -- SOPHIE GLAZER
. . .
Dear Diary:
The scene: A small coffee shop at the subway stop at 47th Street and Avenue of the Americas.
Dramatis personae: Server, counterman, coffee-to-go customer.
Counterman draws coffee, adds milk.
Customer: Wait! Wait! Could you make that a little lighter?
Counterman pours milk generously.
Customer: Hold it! Hold it! That's far too light.
Server, with a shrug of shoulders: Next time bring a swatch. -- ROSS GAFFNEY
. . .
REMEMBERING MAY Bounce of a ball,  treble of children's laughter,  slap of a jump rope smacking the sidewalk.
All the small sounds that winter obscured  are now lured to open windows.
I remember that childhood hour  when sneakers gave wings to my feet.
Mom would put aside bedtime  for one last round of hide and seek,  while the soft May light lingered on. -- DORIS KLEIN
. . .
Dear Diary:
I have long admired the calm behavior of Manhattan dogs as they trot along in groups, escorted by professional walkers, and wondered how such excellent canine demeanor is achieved.
Do only the already docile make it into the group?
I decided to find out recently when I saw a woman encircled by more dogs than I have ever seen with one handler: 12 dogs, 10 of them of considerable size.
Clearly, this woman was an expert -- understanding, gentle, kind.
As she turned from 84th Street onto Park Avenue, I hurried to catch up.
"I wonder how . . . ," I began, but got no further.
"I can't talk!" she snarled.
I cringed and slunk away, a rejected cur. -- ELIZABETH HUNTER
. . .
The day before Mother's Day.
At Lexington and 52d Street, Joseph A. Traver, in town from Whitestone, Queens, saw a panhandler.
Then he saw a fellow walk past the panhandler, turn around and stuff a bill into the beggar's cardboard cup.
As the panhandler transferred the bill from cup to coat pocket, he spoke.
"Thank you," Mr.
Traver heard him say.
"Thanks a lot." He walked on a bit, then turned around.
"And, oh yes," he added. "Happy Mother's Day to your mom!"
. . .
Dear Diary:
Browsing in an antique shop in SoHo, I was witness to the following.
The couple who owned the store were behind the counter, eating lunch, when a customer walked in.
"That looks good," he said, eyeing the lunch.
"What is it?"
"I dunno," the man said. "My wife buys it around the corner. What is it, honey?"
"It's named after the bad guy in 'Pinocchio,' " she said.
"Gepetto?" guessed the customer.
"No, he was the puppet master," the woman said. "He made Pinocchio."
"Captain Hook!" her husband said.
"Honey, that was a different movie." His wife furrowed her brow, then brightened.
"Wait! Stromboli! It's a Stromboli Happy Roll!"
The customer hesitated.
"I hated Stromboli," he said.
"He turned all of the kids into donkeys. I'll have just a small slice." -- ELISA DE CARLO


Montreal Doubles Lead With Double-Overtime Victory
For the first time in these Stanley Cup playoffs, the Islanders trail in a series by two games.
For the first time, they have lost in overtime.
For the first time -- or maybe the second or third -- it seems as if their springtime joy ride is doomed to come to a sputtering, exhausted halt.
After losing by 4-3 to the Montreal Canadiens in the Forum tonight on Stephan Lebeau's slap shot at 6 minutes 21 seconds of the second overtime, it is time to face facts.
Just mail in the next two games, pack away the skates and get out the lawn furniture.
Right guys?


British Air Net Tumbles By 57.4%
British Airways said yesterday that sluggish economies and excess capacity in its many markets cut last year's profit by more than half.
The carrier also said yesterday that it planned a rights offering to raise $:442 million ($678 million) to help reduce debt after recent investments to build alliances with other carriers, including USAir and Qantas, Australia's national carrier.


RESULTS PLUS
TENNIS  Sampras Edges Rosset to Lift U.S.
Team  An off-form Pete Sampras, conceding that luck had something to do with it, helped the United States to a 3-0 victory over Switzerland yesterday at the World Team Cup competition in Dusseldorf, Germany.
Sampras staved off 2 match points in a second-set tie breaker against Marc Rosset before beating the Olympic champion, 2-6, 7-6 (9-7), 6-2.
Michael Chang beat Jacob Hlasek, 6-2, 6-3, in the other singles match, while the doubles team of Patrick McEnroe and Richey Reneberg slipped past Hlasek and Rosset, 6-4, 6-3.
The United States, top seeded in the Blue Group, is seeking a record fourth title, but its first since 1985.
The Americans beat Switzerland to capture last year's Davis Cup in Fort Worth. (AP) Ferreira Prevails: Top-seeded Wayne Ferreira of South Africa survived a third set tie-breaker scare against an unseeded German, David Prinosil, and won his first-round match in the Muratti Time International tournament in Bologna, Italy, yesterday, by 6-3, 4-6, 7-6 (7-1). (AP)


Staten Islanders Hold Noses and Worry About Mount Garbage
To the Editor:
Your May 11 article on the Fresh Kills Landfill on Staten Island, "the world's biggest man-made structure," neglects some major issues.
The landfill may be clean at a glance, but it has plagued Staten Island for more than four decades with odor, health and environmental problems.


AT LUNCH WITH: Alan King; The Man Who Grew Up Talkative
THE salami and eggs were sizzling during the daily luncheon time-warp over on East 55th Street, and the king -- Alan King -- was holding court in the Friars Club, Manhattan's gateway to the alternative universe of show biz.
He had ascended to his station under the gilt Friars logo on the high-visibility north wall.
He had reason to be royally expansive.
His majesty was in mid-anecdote, conjuring up the fullness of his big new Toyota Comedy Festival.
That's the 10-day, five-borough extravaganza that Mayor David N. Dinkins will kick off on June 3, the festival headlining everyone from Whoopi Goldberg and Steven Wright to Jerry Lewis and Buddy Hackett.
The event has the stated civic purpose of bringing in lots of comics, lots of jokes, lots of tourists and lots of bucks.


Punishing China on Trade Hurts Wrong People; Olympics Champion
To the Editor:
A yet undiscussed fact in China's bid to host the Olympic Games in 2000: The man responsible for China's Olympic campaign, the official who was host to visiting International Olympic Committee delegates to Beijing, Chen Xitong, was a key player in the brutal crackdown on the democracy movement in June 1989.


Congress Calls the Public Broadcast Tune
To the Editor:
"Dial 1-800-Censor" (Op-Ed, May 7) by Sandy Tolan is concerned about Corporation for Public Broadcasting intrusion into the rights of stations and producers by monitoring programs to insure political balance.
Ms.
Tolan's views echo a sense of idealism that public affairs producers showed even before the Public Broadcasting Act was passed in 1967.


Playoffs Offer Lesson On Commitment at Top
They hung on, again.
They blew a 10-point lead in the fourth quarter.
The Knicks lost Patrick Ewing to fouls with three minutes and change left and it wasn't until as deep as you can go into the final minute that the Garden crowd, finally, began a chorus inviting the Chicago Bulls to town.
The league office happily faxed the Knicks-Bulls schedule to the Garden early in the evening.
The Knicks' staff hopefully laid copies on the press table before the game.
The Knicks went out into another dogfight and Michael Jordan probably liked what he saw on television again.
The Bulls still haven't lost in the playoffs.
The Knicks still haven't laid an opponent out.


Silent Sizzle
Outback Steakhouse Inc., a chain of 89 restaurants in five states and the District of Columbia, yesterday went higher than its previous 52-week high of $33.25 set earlier this month.
But there were no company announcements and apparently no news that might have affected its price.


Roof Leak Over Aspin Opens a Bureaucratic Floodgate
With the Pentagon spending about $750 million a day, you would not think there would be much debate over an expenditure of $3,105 -- or $3,105.79 to be precise -- for a leaky roof.
But when the roof covers the Georgetown home of the Secretary of Defense, even a modest payment receives special scrutiny, as Les Aspin learned this week.


Judge Hears Questions on Warmus Conviction
In a hearing that could result in a third trial for Carolyn Warmus, the Westchester teacher convicted last year of killing her lover's wife, a private investigator testified today that another woman hired him three months before the slaying to keep the victim under surveillance.
Anthony Souza, a private detective and retired Yonkers police officer, testified that Barbara Ballor hired him on Oct. 13, 1988, saying that she and her boyfriend, Paul Solomon, suspected that Mr.
Solomon's wife, Betty Jeanne, "had a boyfriend of her own" and wanted her followed.


Judge Hears Questions on Warmus Conviction
In a hearing that could result in a third trial for Carolyn Warmus, the Westchester teacher convicted last year of killing her lover's wife, a private investigator testified today that another woman hired him three months before the slaying to keep the victim under surveillance.
Anthony Souza, a private detective and retired Yonkers police officer, testified that Barbara Ballor hired him on Oct. 13, 1988, saying that she and her boyfriend, Paul Solomon, suspected that Mr.
Solomon's wife, Betty Jeanne, "had a boyfriend of her own" and wanted her followed.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  American League
AL -- Suspended Albert Belle, Cleveland Indians outfielder, for three games for charging Kansas City Royals pitcher Hipolito Pichardo during a game May 13.
MILWAUKEE BREWERS -- Named Wendy Selig-Prieb vice president and general counsel.


U.S. Goal on Bosnia: Keeping War Within Borders
The Clinton Administration has dropped its campaign to turn the Balkan war into a fair fight between the Bosnian Serbs and Muslims and has set a much more limited goal of containing the war within Bosnia's borders.
In doing so, despite public assurances to the contrary, Washington has largely relinquished leadership in the crisis to the Europeans and the Russians.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-11  DANES BACK TREATY ON EUROPE  Bringing sighs of relief from Denmark's own Government and its European Community partners, Danish voters strongly ratified the Treaty on European Union that they had narrowly rejected in June.
A1  BANKER ACCUSED OF PLAGIARISM  Jacques Attali, the flamboyant French technocrat, is accused of taking over 40 passages in his book from a planned work by Elie Wiesel and President Francois Mitterrand.
A3


Serb Is Confident of Holding Occupied Lands
The leader of the Bosnian Serbs said today that Western powers should forget the international peace plan for preserving the sovereignty of Bosnia and Herzegovina and accept the inevitability of a separate Serbian state on Bosnian territory.
"There will be a Serbian republic once and for good, and anybody who wants to deal with us has to take that into account," said Radovan Karadzic, the Serbian leader.
"Serbs have decided to have their own province that will be independent."


Open Door And a Hail Of Bullets
It was warm, so the front door was open.
Trinity Wamah, a 34-year-old student from Liberia, sat in a Staten Island social club chatting about his homeland and the civil war he left behind.
Then he looked to the doorway.
He saw a young man with a pistol.
He saw the man firing at the crowd of Liberians, his face silent and grimacing.
A man to his left fell.
Then a bullet struck Mr.
Wamah's arm.


Is There a Comfy Place to Sit on the Front Lines of Design?; A Place to Sit and Dream of Sandboxes
At the beginning there was a fish-shaped table.
It could have been a dining-height skateboard.
Whatever it was ("too much, but fabulous" a fellow next to me said), it definitely wasn't meant for me.
What next caught my eye?
A sandbox full of . . . sand, along with hardware (drawer pulls, wall hooks, door levers) made of brass and bronze and shaped like prehistoric creatures.
Rhea Alexander, a founder of DIGS, the company that makes the paleontologically inspired hardware ($20 to $200), calls them "jewelry for your house." But I craved the sandbox.
A beach lover, I was filled with joy at the thought of stepping in sand year round without leaving my rent-controlled flat.
I told Ms.
Alexander so.


The Young Step Out for a Walk Against Violence


Start of a Consensus; Lawmakers Focusing on Drawing Up Rules For Behavior by Homosexuals in Military
The debate over allowing homosexuals in the military is boiling down to two questions: Should gay men and lesbians be allowed to serve openly, and how open is open?
Something approaching a consensus is developing among lawmakers and Defense Department officials for an approach that is being called "don't ask, don't tell." But the term is being used by different legislators to mean very different things.


Johnson to Play in Exhibition
MAGIC JOHNSON will play his first official game in the United States since he retired last year when he joins current and former college players in his own All-Star Classic on May 26.
Johnson recently returned from Europe, where he played in a series of all-star games.


Bronx Legislator Charged In Assault of a Woman
Councilman Rafael Castaneira-Colon, a veteran Bronx lawmaker, was arrested yesterday and charged with assaulting a woman in a dispute over payments to support their 2-year-old daughter, the police said.
At 8 A.M., Mr.
Colon, who is 57 and divorced, surrendered to the police with his lawyer, Murray Richman, at the 43d Precinct station house in Soundview.
He was charged with third-degree assault and harassment.
He pleaded not guilty at an arraignment in Bronx Criminal Court and was released without bail.


Is There a Comfy Place to Sit on the Front Lines of Design?; A Place to Sit and Dream of Sandboxes
At the beginning there was a fish-shaped table.
It could have been a dining-height skateboard.
Whatever it was ("too much, but fabulous" a fellow next to me said), it definitely wasn't meant for me.
What next caught my eye?
A sandbox full of . . . sand, along with hardware (drawer pulls, wall hooks, door levers) made of brass and bronze and shaped like prehistoric creatures.
Rhea Alexander, a founder of DIGS, the company that makes the paleontologically inspired hardware ($20 to $200), calls them "jewelry for your house." But I craved the sandbox.
A beach lover, I was filled with joy at the thought of stepping in sand year round without leaving my rent-controlled flat.
I told Ms.
Alexander so.


Trade Gap Widens by $10.21 Billion
The nation's trade deficit ballooned in March to $10.21 billion, the widest gap in nearly four years, as imports from Japan and China grew sharply while exports increased slowly, the Commerce Department announced today.
The widening of the deficit, from $7.9 billion in February, mainly reflected a $4.4 billion jump in imports to a record $49.2 billion.


Sanders Returns to Action
Atlanta outfielder DEION SANDERS resurfaced in a baseball uniform after a three-week absence, and said in West Palm Beach, Fla., that he will rejoin the Braves on Friday in New York.
Sanders, 25, played in a simulated game at the Braves' spring training camp.
It was his first baseball action since April 28, when he received permission to leave the team to attend his father's funeral at Fort Myers, Fla.
The two-sport star failed to return, and the Braves placed him on the disqualified list on April 29.


Finance Officer Who Quit Kodak Will Join Citicorp
Christopher J. Steffen, whose efforts to streamline the Eastman Kodak Company ended abruptly with his resignation last month, will become a top executive at Citicorp in June, responsible for making the nation's largest banking company more efficient and more profitable.
Mr.
Steffen will join Citicorp's six-member management committee as a senior executive vice president and will also be nominated to the board, John M. Morris, a Citicorp spokesman confirmed last night. 2d Recruitment Try
John S. Reed, Citicorp's chairman and chief executive, tried to recruit Mr.
Steffen before he joined Kodak earlier this year, Mr.
Morris said.
Mr.
Reed resumed his efforts after Mr.
Steffen resigned as Kodak's chief financial officer.


Economic Scene; Policy becomes fuzzy when jobs enter the advanced-TV picture.
CANDIDATE Clinton said he believed in industrial policy, and now President Clinton is proving it: The Federal Communications Commission's decision on a technical standard for high-definition television, wrote Robert B. Reich, the Labor Secretary and very close Friend of Bill's, "should turn, in part, on an assessment of which system would make the greatest contribution to domestic high-wage employment."
Well, that is not quite proof.
While Secretary Reich's letter to the chairman of the commission has been widely interpreted as a plug for the French-Dutch consortium promising to build the new television sets in America, sources close to Mr.
Reich say he was only repeating his long-held belief that good jobs matter.
But the fallout illustrates both the theoretical attractions and practical difficulties of picking industrial winners.


CIRCUS CIRCUS AND ELDORADO IN HOTEL-CASINO VENTURE
Circus Circus Enterprises of Las Vegas, Nev., said yesterday it had signed a joint-venture agreement with the Eldorado Hotel/Casino to build a 2,000-room combination hotel-casino in Reno, around the theme of a 16th-century Spanish seaport in the lost continent of Atlantis.
The resort, not yet named, will be built between existing Circus Circus and Eldorado properties, and will be managed by Circus Circus.
Groundbreaking for the project, expected to cost about $230 million, is scheduled by the end of the year with completion expected in April 1995.


Alice Green Fredman, English Professor, 68
Alice Green Fredman, professor emeritus of English and comparative literature at Columbia University and an authority on the 18th- and 19th-century novel, died on Monday at Yale-New Haven Hospital.
She was 68 and lived in Carmel, N.Y.
Her husband, Irwin F. Fredman, said she had had a heart attack.


Bridge
Conventional wisdom holds that overtricks are important at match points but unimportant at imp scoring or rubber bridge.
Therefore, the theory goes, a declarer should occasionally be willing to take a slight risk, and even jeopardize his contract, at match points but not at other forms of scoring.
But a doubled overtrick is another matter altogether.
On the diagramed deal, played in a match Tuesday night, the South player, and host, was Edgar Kaplan.
He found himself in five diamonds doubled after West had opened four spades.


Whitman Approach Working
Surgery to his left shoulder last winter and the celebration of his 40th birthday have mellowed Ed Whitman, the head pro at Knickerbocker Country Club in Tenafly, N.J., for the last nine years.
The new approach has helped carry Whitman to the forefront of the $125,000 Dodge Open, the richest tournament for metropolitan-area professionals.


Transactions
Baseball  American League
MILWAUKEE BREWERS -- Placed Dave Nilsson, catcher, on the 15-day disabled list.
Recalled Tom Lampkin, catcher, from New Orleans of the American Association.
Transferred Ted Higuera, pitcher, from the 15- to the 60-day disabled list.
Basketball  United States Basketball League
MIAMI TROPICS -- Activated Freeman Williams, guard, from the taxi squad and Tim Duncan, forward, from injured reserve.
Placed Cliff Robinson, forward-center, and Dwight Stewart, forward, on injured reserve.
WESTCHESTER STALLIONS -- Activated Michael Hugar, guard, and James Hodges, forward, from the taxi squad.
Placed Derrick Canada, guard, and Damon Patterson, forward, on the taxi squad.
National Basketball League
SASKATOON SLAM -- Signed Greg Sutton, guard. Football  National Football League
CINCINNATI BENGALS -- Signed Mike Brim, cornerback.
NEW YORK GIANTS -- Signed Darrell Hamilton, offensive tackle. Canadian Football League
BRITISH COLUMBIA LIONS -- Signed Chris Skinner, running back.
SACRAMENTO GOLD MINERS -- Signed Ernie Rogers, offensive lineman, and Gary McCurty, running back.
Arena Football League
ARIZONA RATTLERS -- Acquired Steve Stutsman, wide receiver-defensive back, from the Detroit Drive for future considerations.
Signed Judd Rachow, Corey Brannon and Arnold Campbell, linemen.
Placed Art Greathouse, running back-linebacker, and Darin Mrachek, Barry Waggoner and Kevin Thomas, linemen, on injured reserve.
CINCINNATI ROCKERS -- Traded Saute Sapolu, lineman, to the Miami Hooters for Wayne Coffey, wide receiver-defensive back.
CLEVELAND THUNDERBOLTS -- Signed Keith Jones, wide receiver-defensive back.
DETROIT DRIVE -- Activated John Corker, lineman.
MIAMI HOOTERS -- Signed Reggie Sutton, wide receiver-defensive back.
Hockey  National Hockey League
CHICAGO BLACKHAWKS -- Signed Christian Ruuttu, center, to a one-year contract.


Washington Recognizes Angola Government
The Clinton Administration recognized the Government of Angola today, and called on the guerrilla movement that has been fighting the Government to join it.
The decision represents a dramatic evolution in American foreign policy from outright hostility toward Angola and attempts to undermine the Government throughout the 1980's to the diplomatic embrace today.


Missed Goal Still Haunting Hogue
Benoit Hogue did not need to watch the replay.
All night, the shot haunted him.
It ran through his head, tauntingly, in the locker room after the game.
It nagged at him on the charter flight back to New York.
Even at home, in his bed, his body aching with exhaustion, the memory would not allow Hogue to rest.
It was only a moment in an opportunity-filled, double-overtime game, but, for Hogue, it was the reason the Islanders fell to the Canadiens, 4-3, Tuesday night in Montreal.
It is the reason New York returns to Nassau Coliseum for Game 3 on Thursday with a 2-0 deficit.
It is the reason he feels even more pressure to produce as the Islanders continue their remarkable post-season ride with this four-of-seven-game battle for the Wales Conference crown.


Is There a Comfy Place to Sit on the Front Lines of Design?; A Little Justice for the 70's, Please
Part Memphis, part Steinway, part Motorola, Rob Kron's "Little Maestro" audio-visual armoire harkens to an era not particularly beloved by furniture fanatics.
What drew me to "Little Maestro" was my sense of a style injustice.
On the streets, the 70's are unavoidable, from center-part haircuts to platform shoes.
But in a bizarre twist of the fashion fates, no matter how many 70's bell-bottoms and fringed jackets waltz down runways and onto the bodies of trendy decorating-magazine editors, 70's furniture just can't seem to make a comeback.
Where are the macrame plant hangers with asparagus ferns inside?
Two-tone shag carpeting?


Garden Q. &amp; A.
Transplant Techniques
Q.
By the time I buy vegetable and flower seedlings they are a pot-bound lump of roots.
What can be done to help them flourish? -- Betsy Sylvester, New York.
A.
Newly purchased seedlings sometimes need help to get going in their new home.
One of my favorite tricks is to treat them -- before transplanting -- to a water drink laced with a diluted solution of any water-soluble plant food.
Let them drain a bit, and then, after sliding them out from their plastic tray, tease apart the root ball.


Review/Rock; INXS And Fans Who Adore It
There's a high-pitched sound at some rock concerts, a sizzling noise that can be heard between notes, which always indicates the presence of a band blessed with female fans.
Roses, thrown on stage, are a tip-off as well, and at the Academy on Tuesday night, the Australian band INXS provoked both.
The lead singer, Michael Hutchence, is pretty high up in the male sex god pantheon, and the audience, which included an unusually large number of women for a hard-rock show, was there to screech, throw bouquets of roses and grab at the band members.
Part of a rock concert's thrill comes from a combination of hero worship and desire, and INXS let itself be admired.


I.M.F. Planning New Aid Package for Russia
In an effort to speed aid to Russia, Moscow and the International Monetary Fund will announce an agreement soon under which Russia will receive $1.5 billion in aid within the next few weeks in exchange for promises to control inflation, fund officials and advisers to Russia said today.
The agreement, to be announced in the next few days, is expected to provide a total of $3 billion in loans to Russia within four to five months and is aimed at helping President Boris N. Yeltsin transform Russia into a market economy.


Is There a Comfy Place to Sit on the Front Lines of Design?; Pull Up a Building and Sit Right Down
I had had several interesting flirtations, roaming around the vast expanse of the fair, and I was on my way out, wanting more.
Then it happened.
I fell in love, serious love.
So serious that I stood stock still and stared.
Four of the objects of my affection were almost seven feet tall, but all six were strong and sturdy, with character galore and panache to spare, yet a certain delicacy.
I had to smile at them.
I couldn't help it.
And I knew they would appreciate it.
From there, things progressed.
Before I knew it, I was touching them.
I wanted them all.


How Do You Spell Pressure? Knicks vs. Bulls
The Knicks have the home-court advantage, but the Chicago Bulls are in familiar territory.
For the fifth straight year, they are in the Eastern Conference finals, where few Knicks have gone before.
Exactly two have been there, not counting Coach Pat Riley.
Rolando Blackman's Dallas Mavericks lost to Riley's Los Angeles Lakers in the seventh game of the 1987-88 Western Conference finals.
Tony Campbell was a bench player on that Lakers team.
That is the sum of the Knicks' conference-finals experience.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-13  CHINA'S ECONOMY IS NO. 3  The International Monetary Fund has concluded that China's economy is more than three times larger than previously measured and is the world's third largest, behind the United States and Japan.
A1  F.B.I.
GETS DETAILS ON BUSH PLOT  Federal Bureau of Investigation agents have been told by an Iraqi being held in Kuwait that he led an attempt to assassinate former President George Bush last month on behalf of the Iraqi Government, American officials said.
A1


New Tally of World's Economies Catapults China Into Third Place
Saying that traditional measures underestimate the economies in developing countries, the International Monetary Fund has concluded that China's economy is more than four times as large as previously measured.
That makes it the third largest, behind the United States and Japan.
The new study, to be released next week, also greatly increases estimates of the economies of India, Indonesia, Mexico, Brazil and other developing countries.


Richter, Move Over For the Tacky Scale
SOME words are perfect, and "tacky" is one of them.
The dictionary synonym is "poor taste," but tacky says it all and poor taste doesn't.
Poor taste doesn't sound right.
It's too . . . tasteful.
The only alternative expression to tacky even worthy of consideration is "the pits" -- it's slang but it's on the same wavelength.
As perfect as tacky is, it isn't an all-encompassing word.
It has degrees, gradations and subtle distinctions.
Light tack, for example, is the only variety that could conceivably pass for more tasteful poor taste.
It consists of "pity they don't know better" actions, regrettable but not all that bad.


Corrections
An article yesterday about Congressional opposition to President Clinton's tax proposals, and a caption with the article, named the chief White House lobbyist incorrectly.
He is Howard Paster.


Hail and Farewell on a Winning Note
The baseball was gone, and so was Jeff Torborg.
The Mets came out of their dugout to begin a most awkward, emotionally confused celebration.
Bobby Bonilla's 10th inning two-run homer had given the Mets a 6-4 victory over the Pirates last night at Shea Stadium.
It was their first triumph in extra innings all season.
The joy was real but the scene was really a farewell.
The manager, who was shaking the hands of his players as well as those of the umpires, was about to learn what everyone in his clubhouse had suspected: he was being fired.


You Can Get Medical Care in This Country Too; Seeing Spots and Lights
To the Editor:
Like John Gagnon (Op-Ed, May 8), I had just arrived in the French countryside in the summer of 1986 to write a book, and I found myself being taken one midnight by the local ambulance to the same regional medical center in Tours.
The ambulance came quickly after my wife called to report I was seeing spots and flashing lights.
My eyes were examined upon arrival by a concerned intern.
I was kept overnight in a holding bed and the next day given laser treatment to cauterize a retinal tear.
This saved the sight of my right eye.
I went home by taxi and was back at my word processor in a few days.
Total cost of the efficient and no-questions-asked care (including ambulance, hospital bed, taxi and a second zap of the laser a month later): $400 at the exchange rate then prevailing.
The charge for a French patient would have been the same through the self-financing state insurance system, with the same 20 percent deductible as my private American insurance.


The Rise and Fall and, Now, Rise of Robert Evans
Few men in Hollywood have ascended so rapidly as Robert Evans, or fallen so precipitately.
"The higher you are, the lower you fall," Mr.
Evans said in an interview at his home in Beverly Hills.
"I had 10 years of a horrific life, Kafkaesque. There were nights I cried myself to sleep. I was in a fetal position. I gave up."


Corrections
A picture caption yesterday about Bobby Wescott, a disabled kindergartner in a regular public school, referred incorrectly in some copies to his position in the picture.
He was second from the right.


Top Performers Lead Again In Money Market Yields
The yields of most money market funds rose slightly in the latest week, with many funds that were in first place the previous week again performing near the top.
IBC/Donoghue's Money Fund Report said 7-day yields of taxable funds advanced, while 30-day yields declined.
In the tax-exempt sector, both 7-day and 30-day yields increased.


Paint the Crosswalks
To the Editor:
Your May 9 article on the large number of pedestrian traffic fatalities in New York City, unfortunately, left out an important aspect of pedestrian safety.
With the hundreds of millions of dollars spent in the last decade on resurfacing and reconstruction of roadways for the movement of vehicles, a pittance has been spent on pedestrian safety, such as the painting of crosswalks.
One of the busiest intersections in the world, 34th Street at Herald Square, has had just about all its crosswalk lines obliterated.


Jets' Brim Cincinnati Bound
Cornerback MIKE BRIM, an unrestricted free agent who started for the Jets the last two seasons, signed with the Cincinnati Bengals yesterday.


Eisenach Journal; Luther and Goethe Breathe Life Into a Dead Land
In the fecund pocket of central Germany where titans like Luther, Bach, Goethe, Schiller and Nietzsche once lived and worked, thousands of tourists are discovering attractions that were hidden in decades of Communist rule.
All five states carved out of the former East Germany hope that increased tourism will help pull them out of their economic distress.
But in only one state, Thuringia, does tourism appear to have the potential to become a major industry within the next few years.


BLUE CROSS CHIEF IS REPORTEDLY OUT
Albert A. Cardone will step down as the head of Empire Blue Cross and Blue Shield, the financially troubled insurer of 8.5 million New Yorkers, a state government official said yesterday.
Mr.
Cardone's fate was determined yesterday at a meeting of Empire's board of directors, but the terms of his departure were not known.
Mr.
Cardone served as both chairman of the board and chief executive of the company, positions he has held since 1987.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Markets
The Dow jumped 55.64 points to a record high of 3,500.03 in a day of wild trading that turned up sharply after interest rates declined and the day's rise in gold prices halted.  [ D1. ]
Treasury prices rallied in the afternoon after the Fed gave no signal that it would tighten interest rates to stem inflation.  [ D1. ]


Essay; Iraqgate Giveaway
If the Department of Justice wins a case to be tried in Atlanta this fall, then the U.S. taxpayer may be forced to cough up over $380 million to a corrupted Italian bank.
Whose side is the Department of Justice on?


As Casino Vote Nears, Jockeying Intensifies
With five days left before the first vote in the House of Representatives on whether to legalize a gambling casino for Bridgeport, the measure is still considered a long shot.
But a new round of maneuvering in the Capitol in the last 24 hours has made the question suddenly more volatile, and legislators on both sides said that no one should rule out large shifts of votes and further changes in tactics as the final hour nears.


Columbia Chief Stresses Role of Teacher
Delivering his 13th and final commencement address, Michael I. Sovern, Columbia University's president, called on America's universities yesterday "to tilt the balance back toward teaching" as they wrestle with fiscal problems and strive to fulfill responsibilities in research and public service.
"Our best universities must all acknowledge that we cannot continue to increase the price of a college education and deliver less of the faculty our students' tuition dollars are supporting," said Mr.
Sovern, who will step down as Columbia's 17th president on June 30 to return to teaching at Columbia's law school.


You Can Get Medical Care in This Country Too
To the Editor:
In "Food, Wine and Surgery" (Op-Ed, May 8), John Gagnon offers a novel solution to this country's health care problems.
The next time you have that lower abdominal pain that won't quit, get yourself to Tours, France, as fast as you can.
Within 20 minutes of checking into your hotel, there will be a doctor in your room making all the arrangements for whatever treatment is necessary.
The doctor probably won't send you a bill, your stay at the hospital will be "blissful," and think of all the frequent flier miles you'll accumulate.
Would you have published this article if the doctor and hospital were in Manhattan or Albuquerque?
Surely, there must be someone in these United States or among the thousands of foreigners who travel to the United States each year to receive their health care who has had similar experiences with American doctors.


Critic's Notebook; Teaching Young Virtuosos How to Play Rough
Scripture promises a Messiah who will make "the crooked straight and the rough places plain." The first few days of the two-week-long Isaac Stern Chamber Music Workshop at Carnegie Hall have worked hard to reverse that process.
Attending these more or less private sessions (three days of public master classes begin on Tuesday) are selected young quartets, trios and duos from as close as the Juilliard School and as far away as France and Austria.
They have arrived revving their powerful, well-tuned motors and been quickly made aware that musical performance has indeed a starting point and a destination, but that its beauty lies in the curves, the bumps and the scenery speeding past along the way.
Shuttling back and forth between Weill Recital Hall and the Kaplan Space, this observer was struck by the identical messages issuing simultaneously two floors apart.
Important among them was that phrases, though legs of a single journey, have lives of their own, their own logic, their own energy and their own peculiar punctuation.


Home Video
May isn't a time for big movies in video stores, but a flow of titles in categories like old films, documentaries and classic television is evidence that studios are watching out for other kinds of material to release on tape.
One mainstay is the old movie available for the first time on cassette.
Film buffs routinely complain about favorite movies being withheld in studio vaults, but video executives reply that some films would not sell well enough to be released and in any event they can't release everything at once.


Who Reports to Rabin in Israel? Often Rabin
Quick!
Name Israel's Prime Minister, Defense Minister, Religion Minister, Education Minister and Interior Minister.
You don't need to be an expert on Israeli political arcana to come up with the answers.
A one-name response will do: Yitzhak Rabin.


Light Penalty for Speculator In Japan Stock Manipulation
Mitsuhiro Kotani, a corporate raider whose shadowy stock market maneuvers in the 1980's toppled major politicians, bankers and businessmen in a web of illicit activities, was handed a light suspended sentence today after being convicted of a multimillion-dollar stock manipulation scheme.
Mr.
Kotani has become a symbol of the excesses of what was known here as the bubble era, a period when stock and real estate prices rose to exaggerated levels before collapsing during the 1990's


Calendar: Paper, Crafts, Gardens and Antiques
Paper and Book Arts  Kate's Paperie, 561 Broadway (Prince Street entrance); (212) 941-9816.
"The Paper Chase," a two-day celebration of paper making, printing, photography, poetry and books, will be held on Saturday from 11 A.M. to 5 P.M. and Sunday from noon to 4 P.M.


Clarifying a Report on Lead in Water
THE Environmental Protection Agency said last week that 816 water systems would have to take action to cut lead levels, and millions of people scoured the list looking for the names of their suppliers.
But finding your utility's name on the list was not necessarily cause for alarm, experts said, and seeing that your company was not listed did not guarantee that your water was safe.
The advice of the experts is the same now as before last week's report: that most people should have their water tested and that some should have their blood tested, too.


Brazil Minister Is Said to Quit
President Itamar Franco accepted Minister of the Economy Eliseu Resende's resignation Wednesday, Globo Television reported.
Mr.
Resende took the post two months ago.
He has been hobbled by allegations that he favored a former employer with Government export credits.


Ethnic Shifts Are Revealed In Voting For Schools
Louisa M. Chan, a Chinese-born nurse, sought to be an advocate for the thousands of minority students in School District 24 in Queens, but she quit attending meetings last year because, she said, the all-white school board repeatedly cold-shouldered her and "it was too unpleasant."
Now, after winning a seat in the May 4 school board elections, Mrs.
Chan will herself be joining the hitherto all-white, all-Catholic board in District 24, which has a student population that is more than 70 percent from minority groups.


A Rich Event? $0 for Winner!
How much do you get for winning the second richest tournament in the history of professional squash, the $141,000 Brazilian Squash Classic?
Nothing.
That was the word last night from the Wales-based Professional Squash Association, which said that Jansher Khan, the internationally top-ranked Pakistani player who won the tourmanent final in Rio Monday night, left Brazil the next day with nothing to show for his victory.
According to Mike Plummer, the association's press officer, neither Khan nor any of the three other players who made it as far as the semifinals of the six-day tournament received their prize money, a total of more than $58,000.
Indeed, the only players who were paid anything, he said, were the 16 pros who lost in the first round.


Is There a Comfy Place to Sit on the Front Lines of Design?; A Little Justice for the 70's, Please
Part Memphis, part Steinway, part Motorola, Rob Kron's "Little Maestro" audio-visual armoire harkens to an era not particularly beloved by furniture fanatics.
What drew me to "Little Maestro" was my sense of a style injustice.
On the streets, the 70's are unavoidable, from center-part haircuts to platform shoes.
But in a bizarre twist of the fashion fates, no matter how many 70's bell-bottoms and fringed jackets waltz down runways and onto the bodies of trendy decorating-magazine editors, 70's furniture just can't seem to make a comeback.
Where are the macrame plant hangers with asparagus ferns inside?
Two-tone shag carpeting?


CAMPBELL SOUP CO. (N)
The Campbell Soup Company's new majority ownership in Arnotts Ltd., the leading biscuit maker in Australia, helped Campbell reach record sales and earnings for its third fiscal quarter, which ended May 2.
Campbell said yesterday that net sales for all divisions rose 6 percent, to $1.63 billion, from the corresponding period a year ago, and earnings increased 19 percent, to $108.5 million.


Small Graduation Gain for Athletes
A National Collegiate Athletic Association study of graduation rates shows that the most recent class included in its survey -- the freshmen of 1985 -- showed a minimal improvement upon the performance of the 1983 and 1984 classes.
Based on the reports of 298 Division I schools, 52 percent of the athletes who enrolled during the 1985-86 academic year earned a degree within six years.
That figure was a single percentage point above the average produced by the freshmen from 1983, 1984 and 1985.


Is There a Comfy Place to Sit on the Front Lines of Design?; Going Limp Over the Lamps
I am awash in a sea of exquisite furniture -- virtual works of art -- and I'm blinded by the light.
It is the light, encased in elaborate bodies of glass, aluminum, chrome and wood, that draws me hypnotically.
Since childhood, I've had a fascination with lamps and light fixtures.
As an adult, I have learned that without proper lighting, even the best of furniture remains literally in the dark.
My personal favorites are two sets of table lamps designed for Flos Inc. by Philippe Starck and Afra and Tobia Scarpa.
Mr.
Starck's delicate 40-watt table lamps in mint green, lavender, greenish gold and royal blue cast a warm, soothing glow.


Jane Pack Dessau; Advertising Executive, 38
Jane Pack Dessau, an advertising executive, died yesterday at Mount Sinai Hospital in Manhattan.
She was 38 and lived in Manhattan.
She died of breast cancer after a four-year battle, her husband, Stephen P. Dessau said.


Parking Rules
Because of Ascension Day, alternate-side parking rules are suspended in New York City today.
Other regulations remain in effect.


APPLE COMPUTER COPYRIGHT CASE IS NARROWED
A judge has further narrowed the scope of the five-year-old Apple Computer copyright infringement suit against Microsoft and Hewlett-Packard.
Tuesday's ruling by Federal District Judge Vaughn R. Walker means that a jury will now consider only 4 of the 147 software features that Apple originally contended had been copied by Hewlett-Packard, and none of the 189 specific Microsoft features that Apple had originally challenged.
The judge set a June 28 trial date for the case, which had already been substantially reduced.
Microsoft and Hewlett-Packard have contended that many of the contested symbols are generic or were derived from icons used earlier by other companies.


Justice Post Nominee Says He Has Quit Golf Club
Webster L. Hubbell, the Clinton Administration's nominee for the third-highest post in the Justice Department, said today that he had resigned from an Arkansas golf club that had been all white until last year, when it recruited its first and only black member.
Mr.
Hubbell, who had been under fire for his membership in the Country Club of Little Rock, said at a Senate confirmation hearing that he had decided to resign after concluding that his membership could be a liability.
He said he sent a resignation letter on Tuesday.


Richardson Sought By Hawks
Arkansas Coach NOLAN RICHARDSON said yesterday in Fayetteville, Ark., that the Atlanta Hawks want to talk with him about their coaching job, and he said they probably will get together this week.
"I usually know immediately if I'm interested in a job or not," Richardson said.
"I have not talked to the Hawks other than to try to set a time to sit down and visit with them. Sometime this week, we should be able to get it done. All they asked for was the opportunity to talk to me."


Turkey Off Balance as Death Ends a Long Rivalry
The election of Suleyman Demirel to the presidency this week after the sudden death of Turgut Ozal in April has thrown Turkey's political system off balance, reduced the country's regional influence and signaled an end to the three-decade-long grip on power of many of the nation's aging political leaders.
"This opens up a new political era," a Western diplomat said.
"The dramatic removal of Mr. Ozal from the political scene has ended the confrontation between Mr. Ozal and Mr. Demirel that has defined the political process for years. It has removed the country's two most important politicians from the daily political process and, since neither man prepared a successor, created a degree of instability and confusion."


Mavs' Jackson Gets Trial Date
A judge in Columbus, Ohio, set Aug. 9 as the trial date for JIM JACKSON of the Dallas Mavericks on charges that he waved a gun at four teen-agers.
The teen-agers said they were driving along a Columbus street on Dec. 30 when Jackson leaned out the window, pointed a handgun and shouted obscenities.


Washington Council Head Found Dead
John A. Wilson, the chairman of the District of Columbia City Council, died today in an apparent suicide.
It was the latest traumatic occurrence to shake the city's government in the last several years.
Mr.
Wilson, the dean of District politicians, was found hanging in his Southwest Washington home by his wife, Bonnie, who had returned home about noon when Mr.
Wilson's office could not locate him.


Is There a Comfy Place to Sit on the Front Lines of Design?; Amid Many Dangers, a Haven
Never before have so many hurtful-looking pieces of furniture been gathered under one roof.
Some were painfully hip, like the living room suite upholstered in what looked like Elvis's last jump suit.
Some were painfully unfunny, like the retro-pop sofa in the form of two puffy red lips.
Some were just painful, like the very tiny chair whose triangular seat and circular back were joined by a vertical piece of spindly iron.
It looked like a Vicks cough drop wired to an aspirin.
In this garish environment, the "Black Velvet" woven cane chair ($1,300) by Meubles Chantiers Baudet stood out like Fred Astaire at Woodstock.
It was cool, suave, unpretentious and utterly itself.
Low-slung and squat, it was darned comfortable, too.
The reddish mahogany and cream stripes made the tubular arm look sort of like a coral snake.
The motif was picked up on the little back legs but not the front ones, a nice touch.


Is There a Comfy Place to Sit on the Front Lines of Design?; A Bed Fit for a King: Neptune, Say
You walk into the furniture fair and, right away, you bond with a bed.
This is some bed, playful yet regal, a queen-size cutie of mahogany veneer with gilded legs.
Somehow, the headboard reminds you of those paper crowns the waitresses at White Castle used to wear atop their hairnets. (They still do, for all you know.)
"Mmmm, White Castle hamburgers," says an earnest-looking man in jeans and a sand-colored blazer.
"I remember when a burger cost a quarter." He is Scott Carroll, a 32-year-old furniture designer with a showroom in Dallas.
It turns out that his inspiration for the bed was not White Castle, but the sail of Columbus's ship the Santa Maria.
In her wake, Mr.
Carroll says, there will be a Nina bed, perhaps a Pinta.


Stocks and Bonds Surge; Dow Hits 3,500; 30-Year Treasury Again Below 7%
A rush of relief washed over the bond market yesterday, as the worst fears from Tuesday turned out to be wrong yesterday.
After a wrenching day of trading that saw prices and yields rise and fall sharply several times, probably costing some traders a lot of money, came a happy ending.


Fingerprints Being Studied In Bomb Case
Fingerprint by fingerprint, investigators in the World Trade Center bombing are amassing forensic evidence, from New Jersey apartments and a storage locker where bomb-making chemicals were kept, that further links suspects in the conspiracy case.
Laboratory reports from the Federal Bureau of Investigation suggest that the fingerprint evidence will be one of the crucial elements that will be unveiled in the trial of the seven people charged in the Feb. 26 bombing that left six people dead and injured more than 1,000.


WHERE TO FIND IT
RUMMAGING through a crowded closet can be traumatic, particularly when items fall from the upper shelves.
But the right combination of rods, shelves and drawers, smartly placed and securely installed, can add storage space and demystify even the most Byzantine closet.
The closet-organization business has grown considerably since the late 1970's.
A closet organizer usually goes to a residence, measures the closets, tallies up belongings (shoes, belts, hanging items) and presents a simple sketch.
Installation usually takes a day.


Clinton Nears Choice for High Court Nominee
Clinton Administration officials said today that they expected the President to choose a new Supreme Court justice within 10 days.
They said he had narrowed his list to a few Federal and state judges.
A White House adviser said the candidates under serious consideration included Judge Jon O. Newman of the United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit, in Manhattan; Judge Stephen G. Breyer of the United States Court of Appeals for the First Circuit, in Boston; Justice Shirley S. Abrahamson of the Wisconsin Supreme Court; Justice Christine Durham of the Utah Supreme Court, and Judge Jose A. Cabranes of Federal District Court in New Haven.


Everything Came Up Roses at Columbia Commencement


Adage Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Kelly Said to Be Pick As Director of F.B.I.
The New York City Police Commissioner, Raymond W. Kelly, has been mentioned as a possible replacement for William S. Sessions as director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation, Clinton Administration officials said yesterday.
The officials, who spoke on the condition of anonymity, said Mr.
Kelly's name had come up in conversations between the White House and the Justice Department, as have at least two other names, those of Louis J. Freeh, a Federal judge in the Southern District of New York, and Richard G. Stearns, a Massachusetts Superior Court judge.


New Tactics Mark Same Old Land Grab
To the Editor:
Another Western land grab is in the making in rural New Mexico, but "In Cattle-Raising West, County Wants to Help U.S. Manage Federal Lands" (news article, May 6) makes it sound as if that is something new.
I strongly suspect that the myth of the cowboy blinded your urban-based reporter to the conflict of interest in turning decision making on public lands over to those who will reap direct financial benefits.


Review/Theater; From Garbage Trucks To the Barricades of '68
On Feb. 12, 1968, black sanitation workers in Memphis staged a wildcat strike to back their demands for equal pay, better working conditions and recognition of their union.
The walkout became a lightning rod for conflicted civil rights and labor movements that were thundering across the country, and provided a flash point that erupted in riots and culminated in the assassination of the Rev.
Dr.
Martin Luther King Jr. on April 3.
"I Am a Man," a gripping new play by Oyamo staged by the Working Theater, centers on T. O. Jones, the leader of the local, who called the strike and then lost control of it to forces far removed from the garbage trucks of Memphis.


Allied Research Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Perot Joins With House G.O.P. in Attacking Clinton
Ross Perot lent his voice to the Congressional rebellion against President Clinton's economic plan today, visiting with freshman House Republicans and embracing their cause as his own.
Opinion polls show that the public holds Congress in low regard, and Mr.
Perot has visited Capitol Hill several times since the Presidential election to express his own complaints.
But today he saved his sharpest barbs for the man who defeated him in November, delivering them at a news conference made all the more provocative by Mr.
Clinton's presence one marble staircase away.


Five for Campaign Reform?
There are moments when elected lawmakers must decide whether to break with their party's leadership or toe the party line on an issue of fundamental public importance.
Such a moment has now arrived for five Republican Senators: Dave Durenberger of Minnesota, James Jeffords of Vermont, John McCain of Arizona, William Cohen of Maine and John Chafee of Rhode Island.
The issue is campaign finance reform.
Partisan sparks are sure to fly when President Clinton's proposal for overhauling campaign financing hits the Senate floor early next week.
But the bill's fate is likely to be determined by a tense drama unfolding well beyond C-Span's camera range and involving the five Senators.


Walter A. Wood Is Dead at 85; World Explorer and Geographer
Dr.
Walter Abbott Wood, a geographer, explorer and past president of the American Geographical Society and the Explorers Club, died on Tuesday at Good Samaritan Hospital in West Palm Beach, Fla.
He was 85 and had homes in Palm Beach and Manhattan.
His family said that death came after a long illness.


Giants Sign Offensive Tackle
The Giants signed DARRELL HAMILTON, a 6-foot-5-inch, 298-pound free-agent offensive tackle, yesterday.
Hamilton was waived by the Falcons in training camp last season and did not play football.
Before that he spent three years with Denver.


London Sees Approval of Europe Pact Today
Bolstered by the about-face Danish vote in favor of the Treaty on European Union, the British Government expects the House of Commons to approve the treaty on Thursday and predicts ratification by early autumn.
If the Government's optimism is borne out, that would mean the demise of a foreign policy issue that has bedeviled the governing Conservatives for more than a year and sapped Prime Minister John Major's authority.


A Young Los Angeles Agency is Winning Praise on Both Coasts.
IT looks like a scene from the film "The Gods Must Be Crazy." Four aborigines lope across a cracked desert floor toward a parked Acura.
Dressed in loincloths, alligator-tooth jewelry and body paint, they exchange puzzled looks as they approach the gleaming car.
Once they figure out how to get in, they take off -- in reverse.
The spot, created by Stein Robaire Helm for the Southern California Acura Dealer Association, "was one of the best commercials I've ever seen," said Pat Burnham, former creative director of the Minneapolis agency Fallon McElligott.


A Chief of Staff Isn't What Clinton Lacks
To the Editor:
"Hold It While I Focus" (editorial, May 8) perpetuates the myth that an effective and efficient Presidency requires a chief of staff and more White House personnel.
Franklin D. Roosevelt had an appointments secretary, Pa Watson, but no chief of staff.
Yet he managed to bring off the New Deal and to win World War II.
Harry S. Truman had no chief of staff, but he gave us the Marshall Plan, the Truman Doctrine, the North Atlantic Treaty Organization, Point Four and the Berlin airlift, and opened the way to equal opportunity and social security.


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt  *
Consolidated Edison Company of New York is offering $200 million of noncallable debt securities in two parts.
The first part consists of $100 million of 5.30 percent debentures due in 1997 at 99.914 to yield 5.325 percent.
The second part is $100 million of 5.70 percent debentures due in 1998 at 99.923 to yield 5.718 percent.
The debentures, which are underwritten by Goldman, Sachs, are rated Aa-2 by Moody's Investors Service, AA- by Standard &amp; Poor's Corp. and A+ by Duff &amp; Phelps.


You Can Get Medical Care in This Country Too; I Asked for 'l'Addition'
To the Editor:
I can confirm John Gagnon's experience with the French health care system (Op-Ed, May 8).
On a business trip to Toulouse in the spring of 1990, I suffered a fall, resulting in a cut lip and scraped knee, but the pain in my shoulder suggested more serious injury.
In pain, I drove myself to the local hospital, the directions to which are well marked on French roads.
Nobody in the emergency room spoke English, and my restaurant French was inadequate.
I proffered my passport and pointed to my cut lip.
I was immediately ushered into an examining room, where a businesslike young female physician quickly appeared.


AFOOT WITH: John Guare; Chasing Serendipity in New York City
JOHN GUARE is a born, bred and committed New Yorker, a man who travels widely but is firmly convinced there is nowhere else to live.
When he is here, he is often afoot, walking his dogs in Greenwich Village, where he lives with his wife, Adele Chatfield-Taylor, or covering the city by himself.
On a clear day, he thinks nothing of strolling uptown to Lincoln Center.
To the playwright's delight, the movie version of his play "Six Degrees of Separation" has been shooting throughout Manhattan -- at the Cathedral of St.
John the Divine, Central Park, the Strand bookstore.
Mr.
Guare was especially pleased that a scene was filmed at one of his favorite habitats, the Metropolitan Museum of Art.


Muslim-Croatian Clashes
Bosnian Muslims and Croats fought gun battles near the central Bosnian town of Vitez today, only hours after their leaders agreed to a cease-fire and pledged to proceed with a United Nations peace plan.
The firefights today took place just outside the Vitez command center of British troops attached to the United Nations military force in Bosnia.
Accurate casualty figures were not available.


WHITE HOUSE OUSTS ITS TRAVEL STAFF
The White House abruptly dismissed its seven-person travel staff today and asked the Federal Bureau of Investigation to examine its books.
Administration officials, who said the low-level appointees had failed to account for thousands of dollars, questioned some of their contracts with air charter companies.
None of the staff members were appointees of the Clinton Administration, and all had worked in the White House for at least a decade.
Three who were dismissed said tonight that they had not been told of the F.B.I.'s involvement, and denied any wrongdoing.


Review/Ballet; On Reckless Passion And Flying Bodies: Meditation in Motion
Ballet bravura as a metaphor for passion is not your usual bag of dance tricks.
Les Grands Ballets Canadiens made the distinction, no holds barred, with the stunning performance that opened its season on Tuesday night with three United States premieres.
The accent was mainly on sweep, not steps, at City Center (131 West 55th Street, Manhattan) although Mark Morris's new "Paukenschlag" is something of an exception on this first of two mixed bills.
And certainly, the first is not to be missed.
This company from Montreal plunges daringly into the earthiness of "Na Floresta," a 1990 ballet by the Spanish choreographer Nacho Duato.
But it is James Kudelka's 1991 work to Prokofiev, "Desir," a bold meditation on how both emotions and bodies can take flight, that is the real heart-stopper.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article last Thursday about a Pennsylvania law restricting abortions misstated the Supreme Court's former test for judging the constitutionality of such laws.
Until last year's ruling in Planned Parenthood v.
Casey, states had to show a compelling reason for restricting abortion.


Classical Music in Review
'1924 Now'  Manhattan School of Music
It was a very good year.
Janacek's "Cunning Little Vixen," Strauss's "Intermezzo," Schoenberg's "Erwartung," Gershwin's "Rhapsody in Blue," Sibelius's Symphony No. 7 and Respighi's "Pines of Rome" all had their premieres in 1924.
So did a number of humbler creations that were performed in whole or in part on Wednesday evening by students of David Noon's class on music and life in 1924, including Varese's "Octandre," Prokofiev's Piano Sonata No. 5, Stravinsky's Sonata and Poulenc's "Poemes de Ronsard."


Challengers On Line for Prairie Bayou
For the first time since he won the Preakness Stakes four days earlier, Prairie Bayou stretched his million-dollar legs yesterday when he went jogging on the track at Belmont Park where he will return in two weeks to try to clinch his standing as the country's best 3-year-old colt.
But even while he was loosening up, the line of challengers was forming on the right.
Sea Hero, who ran first in the Kentucky Derby but fifth in the Preakness, rested in his Belmont barn before taking his first gallop this morning.
And Cherokee Run, a tight second in the Preakness, also arrived in New York and rested for the start of his formal workouts next week.
Rivals On the Horizon
Meanwhile, two possible new rivals surfaced, although neither seemed sanguine about running a mile and a half in the Belmont Stakes on June 5 against alumni of the first two Triple Crown classics.
They were Miner's Mark, who outran a small but formidable allowance field of four other colts at a mile and one-eighth yesterday afternoon, and Tactical Advantage, who chased him home but missed by four and one half lengths.


ECONOMIC PULSE: New Jersey; New Jersey Slump: Go-Go Suburbs Went
For two decades, New Jersey has been reshaping the American suburb into a powerful magnet for economic growth.
But with a four-year recession that is proving deeper for this state than for any other, its grand suburban experiment has hit a roadblock as wide as an 18-wheeler jackknifed across Interstate 80.
It was around Morristown, Parsippany, Secaucus, Edison, Princeton, Mount Laurel and other suburbs that developers and corporations, beginning in the 1970's, began transforming rural towns and sleepy bedroom communities into something much more diverse: places for people to pursue corporate careers, shop, dine out and raise their families far beyond the congestion and blight of the region's big cities. 'Models for the World'
In Central and Northern New Jersey, office parks replaced farmland.
Glittering shopping malls eclipsed suburban Main Streets.
Thousands of workers began commuting from suburb to suburb instead of into New York City, Philadelphia, Newark and Trenton.


Spring! And Venus Beckons


End the War in Bosnia - Peacefully; Send NATO Troops to Bosnia
An extraordinary combination of circumstances makes this a propitious moment for a new effort to end the cruel war in Bosnia.
It is not a time to step back, although the temptation to do so is strong.
After the defiant vote of Bosnian Serb leaders to reject the Vance-Owen peace plan, and under intense pressure from economic sanctions and President Clinton's credible threat of force, President Slobodan Milosevic of Serbia has suddenly stopped encouraging his allies in Bosnia.
Boris Yeltsin has made it clear that he supports international peace efforts and will not throw a life preserver to Serbs in either Bosnia or Serbia.
Finally, recent fighting around Mostar has reminded the world that Croatia as well as Serbia must be brought to heel if there is to be progress toward peace.


Currents: Feeding Baby
AUGUST and September may typically have the highest birth rates, but this month baby spoons seem to be spawning, along with other utensils and cups for toddlers and their style-minded parents.
In sterling silver, silver or gold plate, and pewter, they are created by designers of jewelry, home accessories and furniture and by metalsmiths.
And there is enough variety to please any grandparent, godparent or great-aunt (those most often relied on to buy the heirloom-to-be).
Izabel Lam, who does much of her own welding at her studio in Long Island City, Queens, produced unusual seahorse-shaped spoons in cast metal.
Spoons by Michael Lammers, a metalsmith, are also rattles; they are $100 at Julian &amp; Sara, 103 Mercer Street (at Spring Street).
Tiffany's still carries plain sterling silver cups at $170 but has jazzed up its line with Elsa Peretti's sleek, seal-like designs.
Bergdorf Goodman has traditional cups and spoons as well as heavily detailed vintage styles circa 1910 to 1930 -- for those who want an instant heirloom.


Behind in Race, Texas Senator Turns Terminator
It's a United States Senator on camera, all decked out in a black leather jacket and Terminator sunglasses, striking an Arnold Schwarzenegger pose and mocking his own reputation as a stodgy Elizabethan scholar.
"Was it Shakespeare who said, 'Hasta la vista, baby?' " asks the Senator, a Senator desperately trying to hold on to his job.


HOME IMPROVEMENT
SUMMER is vacation time, and homes are often left unoccupied for days or even weeks.
Although many people rely on electronic alarm systems, generally speaking, these are effective only if their noise frightens off an intruder.
Deterring or physically preventing unlawful entry can offer greater protection.
Here are some simple, and often overlooked, ways to accomplish both.
Over all, the most successful strategy for protecting a vacant home is to create an impression that it is occupied.
Eliminate any signs that will telegraph your absence.
Do not overlook the obvious: for example, allowing mail, newspapers and other deliveries to accumulate.
Advertise your plans to as few strangers as possible.
For example, you might want to notify the post office to hold your mail, but you might prefer to ask a trusted neighbor to collect other deliveries.
Arrange to have your lawn mowed regularly.
Leave a car parked in the driveway, or better yet, have a neighbor use the driveway frequently.
Install automatic timers to operate lights and television sets.
Use a heavy-duty timer for an air-conditioner, but to save on electric bills, set the controls so that only the fan operates.
Program the timers to turn lights and appliances on and off logically throughout the house, as if someone was actually using them.


BASEBALL: It's Lights Out for Torborg After One Last Blast; Advice for Torborg: Don't Look Back
Jeff Torborg's travails began early in his tenure with the Mets.
Here are a handful of his worst days on the job.
April 19, 1992
Torborg, less than a month into his tenure with the Mets, confesses to having underestimated the difficulty of managing in the National League.
"Our pitcher always seems to be coming up," Torborg said after a tactically suspect loss against the Expos 24 hours earlier.
June 26, 1992
In a painful version of his daily radio show, Torborg is grilled about the coverup for Bobby Bonilla's phone call from the dugout the day before.
The manager winds up apologizing to "all the New York media" for any lack of candor, real or perceived.
Aug. 4, 1992
The Mets, only four games back of the Pirates and lacking their top players, respond to the manager's call for a "critical win" in Pittsburgh by losing in 12 innings.
The Mets, who would wind up 4-14 on the season against the Pirates, go on to complete the decisive road trip 0-6 to fall hopelessly out of the race.
Sep. 1, 1992
Torborg gets involved in a profane and physical confrontation with outfielder Vince Coleman on the field after Coleman was ejected for arguing a strike call.
The scene dramatized what had been a season-long frustration for many Mets, namely that Torborg's failure to argue with umpires began to seem like a failure to stand up for his players.
April 11, 1993
Torborg chooses not to discipline or criticize Bobby Bonilla after the outfielder's run-in with a reporter in the clubhouse at Shea Stadium.
The Mets then go out and lose their third straight home game to the Astros.
April 25, 1993
The Mets squander a comeback from an 8-3 deficit and lose 9-8 to the Padres on an unearned run.
April 26, 1993
Torborg opts to hide the cause of Dwight Gooden's shoulder injury after a clubhouse mishap shortly before Gooden is scheduled to start.
It is later revealed that Vince Coleman inadvertently struck Gooden with a golf club while practicing his swing an hour before game time.
April 29, 1993
Bret Saberhagen, who won't win a game against a non-expansion club before Torborg is fired, is bombed for three home runs in a 10-5 defeat to the Giants.
The Mets commit five errors.
May 2, 1993
A second straight defeat in San Diego underscores another of the club's weaknesses: the bullpen is 0-10  May 8, 1993
Torborg, who said upon his hiring that all players would do all things his way, sees Bobby Bonilla fail to run full out from first base on an eighth-inning flyball by Howard Johnson, even though the Mets are trailing the Marlins by two runs.
Torborg does not challenge Bonilla himself and ultimately has to act as a peacemaker after Bonilla flys into a rage at third base coach Mike Cubbage, who criticizes Bonilla's lack of effort on the field.
Bonilla is neither fined nor reprimanded.
May 9, 1993
After enduring the ignominy of having to identify a May series against the Marlins as critical, the Mets lose their second straight to the expansion club, securing occupancy of last place in the N.L.
East.
May 14, 1993
The Mets get a season-high 14 hits but lose to the Expos, 8-7.
Frank Tanana gives up five runs on one hit in the first inning as errors and hit batsmen doom the Mets.
The one-run loss is the first of three that weekend against the Expos.
The Mets wind up 2-10 in one-run decisions under Torborg.
May 17, 1993
"Jeff Must Go" is heard at Shea as the Pirates beat up Dwight Gooden and the bullpen in a 9-4 loss to the Pirates.
May 18, 1993
This time the Mets get 17 hits, but the ultimate result is a fifth straight loss, a 10-8 embarrassment to the Pirates that leaves New York at 12-25, the second worst record in baseball.


Wilderness Campaign: Anyone Listening?
For years J. Patrick Gilligan has been telling anyone who would listen how New Jersey's tax system should be overhauled.
He said he won praise from some fellow Republicans but no action and that is why, at the age of 72, he is running for governor.
"People would listen and promise to bring my ideas before the state party leadership and the Legislature but they never did," he said.
"Going through channels hasn't worked, so I'm going right to the people and hope enough of them will agree with me and something will change."


'Yes' to Europe. But What Kind?
It was the idea of European union, rather than the specifics of the Maastricht treaty, that Danish voters finally said "yes" to on Tuesday.
The ambitious Maastricht blueprint for a unified European foreign and defense policy and a single European currency seems increasingly unlikely to be realized, at least by the 1999 deadline.
Americans have little stake in the details of Maastricht, but a great deal in closer European cooperation.
The events of the past year, from currency upheavals to Europe's disastrous fumbling of the Bosnia catastrophe, painfully underscore how far Europe still has to go.


Courting Badillo: A Last Hurrah as Comptroller?; The Hispanic Elder Statesman of New York City Politics Assesses His Political Fate
"When I'm running for office," Herman Badillo once acknowledged, "it's like running against three people because in the Puerto Rican community they call me bah-DEE-oh, in the Italian community they call me bah-DILL-oh, and in the Jewish community they say Herman."
Today, nearly three decades after he first sought elective office, fewer New Yorkers may know his name at all, much less how to pronounce it.
For a candidate who was often considered ahead of his time, the fundamental question Mr.
Badillo now faces is whether time has passed him by -- whether he remains an icon, among Puerto Ricans, in particular, or has become a political relic.


BASEBALL: It's Lights Out for Torborg After One Last Blast; Green Is Hired To Hoist Mets Out of Cellar
Jeff Torborg worked his final game as manager of the Mets last night, a victim of his club's nonstop losing.
He was officially dismissed after a rare and dramatic 6-4 extra-inning triumph over the Pirates.
The final score, though, couldn't change the ugly numbers for the season, a 13-25 record and last place.
Dallas Green, the former Yankees and Phillies manager whose current job had been as a scout in the Mets organization, will succeed Torborg.
Green was named by General Manager Al Harazin at a news conference at Shea Stadium after last night's game.
Green's contract will run through the 1995 season, and the tough-talking 59-year-old with the reputation for mixing patience and intimidation will be in the dugout for the next game, tomorrow night at Shea against the Braves.


Massachusetts Governor Has Let Cities and Towns Go Begging
To the Editor:
William Safire's column extolling the virtues of a Presidential run by Gov.
William F. Weld of Massachusetts ("What About Weld?", May 6) needs some correction before yet another political myth is created.
Mr.
Safire quotes Governor Weld's claim that he has "balanced three budgets without raising taxes or borrowing," thus proving that the conservative Governor Weld is able to do what Gov.
Michael S. Dukakis before him and President Clinton were unable to do.


No Headline
"It's a reminder that China is a great power already, which is something many people haven't quite grasped yet." -- PAUL KRUGMAN, an M.I.T. economist, on a new ranking of the world's economies.  [ A1:4. ]


Executive Changes
AMES DEPARTMENT STORES INC., Rocky Hill, Conn., appointed John W. Hermsen senior vice president of store operations.
BERNARD CHAUS INC., New York, a women's apparel company, named Nicole Eskenazi executive vice president of product development.


Classical Music in Review
The Dessoff Choirs  St. Peter's Church
For her final concert of the season with the Dessoff Choirs on Saturday evening, Amy Kaiser chose a program of Baroque sacred works that showed the extent to which serenity and sobriety can thrill the spirit.
It also gently made a musicological point in its juxtaposition of works for the Roman Catholic Church by Monteverdi and Giovanni Gabrieli, and a Lutheran Requiem by Schutz.


Sports of The Times; The Captain Goes Down; Ship Stays
COACHES aren't merely fired in New York, they're paraded about in public first, then executed.
Bill Fitch was removed as coach of the Nets last May but only after a tortuous public flogging and an open player rebellion that eroded his authority.


Ferguson Is Betting Bowe Isn't His Better
Jesse Ferguson put his money where his mouth is today.
The 36-year-old challenger for Riddick Bowe's heavyweight title, an overwhelming underdog, said he had sent an emissary to Las Vegas to bet more than $100,000 that he would win Saturday night's title fight at R.F.K.
Stadium.
"If I walk in the ring and know it's my money, it's more motivation for me to win," Ferguson explained.
"But there's another reason: They should stop making people 30-1 underdogs. Maybe this will help."


Vitamin E Greatly Reduces Risk Of Heart Disease, Studies Suggest
Two new studies of more than 120,000 men and women strongly suggest that supplements of vitamin E can significantly reduce the risk of disease and death from fat-clogged coronary arteries.
But the researchers and other experts cautioned against rushing out to buy the vitamin supplements before further clinical trials confirm that they are beneficial and safe.
The studies, by researchers at the Harvard School of Public Health and Brigham and Women's Hospital in Boston, showed that initially healthy people with the highest daily intakes of vitamin E developed coronary disease at a rate about 40 percent lower than comparable men and women whose intake of this vitamin was lowest.
The preventive effects of vitamin E occurred independently of any change in blood levels of cholesterol.


INSIDE
U.S. Trade Deficit Grows
The trade deficit ballooned in March to $10.21 billion, the widest gap in nearly four years, as imports from Japan and China surged.
Page D1.
An Abortion Rights Victory
A bitterly divided House Judiciary Committee approved a bill that would ban most state restrictions on access to abortions.
Page A14.
Russia Acts on Bosnia Issue
Russia is trying to fill the vacuum left when President Clinton yielded to European opposition and shelved a plan to bomb the Serbs.
Page A12.
Mets Change Managers
The last-place Mets dropped Jeff Torborg in his second season and named former Yankee Manager Dallas Green to take over.
Page B13


Torborg: Decent Man In an Indecent Spot
Jeff Torborg was told late last night that his services were no longer needed by the New York Mets.
That organization and most specifically the players are exceedingly lucky that Torborg left as he arrived: a gentleman who's never had it in his nature to lead with a fist on offense or slash and burn on defense.
Torborg was fired half an hour after the underachieving Mets came out of character to beat the Pirates, 6-4, in 10 innings, winning for only the 13th time in 38 games.
He could have taken a lot of people -- very deserving people -- down with him.
Torborg would not, could not do so.
It is not now nor has it ever been in his nature to extract retribution designed to do one thing: spill blood.


Network Venture Poses Risks for Baseball
What was once a comfortable financial equation for Major League Baseball may turn into risky business if a proposed joint advertising venture with ABC and NBC is approved by team owners, who may vote on the alliance on May 28 in Chicago.
For years, baseball got infusions of cash from the networks, which supported ever-higher player salaries.
It did not have to fret over how the networks fared in selling advertising.


Against Barkley? Put on the Pads
If ever a basketball player belonged on a football field, it is Charles Barkley.
Not only does he lower his shoulder like a pulling guard, but he is not the least bit frightened of grime.
Tuesday night, Barkley missed a dunk with a San Antonio Spur on his back, dropkicked his mouthpiece into the stands, had it passed back to him by several strangers, fumbled it again to the ground and plopped it straight back in his mouth.
Barkley obviously does not get by on esthetics, although, in one sense, Tuesday's game may have been the prettiest of his career.
The playoff series was tied 2-2, Barkley's hamstring and shoulder were throbbing, he had managed only two first-half shots, his Phoenix Suns teammates were frozen in their halfcourt offense and the Spurs' fourth-quarter lead was 7 points.


Market Place; A bit more choice for investors who want to test cruise waters.
INVESTORS looking to buy stock in a cruise company have had nearly as few options as did customers for the Model T, who Henry Ford said could have the car in any color, as long as it was black.
Until recently only one cruise line was listed on the New York Stock Exchange, Carnival CruiseLines, which went public in 1987.
But a few weeks ago, investors got another option when Royal Caribbean Cruises Ltd., incorporated in Liberia and based in Miami, raised $180 million by selling 10 million shares of common stock.


Corrections
A picture caption on Tuesday about Northern Ireland referred incorrectly to actions by Gerry Adams, the president of Sinn Fein, the Irish Republican Army's political wing.
He has met with a rival Roman Catholic political leader in Northern Ireland, not with the British Government.


RESULTS PLUS
SOCCER  Juventus Wins UEFA Cup
Juventus won the UEFA Cup for the second time in four seasons, beating Borussia Dortmund of Germany, 3-0, last night in the second leg of the final in Turin, Italy.
Juventus, which also won the UEFA Cup in 1977 and 1990, defeated Dortmund, 3-1, in Germany two weeks ago in the home-and-home, total-goals final.
Dino Baggio scored in the fourth and 43d minutes, and Andreas Moller scored in the 64th minute before a capacity crowd of 70,000 in the Stadium of the Alps.
It was the second part of a possible sweep of the European trophies by Italian teams.
Parma won the Cup Winners Cup last week and AC Milan plays Olympique Marseille of France next Wednesday in the final of the European Cup.
Italy swept the three competitions in 1990.
Borussia Dortmund was missing injured forwards Stephane Chapuisat and Flemming Povlsen, and lost Michael Rummenigge to a right knee injury following a rough tackle in the first half. (AP)


Is There a Comfy Place to Sit on the Front Lines of Design?; Indoor Plumbing With a Hint of Outdoors
About a year ago, a woman I know, a printer friend who has never traveled farther west than Pittsburgh and had never demonstrated an interest in anything outdoors or anything not chrome, became suddenly, peculiarly, engrossed by the wilderness.
Not that she ventured out.
It was what ventured in.
She found an end table with a bale of hay for a base.
Her new computer desk has legs made of twigs, about a thousand of them, from the Pacific Northwest.
And her bathtub is an actual trough, or an actual facsimile of one.


Knicks' Tickets On Sale Today
A limited number of tickets for the Eastern Conference finals and for the N.B.A. finals will go on sale at 8 A.M. today, at the Madison Square Garden box office only.
Tickets will be sold on a first-come, first-served basis.
Bracelets were to be distributed to customers starting at midnight to protect their places in line.
Bracelets will be distributed throughout the morning, but receiving a bracelet does not guarantee tickets.


19th-Century Calculator Sells for $11.8 Million
A German 19th-century brass calculator, a gilded and lacquered precursor of today's computers, was sold yesterday for $11.8 million at Christie's in London to a Swiss dealer in clocks and watches.
The price paid for the drum-shaped, 10-pound rechnungs Maschine, as it was originally called, was an auction record for any scientific instrument and the third-highest sum paid for any item at an art-auction house this year.


Divided House Panel Advances Bill To Ease State Abortion Restrictions
Abortion-rights supporters won an important victory today as a bitterly divided House Judiciary Committee approved legislation that would ban most state restrictions on abortion.
Committee liberals bit their tongues and voted for two amendments intended to improve the bill's chances on the House floor.
One would leave intact state laws requiring parental consent or notification before a minor could have an abortion.
The other would allow states to exempt private institutions, like Catholic hospitals, from performing abortions.


Dr. Alfred Ebel, 86, Professor of Medicine
Dr.
Alfred Ebel, professor emeritus at Albert Einstein College of Medicine and chief of clinical services for rehabilitative medicine at Montefiore Hospital, died on Monday at the Bronx Veterans Administration Hospital.
He was 86 and lived in Yonkers.
The cause was congestive heart failure, his family said.


METRO DIGEST
EMPIRE CHIEF IS LEAVING
Albert A. Cardone will step down as the head of Empire Blue Cross and Blue Shield, the financially troubled insurer of 8.5 million New Yorkers, a state government official said.
Mr.
Cardone's fate was determined at a meeting of Empire's board of directors, but the terms of his departure were not known.
Mr.
Cardone served as both chairman of the board and chief executive of the company, posts he has held since 1987.
A1.
RECESSION SETTLES IN SUBURBS
For two decades, New Jersey has been reshaping the American suburb into a powerful magnet for economic growth.
But with a four-year recession that is proving deeper for this state than for any other, its grand suburban experiment has hit a roadblock as wide as a semi-trailer jack knifed across Interstate 80.
A1.


Humana Bets All on Managed Care
A crane ripped the name Humana off the sleek front wall of a hospital on Biscayne Boulevard in northeast Miami last month, removing all hint that it had been part of the big health-care company that has been plagued by troubles in recent years.
The change at the newly named Aventura Hospital and Medical Center, like those taking place at all the company's 75 hospitals, is more than cosmetic: battered by sharp criticism from doctors, patients and insurers, by a stock price driven down as skeptical investors sold and by sweeping changes in health care, Humana is changing course sharply.


Stocks and Bonds Surge; Dow Hits 3,500; Blue Chips Rally To Finish Up 55.64
After weeks of being cowed by a troubling economic outlook, stock traders bid up the Dow Jones industrial average yesterday to a record high of more than 3,500 after a wild trading session that saw share prices first fall and then soar.
The rise came as interest rates declined and the rally in gold prices halted.


CHRONICLE
SAUL BELLOW will be moving classrooms, too.
The Nobel and Pulitzer Prize-winning novelist, who has taught at the University of Chicago since 1962, will move to Boston University in the fall, it was announced this week.
He will hold two titles there, university professor and professor of English, and will teach courses in literature and modern intellectual and cultural history.
He will be the third Nobel laureate on the faculty, joining Elie Wiesel and Derek Walcott.


Starks, Pippen Loom as The Keys
Bulls vs.
Knicks on the Madison Square Garden marquee reminds some of the old fight nights, or worse.
"It's shaping up like a heavyweight championship fight," said Michael Jordan, also known in Chicago as Michael Miracle.


High New Jersey Minimum Wage Doesn't Seem to Deter Fast-Food Hiring, Study Finds
Despite sharp opposition from business, New Jersey last year increased its minimum wage to $5.05 an hour, the second highest in the nation and a level well above those in nearby states.
The increase in April 1992, from $4.25 an hour, came amid a slump in the state's economy, and at a time when employers were already under financial pressure and often unable to pass added labor costs on to customers in the form of higher prices.


Shops Await Impact Of Two Acquisitions
Two acquisitions by giant marketers might have differing outcomes for the agencies involved.
The Quaker Oats Company of Chicago said yesterday that it was considering whether to keep the account of its newly acquired Chico-San rice cakes brand at Leo Burnett U.S.A. of Chicago, which has handled the account under Chico-San's previous owner, the H. J. Heinz Company.


Is There a Comfy Place to Sit on the Front Lines of Design?; A Bed Fit for a King: Neptune, Say
You walk into the furniture fair and, right away, you bond with a bed.
This is some bed, playful yet regal, a queen-size cutie of mahogany veneer with gilded legs.
Somehow, the headboard reminds you of those paper crowns the waitresses at White Castle used to wear atop their hairnets. (They still do, for all you know.)
"Mmmm, White Castle hamburgers," says an earnest-looking man in jeans and a sand-colored blazer.
"I remember when a burger cost a quarter." He is Scott Carroll, a 32-year-old furniture designer with a showroom in Dallas.
It turns out that his inspiration for the bed was not White Castle, but the sail of Columbus's ship the Santa Maria.
In her wake, Mr.
Carroll says, there will be a Nina bed, perhaps a Pinta.


Editor Recalls Overriding Lawyer on a Quotation in Dispute
The editor of Janet Malcolm's two articles about Jeffrey M. Masson took the stand in Federal court today and testified that he overrode a suggestion from a New Yorker lawyer that the words "sex" and "women" be removed from a quotation that is one of five in dispute in the libel lawsuit on trial here.
The editor, Gardner Botsford, who is also Ms.
Malcolm's husband of 17 years, said he had initially thought his wife had tape recordings of the worrisome quotation, in which Mr.
Masson said that he had hoped as curator of the Freud Archives to turn the Freud family home into a place of "sex, women, fun."


Phone Acquirer Finds Big Money in Small Niches
Convinced that there is big money in tiny telephone companies, a little-known concern named Citizens Utilities agreed yesterday to pay the GTE Corporation $1.1 billion in cash for more than 200 local phone networks scattered over 10 states.
The deal marks a huge expansion for Citizens, based in Stamford, Conn., which has been making hefty profits from small phone, power and water companies in small places like Bullhead City, Ariz., and Elk Grove, Calif.
Last year, the company made $115 million on sales of $600 million, and it has amassed roughly $750 million in cash while keeping its debt low.
A Man Who Picks His Spots
The agreement also marks the emergence of Citizens' chief executive, Leonard Tow, as an aggressive acquisitor and deal maker in an obscure but lucrative niche of the telephone industry.


Is There a Comfy Place to Sit on the Front Lines of Design?; Amid Many Dangers, a Haven
Never before have so many hurtful-looking pieces of furniture been gathered under one roof.
Some were painfully hip, like the living room suite upholstered in what looked like Elvis's last jump suit.
Some were painfully unfunny, like the retro-pop sofa in the form of two puffy red lips.
Some were just painful, like the very tiny chair whose triangular seat and circular back were joined by a vertical piece of spindly iron.
It looked like a Vicks cough drop wired to an aspirin.
In this garish environment, the "Black Velvet" woven cane chair ($1,300) by Meubles Chantiers Baudet stood out like Fred Astaire at Woodstock.
It was cool, suave, unpretentious and utterly itself.
Low-slung and squat, it was darned comfortable, too.
The reddish mahogany and cream stripes made the tubular arm look sort of like a coral snake.
The motif was picked up on the little back legs but not the front ones, a nice touch.


CLINTON PUTS DOWN DEMOCRATIC REVOLT ON ECONOMIC PLAN
Backed by his party's Congressional leadership, President Clinton appeared today to have quelled a revolt by conservative Democrats in the House who had demanded more spending cuts, fewer taxes and caps on benefit programs like Medicare.
But some of the rebellious Democrats insisted, at least for public consumption, that the White House still lacked the votes to pass the President's economic package.
And no sooner had the Democratic leadership declared the revolt among House Democrats over than a similar challenge began to take shape among a group of conservative Democrats and moderate Republicans in the Senate.
Boren Leads Dissent
In what threatened to be a serious setback for the President, the bipartisan group, led by David L. Boren, Democrat of Oklahoma, reached agreement tonight on a plan to swing the Clinton budget sharply away from higher taxes and toward more spending cuts.


No Spotlight For Tartabull
Danny Tartabull does not want the spotlight when he produces big hits, or so he said today.
Perhaps because he does not want it at Yankee Stadium, where he has hardly hit season.
Tartabull hit his sixth homer and drove in four runs as the Yankees defeated the Twins, 11-6, today.
But with his batting average at the Stadium stuck at .091 (5 for 55), he was savvy enough to divert attention after one solid series on the road.


Network Venture Poses Risks for Baseball
What was once a comfortable financial equation for Major League Baseball may turn into risky business if a proposed joint advertising venture with ABC and NBC is approved by team owners, who may vote on the alliance on May 28 in Chicago.
For years, baseball got infusions of cash from the networks, which supported ever-higher player salaries.
It did not have to fret over how the networks fared in selling advertising.


No More Crusades Likely As Lewis Looks Ahead
Carl Lewis, maybe the world's most dashing figure at age 31, says he is through looking out for everybody else.
"For 10 years and eight gold medals, I worked my tail off to help the sport," Lewis said yesterday from his home in Houston.
"I never received support. I'm at the stage now where I don't care about anybody except the Santa Monica Track Club."


CHRONICLE
For three years, KITTY KELLEY has declined repeated entreaties that she speak at Oxford Union, the prestigious Oxford University debating society.
Now she has relented, and tonight she will debate the proposition that "Men Are Still More Equal Than Women."
What broke her resolve?
"This year the invitation came via a feminine voice, that of Katherine Wade, the president of the Oxford Union," Ms.
Kelley, the outspoken and unauthorized biographer of Nancy Reagan, Frank Sinatra and Jacqueline Kennedy Onassis, said from London yesterday.
"I always said no, probably because I was intimidated."


Yanks Are In Seventh Heaven
It looked like Bob Wickman might finally lose today.
A 4-0 lead had evaporated and the pitcher with the charmed existence departed in the fourth inning trailing the Twins by two runs.
How could the Yankees ever rescue him from this debacle?
By exploding for a batch of runs, a routine that has become commonplace whenever Wickman starts.
The Yankees pummeled the worst pitching staff in the American League, received a magnificent relief effort from Rich Monteleone and swept a three-game series from the sluggish Twins for the first time in five years with an 11-6 triumph at the Metrodome.
Regrouped and Rebounded
Where have you gone Don Mattingly?
And Bernie Williams?
Since those starters incurred rib-cage injuries last week, the Yankees have won four of six games and remained entrenched in second place.
They could have sulked after the injuries and they could have taken their foot off the gas today when the Twins grabbed a 6-4 lead.
Instead, they regrouped, rebounded and continued raging on the road where they have a league-best 13-8 record.


Firm With Florio Ties Thrives While Doing Little
The investment house owned by Gov.
Jim Florio's chief aide and another Florio political associate earned more than one million dollars in three years even though the firm performed little underwriting work, and in some cases none at all, for the money, according to Wall Street executives, lawyers and government officials who did business with it.
The firm, Armacon Securities, was federally licensed to buy new bond issues and to resell them to the public, but it lacked almost all of the normal essentials of an underwriter.


Classical Music in Review
Sine Nomine Singers  St. Ignatius Episcopal Church 552 West End Avenue Manhattan
Last year the Sine Nomine Singers gave what was billed as their final concert.
The report was premature; the group resurfaced on Sunday night, presenting a varied program in advance of an Italian tour.
The first half was given over to compositions in Italian modes by Palestrina, Monteverdi, Gesualdo and Schutz, among others; the remainder took a rapid tour of England, Spain, Flanders, Germany, Russia and France, covering everyone from Lassus to Tchaikovsky.


Dow Soars to a Record
Stock prices jumped in wild trading yesterday, sending the Dow Jones industrial average up 55.64 points to a record closing high of 3,500.03.
The stock market's surge came as interest rates declined.
Treasury bond prices rose after the Federal Reserve gave no signal that it would tighten interest rates to stem inflation.
Articles, Business Day, page D1.


Saatchi &amp; Saatchi To Issue New Shares
The Saatchi &amp; Saatchi Company said yesterday that it would seek to raise $:73 million, or roughly $113 million, through a rights offering to shareholders.
Despite a sweeping overhaul of Saatchi's finances, the London-based company has so far been unable to make much headway in reducing its debt, which last year averaged $:195 million, or about $300 million.
The debt "has constrained the company's ability to fund long-term development and reduced its financial flexibility," Saatchi said in a letter to shareholders.


Classical Music in Review
La Gran Scena Opera  Town Hall
Successful satire, the saying goes, sincerely loves its targets.
This, beyond all the gags and double-entendres, best explains why La Gran Scena Opera Company works.
The eight-man (yes, man) ensemble returned over the weekend bringing their cross-dressing glitter and feminized voices to operatic scenes from "Madama Butterfly," "Semiramide," "Manon," "Der Rosenkavalier" and "La Fanciulla del West." The ranges were authentic, but, more important, scrupulous attention was paid to phrase and ornament.


Torborg Leaves In State Of Acute Media Shock
The night's organizational dirty work had been done.
Jeff Torborg, who had conceded that the city's intense news media focus had been the single greatest shock and obstacle he had faced as manager of the Mets, stood behind his office desk and faced the microphones and cameras once more.
There was humor and relief and a tiny hint of defiance to the end.
Of course, the future for Torborg was not exactly desolate or impoverished.
He has more than a million dollars coming, and his guaranteed contract with the Mets is not for personal services.
He is not obligated to do anything but cash checks through 1995.


You Can Get Medical Care in This Country Too; Common Surgery
To the Editor:
Professor Gagnon (Op-Ed, May 8) survived a potentially fatal illness in France.
He developed an acute surgical abdomen.
Surgery showed the problem's source: a ruptured appendix, a common surgical ailment, which can be treated in any community hospital in the United States.
It is not clear why he had to be transferred.
Was a surgeon unavailable at the first hospital?
Was a more complex problem suspected, such as a ruptured abdominal aortic aneurysm?
Even this can be managed in most of our hospitals.
A "team" is not required for a ruptured appendix, usually managed by a surgeon and one assistant (another physician, a nurse or a hospital corpsman).


Webster Hubbell and the Clubs
Webster Hubbell, confidant of the Clinton family and nominee for Associate Attorney General, publicly dropped his country club membership yesterday and was embraced by that other club, the United States Senate.
The Judiciary Committee showered him with praise and thanks for enabling it to approve his Justice Department appointment.
Committee members then congratulated themselves as heartily as if they had struck a mortal blow, rather than a marginal cut, against the bigotry of exclusive clubs.
Yet they barely scratched the surface of the club question.


RJR Retiree Takes Charge At Liggett
Three years removed from the tobacco business and the golden parachute that carried him away from R.J.
Reynolds, Edward A. Horrigan Jr. has landed back in the industry.
The 63-year-old private investor was named yesterday as chairman and chief executive of the Liggett Group, a minor player in an industry dominated by the Philip Morris Companies and R. J. Reynolds.


Review/Music; Satie Again SatieAgainSatieagainsatieagains
Out of contempt for tradition, out of loyalty to the absurd, Erik Satie filled his scores with unperformable commands.
"Arm yourself with clairvoyance," he would write; "open your head"; "be visible for a moment." He outdid himself in the short piano piece entitled "Vexations," writing at the top of the page: "In order to play this motif 840 times, one would have to prepare oneself in advance, and in the utmost silence, through serious immobilities."
It was left to John Cage to take Satie at his word and organize a 19-hour performance of "Vexations" in which the piece was actually heard 840 times in a row.
The event, in September 1963, required a rotating squad of pianists, drew attention from the "Guinness Book of World Records" and brought out whole teams of critics.


A Guard Who Didn't Guard
Safety is elusive enough in New York City schools.
It certainly doesn't help when those assigned to provide security in the schools not only fail to do so, but become instruments of danger.
That's what happened in the case of Larry Krakower, a former reading teacher who was beaten up when a security guard apparently led his assailant right to him.


Moscow Stepping In; As Clinton Yields on Bosnia, Russians Are Moving to Reclaim a World Role
Taking its most visible international role since the collapse of the Soviet Union, Russia is trying to fill the policy vacuum left by President Clinton's decision to yield to European opposition and shelve his plan to bomb the Serbs and arm the Bosnian Muslims.
The Russian Foreign Minister, Andrei V. Kozyrev, after a tour of Europe and the Balkans to try to organize support for a new Russian initiative, will meet Secretary of State Warren Christopher on Thursday in Washington.
Mr.
Kozyrev wants to begin carrying out the Vance-Owen peace plan despite formal Bosnian Serb opposition, an approach that has brought skepticism from Washington.


Books of The Times; Definitions 1 and 2 of the Term 'Hard Boiled'
Paper Doll  By Robert B. Parker  223 pages.
G.
P.
Putnam's Sons. $19.95.
Shella By Andrew Vachss  225 pages.
Alfred A. Knopf. $20.
Typically, it takes Robert B. Parker exactly two sentences to get the tension crackling in "Paper Doll," the latest of his many Spenser thrillers: "Loudon Tripp, wearing a seersucker suit and a Harvard tie, sat in my office on a very nice day in September and told me he'd looked into my background and might hire me.


2 Are Killed as Bridge Collapses Onto Interstate


Hurdles for Tax Plan; Sailing May Turn Smooth in House, But Rough Seas Lie Ahead in Senate
President Clinton was able to win support for his tax proposals from Democratic members of the House of Representatives at their meeting in the Capitol this morning because he allayed their worst political fears.
But the flame of opposition he managed to extinguish in the House was a precursor to the serious problems his program faces in the Senate.
Unlike the situation in the House, where Mr.
Clinton was on firm footing from the start, the rules, style and committee structure in the Senate work to his disadvantage.


End the War in Bosnia - Peacefully; Send NATO Troops to Bosnia
An extraordinary combination of circumstances makes this a propitious moment for a new effort to end the cruel war in Bosnia.
It is not a time to step back, although the temptation to do so is strong.
After the defiant vote of Bosnian Serb leaders to reject the Vance-Owen peace plan, and under intense pressure from economic sanctions and President Clinton's credible threat of force, President Slobodan Milosevic of Serbia has suddenly stopped encouraging his allies in Bosnia.
Boris Yeltsin has made it clear that he supports international peace efforts and will not throw a life preserver to Serbs in either Bosnia or Serbia.
Finally, recent fighting around Mostar has reminded the world that Croatia as well as Serbia must be brought to heel if there is to be progress toward peace.


Iraqi Tells F.B.I. He Led Attempt To Kill Bush, U.S. Officials Say
Federal Bureau of Investigation agents have been told by an Iraqi being held in Kuwait that he led an attempt to assassinate former President George Bush last month on behalf of the Iraqi Government, American officials said today.
The officials said the man had admitted to working with the Iraqi intelligence service, and said other members of the 10-member team had admitted from a Kuwaiti jail to having received Iraqi Government assistance.
Absolute Proof Not Established
Some of the suspects denied knowing that Mr.
Bush was the target of the plot, the officials said.
But they said the leader and some others had identified Mr.
Bush as the intended victim.


Is There a Comfy Place to Sit on the Front Lines of Design?; Going Limp Over the Lamps
I am awash in a sea of exquisite furniture -- virtual works of art -- and I'm blinded by the light.
It is the light, encased in elaborate bodies of glass, aluminum, chrome and wood, that draws me hypnotically.
Since childhood, I've had a fascination with lamps and light fixtures.
As an adult, I have learned that without proper lighting, even the best of furniture remains literally in the dark.
My personal favorites are two sets of table lamps designed for Flos Inc. by Philippe Starck and Afra and Tobia Scarpa.
Mr.
Starck's delicate 40-watt table lamps in mint green, lavender, greenish gold and royal blue cast a warm, soothing glow.


Starks, Pippen Loom as The Keys
Bulls vs.
Knicks on the Madison Square Garden marquee reminds some of the old fight nights, or worse.
"It's shaping up like a heavyweight championship fight," said Michael Jordan, also known in Chicago as Michael Miracle.


Joint Chiefs Warn Congress Against More Military Cuts
The Joint Chiefs of Staff told Congress today that the readiness of the American military to go to war could be jeopardized by continued reductions in spending.
Without directly criticizing President Clinton's plans to trim military spending, the service chiefs' warning opened a touchy political issue for the Administration, which has insisted it is cutting the armed forces responsibly and has struggled against the perception that it is anti-military.


Review/Jazz; A Saxophonist Whose Motto Is Precision
The tenor saxophonist Joe Lovano's career has been on an upswing recently.
He has been releasing albums and playing the club circuit, and the critical consensus about him is that he is becoming a major figure on the instrument.
On Tuesday night he opened at the Village Vanguard (178 Seventh Avenue South, at 11th Street in Greenwich Village), where he continues through Sunday.
Backed by several members of the group he uses in Europe -- Henri Texier on bass and Aldo Romano on drums, along with Kenny Werner on piano -- Mr.
Lovano showed exactly why his reputation was blossoming.
He is an extraordinarily resourceful musician whose solos jump registers and change textures like darting fish.
He remembers what he plays, and he'll answer a line with another that mirrors or paraphrases what came before.
There's a voluminousness to his playing, made articulate by spaces and phrasing and rhythms, that gives the impression of ceaseless creativity.
And above all, he's exciting.


New Japan-Trade Policy May Split Power Among Agencies
Top Clinton Administration officials are in the final stages of drafting a new American trade policy toward Japan that would call for five Cabinet agencies to begin immediate negotiations to open the Japanese market, American officials and Washington trade experts said today.
A series of secret meetings have been held in the last six days at the White House to draft the new policy, which would split the negotiating authority among the Treasury, State, Defense and Commerce Departments and the Office of the United States Trade Representative.


COMPANY NEWS
AUTOTOTE CORP., Newark, Del., agreed to buy the on-line lottery business of General Instrument Corp., Chicago, for undisclosed terms.
Autotote shares rose $5.25 yesterday, to $45.75; General Instrument rose $1.50, to $38.50.
GENERAL ELECTRIC CORP., Fairfield, Conn., said Japan Airlines has ordered G.E. turbofan engines valued at a total of $75 million.


A Rape in Prospect Park
A 20-year old woman jogging in Prospect Park in Brooklyn on Tuesday night was assaulted by a man and raped, the police said yesterday.
The man approached the woman as she ran on East Drive about 8:30 P.M., grabbed her, covered her mouth with his hand and dragged her into a wooded area near the zoo, the police said.
Lieut.
William McNee, commanding officer of the Brooklyn Special Victims Squad, said investigators were searching for witnesses.


CHRONICLE
When King William III and Queen Mary II granted a charter to the College of William and Mary in Williamsburg, Va., in 1693, it called for the appointment of a chancellor to represent the interests of the college before the crown.
No matter that the college is no longer under British rule, the position survives, albeit as a totally ceremonial one.
MARGARET THATCHER, the former Prime Minister, who is now a member of the House of Lords, has been elected to serve as the 21st chancellor.
She will succeed WARREN E. BURGER, the retired Chief Justice of the United States, whose seven-year term as chancellor ends on June 30. (George Washington was the first American to hold the position.)


Trading In Shell Slackens
The trading surge in the Royal Dutch/ Shell Group of Companies abated today after more than 86 million shares were exchanged in four days of trading on the New York Stock Exchange.
Analysts said many investors had acquired shares of the oil giant, based in London and the Netherlands, on Thursday and Friday to qualify for the final dividend payment of its 1992 fiscal year.
Many shares were then sold by the same investors on Monday and Tuesday.


Philippines Presses Case
The President of the Philippines, Fidel V. Ramos, said today that his Government would pursue its cases against the Westinghouse Electric Corporation.
The company was cleared this month in Federal District Court in Newark of charges of having bribed President Ferdinand E. Marcos in 1976 to win a contract to build a nuclear power plant.


Bosnian Serbs' Leaders Meet to Ratify Vote Rejecting Peace Plan
Bosnia's Serbian nationalist leaders convened their self-proclaimed parliament in a ski hotel here today to ratify the results of a weekend referendum that overwhelmingly rejected the international peace plan for Bosnia and Herzegovina.
The 80 delegates who attended the session met in a mood of growing confidence that the United States and other Western governments will eventually accept the results of the referendum.


Events: Architecture, Art and Design
Art, Architecture, Graphics  Cooper Union, Foundation Building, Third Avenue at Seventh Street; (212) 353-4200.
The 134th annual exhibition of student art and architecture starts Tuesday and continues through June 15.
The show will include more than 1,000 works, including drawings, models, prints, photographs, videos, painting and sculpture.
Open Monday through Friday, noon to 7 P.M.; Saturday, noon to 5 P.M.
No charge.


Is There a Place to Sit on the Front Lines of Design?
RRIIPP. . . .
The sound of sawing wood echoed through the aisles at the Jacob K. Javits Convention Center in Manhattan the other day.
"Not a reassuring noise to hear at a furniture fair," said Dan Mack, a New York designer, as he trimmed the top of one of his ecologically sensible cabinets.
"I think this one grew while it was here," said Mr.
Mack, whose reputation as a rustic furniture star keeps growing as well.
He was at the International Contemporary Furniture Fair, which for four days made Manhattan a mecca for chair, table and lamp lovers.


132 on Missing Colombian Plane
A commercial flight carrying 125 passengers and seven crew members disappeared from radar screens today in Colombia, and is believed to have crashed.
The plane, a Boeing 727 identified as SAM Airlines Flight 501, had left Panama City at 2:18 P.M. and was bound for Medellin and Bogota.


Florida Move On Insurance
The Insurance Commissioner of Florida, Tom Gallagher, yesterday ordered a 90-day moratorium on cancellations and nonrenewals of insurance policies, after two days of hearings on the plans of the Allstate Insurance Company to drop coverage of 300,000 homeowners in the state.
A department spokeswoman, Jill Chamberlin, acknowledged, however, that it was unclear whether Mr.
Gallagher had the power to stop companies from withdrawing coverage in the state.
Numerous insurers have said they planned to reduce their business in the state as a result of the $16.5 billion in losses last year from Hurricane Andrew.


Assault Issue Draws Hearing in Glen Ridge Case
A New Jersey appeals court today ordered a court hearing into assertions that one of the former Glen Ridge football players convicted of sexually assaulting a mildly retarded schoolmate assaulted a woman at Boston College in 1990.
At issue is whether the man, Christopher Archer, should remain free on bail while he appeals his March conviction.


PARENT &amp; CHILD
A FEW years ago, Dr.
Naomi Baron discovered that her son's kindergarten class had been stricken by an epidemic.
The problem was not medical, but verbal.
One child had heard an obscene phrase and freely shared it with his classmates.
They, in turn, took great joy in repeating the words to one another and to their teachers and parents, measuring the reactions and testing new limits to their behavior.


Is There a Comfy Place to Sit on the Front Lines of Design?; Indoor Plumbing With a Hint of Outdoors
About a year ago, a woman I know, a printer friend who has never traveled farther west than Pittsburgh and had never demonstrated an interest in anything outdoors or anything not chrome, became suddenly, peculiarly, engrossed by the wilderness.
Not that she ventured out.
It was what ventured in.
She found an end table with a bale of hay for a base.
Her new computer desk has legs made of twigs, about a thousand of them, from the Pacific Northwest.
And her bathtub is an actual trough, or an actual facsimile of one.


Track and Field; A Cousin Follows in Mutola's Footsteps
Tina Paulino has never competed against her favorite cousin, Maria Mutola.
Until 15 months ago, she never raced against anything more determined than a basketball.
This is all very new to the 19-year-old high school senior from Maputo, Mozambique, who will run 800 meters tomorrow against a world-class field that includes Mutola, Joetta Clark, Meredith Rainey, and Yelena Storchevaya of Ukraine at the Reebok New York Games in Columbia University's Wien Stadium.


Royals Owner Says He Has Bone Cancer
Exactly one month after announcing a plan that would keep the baseball Royals in Kansas City after his death, owner EWING KAUFFMAN revealed he has bone cancer.
Kauffman, 76, told The Kansas City Star on Wednesday that doctors are still trying to determine the seriousness of his condition.
He is undergoing therapy for pain, he said.


Cambodia Is Hit by Fierce Fighting in Northwest as U.N. Gets Ready for Elections
As the United Nations made final preparations for an election meant to bring peace to Cambodia, heavy fighting was reported today between Government soldiers and rebels of the Khmer Rouge in areas of the Cambodian countryside where voting is now expected to be all but impossible.
The United Nations insisted that the fighting in northwestern provinces of Cambodia would not delay the election, which is scheduled to begin Sunday, although it could force officials to shut down scores of polling places.


Cheers for 'Motor Voter' Bill


CHRONICLE
QUEEN ELIZABETH THE QUEEN MOTHER was hospitalized yesterday in Scotland, where she was vacationing.
Buckingham Palace officials said she was being treated for a throat obstruction caused by a fish bone.
The officials said the Queen Mother, who is 92, would remain in the Aberdeen Royal Infirmary for observation.


Failing to Build Dump, New York Faces a Shutout
For more than eight years, New York State has been promising to build a dump for its low-level radioactive waste, 84 tractor-trailers full a year.
And for more than eight years, it has completely failed, relying instead on the good graces of South Carolina to take the waste.
Now South Carolina, the only place in the country besides Washington State with a low-level radioactive waste site, is finally running out of patience.
When New York State announced last week that it was essentially putting its search on hold, officials in South Carolina, which has been increasingly reluctant to accept New York waste, said they were beginning to think that New York had never seriously intended to build a dump, and they threatened to cancel its contract.


Schmiechen Memorial
A memorial service for Richard Schmiechen, the film producer who won an Academy Award for his 1984 documentary "The Times of Harvey Milk," is to be held at 3 P.M.
Sunday at Judson Memorial Church, 55 Washington Square South, Greenwich Village.
Mr.
Schmiechen died in Los Angeles on April 7 at the age of 45.


First Step in Journey; After Chief Leaves, a Maze of Issues Still Confronting Empire Blue Cross
With the end of Albert A. Cardone's tenure as its leader, Empire Blue Cross and Blue Shield closed a chapter that increasingly was laced with charges of extravagance and poor management.
But in the face of mounting losses, investigations in Washington and Albany and accusations of serious organizational lapses, several monitors of the insurance giant said yesterday that his exit was only a step in a long journey to overhaul the company's image and the way it does business.


INSIDE
Venezuelan Headed for Trial
President Carlos Andres Perez promised to surrender his powers in order to defend himself against corruption charges.
Page A6.
Commerce Nominee Quits
John A. Rollwagen dealt President Clinton a blow, withdrawing his nomination to become Deputy Secretary of Commerce.
Page D1.
Fight Ahead on Nominee
Senate Republicans declared war on Clinton's choice as civil rights chief, describing her opinions as "racism in reverse." Law, page B9.
Boy Found in Compactor
The pajama-clad body of a 3- to 5-year-old boy was found at the bottom of a garbage chute in a Brooklyn housing project.
Page B1.
Life Imitates Sitcom
At a saloon in Larchmont, N.Y., patrons like to think they embody the spirit of "Cheers," the venerable NBC series that concluded last night.
Articles are on pages B1 and B20.


COMPANY NEWS
AMERICAN TELEPHONE AND TELEGRAPH CO.  will provide CBS Inc. with long-distance and data communications services valued at $15 million over three years.
NEWS CORP.  completed an agreement with a group of 27 banks in Australia, Europe and the United States to provide it with as much as $3 billion in loans through June 1999.
The new loans will be used to repay all outstanding bank debt and reduce borrowing costs.


Trying to Sell Art These Days Is Hard Enough; Not Like Potatoes
To the Editor:
I read with dismay your May 7 article on bargaining at the art galleries.
It certainly is a discouraging picture of the art world.
Like other artists, I am feeling the effects of the recession.
Perhaps you should find out why art materials and rents don't come down in price to keep pace with artists' prices.
On the contrary, art materials, rents and all other related expenses go up in price, instead of giving discounts.


CHANGING HEALTH CARE: Political Memo; Clinton Facing Reality Of Health-Care Reform
Eight months ago, on the campaign trail in Rahway, N.J., candidate Bill Clinton delivered a rousing manifesto on health-care reform, promising affordable, comprehensive coverage for all.
There was no downside to the candidate's vision that day, no burdensome costs, no new taxes.
Now, as President Clinton prepares to redeem that promise, he faces a series of tradeoffs, risks and political conundrums.
The interest groups are massing; lawmakers on Capitol Hill are simultaneously committed to revising the health-care system and terrified of it, and the giddy days when health reform was just an applause line are gone.
From here on out, the politics of health care are for real.


Man Wins $1 Million Sex Harassment Suit
In what legal experts say is the largest judgment of its kind, a jury has awarded more than $1 million to a male former manager at a spa manufacturing company who sued his former female supervisor, claiming she had sexually harassed him daily on the job for six years.
Experts in sexual harassment and lawyers in the case said that while other men have successfully claimed sexual harassment by women superiors, they knew of no lawsuits involving such a large damage award.
In part that is because California law imposes no limits on damages in such cases, whereas most other states and the Federal Government either ban or place strict caps on punitive damages when employees claim sexual harassment.


Blamed in Boston: Boggs Girds for Fenway Return
The last time Wade Boggs was in Fenway Park, he cried.
He stood in a runway last October after his final game, stared out at the field that had been his home for 11 years, and wept.
Boggs knew he was leaving the Red Sox.
He knew he had left a Boston uniform rumpled at his feet for the last time.
The moments he spent alone, perhaps only seconds, felt like years, with memories of the hits and misses of his storied career flickering in his mind like a black-and-white newsreel.


Flying Frenchmen Push Islanders to the Precipice
Referee Kerry Fraser isn't the only reason the Islanders lost to Montreal tonight to find themselves one game from elimination in the Stanley Cup playoffs.
He's probably not the main reason, either, although Coach Al Arbour wouldn't mind if people think so.
It's true that Fraser could have called a penalty on Montreal for too many men on the ice moments before Guy Carbonneau of the Canadiens scored the winning goal, on a slap shot, at 12 minutes 34 seconds of overtime.


Bomb Suspects Used Notorious Path to U.S.
When Mohammad Ahmad Ajaj disembarked from a Pakistan International Airlines flight in New York last September, he had enough passports for several people, as well as manuals and videotapes that taught everything from suicide car bombings to placement of land mines.
Mr.
Ajaj, later indicted as a suspect in the World Trade Center bombing, never got past the immigration agents at Kennedy International Airport; he was caught for his fraudulent Swedish passport.
But a fellow passenger who would also become a Trade Center suspect, Ramzi Ahmed Yousef, did.
Although he had no visa, he said the magic mantra -- that he wanted political asylum -- and was let into the country to await hearings.


Plea Is Issued on High-Definition TV
Amid crucial negotiations over a standard for high-definition television, the nation's biggest computer companies warned the Federal Communications Commission today that they would develop a separate standard if the Government endorsed the technology favored by broadcasters.
The warning came in a letter from the Computer Systems Policy Project, a group consisting of chief executives from 13 companies including Apple Computer, Digital Equipment and I.B.M.
An Alliance Is Sought
The plea comes as developers of four rival high-definition TV systems face down-to-the-wire negotiations in Washington aimed at forming "a grand alliance" that would combine different features of each system.


Trying to Sell Art These Days Is Hard Enough
To the Editor:
Your humorously illustrated "Bargaining at the Art Galleries: A Personal Odyssey" (May 7) should be retitled "Bargaining at the Art Galleries: A Personal Insult." Readers who chuckled at the mockery your writer made of artists, their art and the gallery dealers who represent them deserve to hear another side.
The subject of "discounts" from contemporary galleries was thorny to artists and dealers long before the greedy 80's or the needy 90's.
Serious collectors (individuals who are driven to purchase, who spend more than they think they can afford and who are not primarily interested in art as decoration) have always been treated differently from the myriad other visitors (students, teachers, artists, lookers, journalists pretending to be buyers).
There is good reason.


Dusk's Magic: As the Day Ends, the Fun Begins; Dining
As dusk falls over the city, so too do menu prices in many prominent restaurants.
The economic slowdown of recent years has compelled dining establishments of all kinds to attract new customers with pre-theater menus, post-theater specials, Sunday discounts and early evening packages.
All of this has led to a dining trove for those who are flexible with time.
At 6 P.M. dining rooms are quieter and generally more efficient.
Servers are underemployed and have not yet become frazzled, so you get attentive service.
Moreover, most early specials include dishes from the regular menu but at two-thirds the price or less.


Cargill Builds Plant to Make Plastic From Farm Products
Cargill Inc. will use some of its expertise as a huge processor of agricultural products to enter the recycling business.
It said on Wednesday that it would build an $8 million pilot plant in Savage, Minn., to make natural plastic, which can decompose or be recycled, from corn and potatoes.
The plastic is made from lactic acid, a byproduct of fermented sugars found in milk, sugar beets, corn and other grains.
It can be recycled, put in a compost heap or incinerated.
Pat Gruber, a Cargill organic chemist and leader of the team that developed the plastic, said it could help manufacturers who faced different waste disposal requirements.
"That's a versatility you can't get in other products," he said.


Sports Fans, Behold the Devil's Head
Ultimately, Jeff Torborg was done in by Pat Riley's hair.
Not by an outfielder's insecurity or a general manager's ineptitude or the media's ravenous appetite, although he took the rap for all that, too.
Torborg was fired because the competition in New Jock City has become an interdisciplinary battle royal and Torborg was compared with a man who is perceived to have given the Knicks collective character, to have squeezed a handful of loose change into a golden coin.
So why couldn't Torborg have done the same thing, ask the querulous voices of think-tank radio?
Why couldn't Torborg, with basically better material than Riley -- at least on paper -- teach, motivate, boot, abuse, do whatever was necessary to make those overripe adolescents earn their amazing salaries?
Those are good questions in New Jock City, now that cross-sports comparisons are mandatory for fandom.
With the exception of Patrick Ewing, there are no certified superstars on the Knicks, and even Ewing is not the standard at his position.
So if the Knicks beat Chicago, the key will be Coach Riley.
Meanwhile, the Mets have Doc Gooden, Bobby Bonilla, Eddie Murray, Howard Johnson, Tony Fernandez, and if they can't even beat Chicago, the key must be Manager Torborg.


Taste of Money
The Snapple Beverage Corporation has thrived by producing and selling new flavors and combinations of iced teas and fruit drinks.
The Valley Stream, L.I., company has had a powerfully rising stock price to match its rising sales and earnings.
Yesterday its share price established a new high of $57, closing for the day up $2.50, to $53.25 a share.


For Declassification, Get a New Broom
To the Editor:
"Democracy's Obsolete Secrets" (editorial, May 9), your call for changes in the classification-declassification system for so-called national security secrets, is on the mark when it warns that the President may have asked the foxes to clean out the chicken coop -- although firm White House leadership could prevent that.
More of a barrier is the interpretation of privacy and executive privilege.
Executive privilege should not protect 30-year-old records of discussion by a President and his advisers.


Accounts
*
Syntex Corp., Palo Alto, Calif., to Kallir, Philips, Ross, New York, to handle advertising for Cardene, an antihypertensive, previously handled by Lewis &amp; Gace, Fort Lee, N.J.
Billings were estimated at $3 million.


For Children
'Aesop' 'Fables for New York'
Midtown West School  328 West 48th Street  Manhattan  (212) 247-0208  Recommended ages: 4 to 10  Tomorrow
In the New York Youth Theater's modern version of the Aesop fable "The Lion and the Mouse," a mother and father lion live in New Jersey and have a son named Anthony.
The lion family adopts a mouse, who becomes Anthony's sister and is named Lydia.
But that doesn't mean Anthony is proud: he's embarrassed by Lydia's puniness and doesn't want to be seen with her.
But as in all Aesop fables, Anthony learns a large lesson from his small-mindedness: when Lydia's smallness turns into an attribute, Anthony understands that size is unimportant in the big scheme of things.


Accounts Assigned By Large Advertisers
A flurry of account assignments and a narrowing of a review have been announced by several big advertisers.
Cadbury Beverages in Stamford, Conn., said yesterday that it had selected Foote, Cone &amp; Belding in Chicago to handle advertising for Oasis Real Fruit Lemonades, a line of lemonade-based noncarbonated beverages to be introduced nationally in the next month.
Billings have not been set.
The agency, which handles Cadbury brands like Canada Dry Ginger Ale, was awarded the assignment after a competition with Ammirati &amp; Puris in New York, which handles Cadbury brands like Schweppes Ginger Ale.


China's Cruelty and Women's Rights
China is a very big country with a very big problem: it has 7 percent of the earth's arable land -- and more than 20 percent of all its people.
Today they number 1.17 billion.
In several decades they will probably number 1.9 billion.
So what's a government to do when its vision of a rich new future is occluded by the prospect of millions more hungry inhabitants?
The answer, for Beijing, is very clear.
You just take family-planning decisions out of the hands of the people.
"We maintain that the most important human right in a country or nation," Peng Peiyun, minister of the State Family Planning Commission, said recently, "is the people's right to survival." To that end -- survival -- China is now exercising vicious control over its birth rate.


Chances for Recovery? Ask the Casino Doctor
DOMINICK CARLINO'S envious peers are convinced that he spends his days -- and nights -- sidling up to showgirls and hanging out with celebrities.
Scantily clad women do drop in at the strangest hours, often with the strangest problems.
"I need help," more than one of them has said to the platinum-crowned woman guarding his sanctum.


Art in Review
'Expressive Heads'
Jason McCoy Gallery  41 East 57th Street  Manhattan  Through June 12
Faces and heads of all descriptions, dating from the Renaissance on, line the walls of this ambitious exhibition of drawings and works on paper, selected by and belonging to the dealer Kate Ganz.
With pictures attributed to Piero di Cosimo, Andrea del Sarto, Giovanni Battista Tiepolo and other early masters, as well as contemporary images by such artists as Robert Rauschenberg, Roy Lichtenstein and Chuck Close, the show testifies to artists' continuing fascination with depicting the face.


Triton Reports Gusher In Colombian Oil Test
The Triton Energy Corporation announced today results from its newest test well in Colombia that appeared to confirm the presence of one of the largest new oilfields in the Western Hemisphere in recent decades.
Although analysts want to see more data from additional test wells, they said the early results indicate that Triton's Colombia operations hold a potential three billion to five billion barrels in combined reserves.
The British Petroleum Company and Total S.A. of France each own a 38 percent interest in the Colombian contracts; Triton has a 24 percent stake.


Deal Is Struck for Restaurant Enterprises
Two buyout groups and a fast-food chain said today that they had struck a deal with a majority of bondholders of Restaurant Enterprises Group in an effort to take over the money-losing company.
The group, whose 587 restaurants operate under such names as Carrow's, Reuben's and El Torito, has been a takeover candidate since August when the company disclosed a cash shortage.
The group has subsequently missed two bond payments of $16.7 million and a $13 million promissory note payment.
It has also had cumulative losses over the last three years of $267 million.


Berkshire Benefit
The Berkshire Theater Festival's spring benefit, "Sante Fe East," will be at Blantyre, an inn in Lenox, Mass., on May 30 from 6 to 9 P.M.
This year the festival runs from June 25 to Sept. 4 in Stockbridge, Mass.
Benefit tickets: $50 for patrons; $125 for benefactors, who are invited to arrive at 5 P.M.
Information: (413) 298-5536.


Jobless in Japan: A Special Kind of Anguish
Since the factory where she worked for 30 years closed and left her without a permanent job, Kimiko Kanda has not left her home much and is too embarrassed to talk to friends who still work at her old company.
"Somehow, although I have done nothing wrong, I feel like a criminal," Mrs.
Kanda said.
"I have never heard of people being fired in my neighborhood or among my friends."


Haircut Grounded Clinton While the Price Took Off
It may have been the most expensive haircut in history.
Two of Los Angeles International Airport's four runways were shut down for nearly an hour on Tuesday, some incoming flights were delayed and Air Force One sat on the tarmac with engines running -- all so that President Clinton's Beverly Hills hairstylist, Chistophe, could come aboard and give Mr.
Clinton a high-price trim before he took off for Washington.


Shawn Has a Say in New Yorker Trial
One of the commanding figures of 20th century letters spoke from the grave today when the jurors in a libel lawsuit between Jeffrey M. Masson and Janet Malcolm were read a deposition from William Shawn, the legendary editor of The New Yorker magazine.
Mr.
Shawn, who died last December at the age of 85, was heard as a witness for Mr.
Masson, the iconoclastic Freudian scholar who is suing the magazine and the writer, Ms.
Malcolm, in Federal court here.
Mr.
Masson is asserting that an unflattering profile of him that ran in The New Yorker nearly a decade ago included fabricated quotations that were libelous.


Ex-Officers Of Drexel Penalized
One of the last chapters of the Government's six-year investigation of Drexel Burnham Lambert Inc. came to a close yesterday as the firm's former chief executive and another senior officer agreed to be barred for three years from supervising securities firms.
The sanctions came in a settlement between the Securities and Exchange Commission and Frederick H. Joseph, the former chief executive, and Edwin Kantor, the supervisor of the firm's trading departments.
The settlement did not impose any fines.


Late Flurry Adds to 23.25 Dow Gain
Aided by extraordinarily heavy computerized trading, the stock market yesterday followed up Wednesday's surprising rally with a very late surge.
The Dow Jones industrial average jumped to its second straight record high, closing up 23.25 points, to 3,523.28.


METRO DIGEST
METRO DIGEST  EMPIRE BOARD FORCED CARDONE TO QUIT
The board of Empire Blue Cross and Blue Shield forced the resignation of the company's top executive, Albert A. Cardone, after an internal inquiry revealed deep management and morale problems, board members and others said.
A1.
With the end of Albert A. Cardone's tenure as its leader, Empire Blue Cross and Blue Shield closed a chapter.
B4.


Chronicle
Good art was good business in New York City last year -- so good, in fact, that City Hall held a news conference on the subject yesterday.
BARBARA J. FIFE, the Deputy Mayor for Planning and Development, said yesterday that four major art shows last year at three of the city's largest museums were also big profit makers for the city.
They generated $617 million in tourist spending and provided the city and state with $61.7 million in taxes.


Trying to Sell Art These Days Is Hard Enough; More Insight, Please
To the Editor:
I write as director of an art gallery that deals only in European old master paintings and drawings, thus beyond the range of the potshots your reporter took at the contemporary art market (May 7).
Nevertheless I read the article with horror, embarrassment and, in the end, indignation.
The article had the single idea that "art" is not as expensive as it used to be.
To this familiar truth the author and his spiteful humor (if one can call it that) nailed a number of galleries, humiliating in the process the employees who are doing what they can to keep the art market alive in difficult times.


Corrections
An article yesterday about mentions of the New York City Police Commissioner, Raymond W. Kelly, as a possible replacement for William S. Sessions as director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation misstated the findings of a report on Mr.
Sessions prepared by the Office of Professional Responsiblility.
It found that Mr.
Sessions traveled aboard F.B.I. aircraft at Government expense, often taking his wife for visits to friends and relatives; that he used a loophole to seek a tax break on his official limousine and that he should have reimbursed the F.B.I. for a fence at his home.
Mr.
Sessions was not accused of using his office for financial gain.


Review/Theater; The Angel Of No Hope Visits New York
If an angel who descends to New York in Jose Rivera's "Marisol" is to be believed, there's only one hope for the city: "Immediate evacuation followed by fire on a massive scale." This is not a play the Mayor would want to use for a re-election platform.
In Mr.
Rivera's urban landscape of 1993, citizens who are not bludgeoned to death on the IRT are likely to be sickened by contaminated milk or drenched in acid rain.
Coffee and apples are extinct, and even the moon is hiding in shame.
Mr.
Rivera, born in Puerto Rico and of late a resident of Los Angeles, is an adventurous young writer who has been steadily moving toward the phantasmagoria of "Marisol" in his decadelong career.
After first gaining attention at Ensemble Studio Theater with "The House of Ramon Iglesia," a smart coming-of-age work later seen on public television on "American Playhouse," he began to smash through convention by tentatively injecting magical realism into his plays' immigrant households.
In "Marisol," which opened last night at the Joseph Papp Public Theater, Mr.
Rivera breaks through to the other side.
Heaven and hell are the only settings that count in this gruesome fantasy, though hell happens to go by such names as Brooklyn and the Bronx.


Books of The Times; A Creep in a Post-Modern Gothic
Dr. Haggard's Disease
By Patrick McGrath
191 pages. Poseidon Press. $20.
The narrators of Patrick McGrath's novels have all been creepy, sinister men, the sorts of untrustworthy, morbid characters usually encountered late at night in horror movies on television.
The narrator of "The Grotesque" (1989) is an amateur paleontologist suffering from paranoid delusions; after a mysterious accident, he has become a human vegetable, "cocooned in bone" and pupating "behind a blank and lizardlike stare." The narrator of "Spider" (1990) is a former insane asylum inmate who portrays himself as a long-suffering victim but who in fact plays a pivotal role in a horrific story of murder and manipulation.


Review/Opera; Glass's 'Orphee,' Built on Cocteau's
Any composer who takes on the oft-set story of Orpheus faces an unapproachable ideal.
Orpheus's music had, poets tell us, the power to make trees and mountains bow their heads; it could draw iron tears from the Lord of the Underworld.
In Philip Glass's new opera, "Orphee," which is receiving its world premiere performances here at the American Repertory Theater until July 10 (and which will also be seen at the Brooklyn Academy of Music in the fall), Orpheus is turned into a hip French poet.
This is fortunate: the music did not have to face the challenge of matching its mythic origins.
The opera is based on Jean Cocteau's 1949 film "Orphee," so it did not have to demonstrate great gifts of poesy either.
Cocteau set the film in contemporary France, and he avoided any demonstration of his poet's achievements.
The opera libretto, adapted by Mr.
Glass and edited by Robert Brustein, the company's artistic director, is just a shortened version of the movie screenplay.
The opera reproduces nearly all of Cocteau's surreal alterations to the Greek myth: the motorcyclists who are the agents of Death; the mirrors through which the world of the dead can be entered; the rubber gloves that give passage through these zones; the radio that sputters odd fragments of Morse code and Appolinaire's poetry; the icy Princess who captures the souls of the dead.


Senate Panel Dismisses a Petition to Unseat Packwood


Peacemaking's Limit
International outrage, economic sanctions and military threats may have come down to this: In the end, the world seems prepared only to wait and hope that the Bosnian Serbs will stop fighting.
This is also where the leadership of Serbia proper now finds itself.
President Slobodan Milosevic, his economy reeling and his country diplomatically isolated, personally pressed his brother Serbs in Bosnia to agree to the so-called Vance-Owen peace plan and was humiliated by their rejection.
Now, he insists that he still supports the plan, and hopes the Bosnian Serbs will finally see the light and accept it.


Review/Film; Movies Shot By 6 Germans In the War
The documentary "Mein Krieg" ("My Private War") offers stunningly un-self-conscious World War II memories from six German veterans, each of whom took a home movie camera with him into the fray.
As directed with chilling simplicity by Harriet Eder and Thomas Kufus, it presents both a compilation of eerie wartime scenes and a catalogue of the photographers' present-day attitudes toward their experience.
"I wouldn't be talking about these things if my conscience weren't clear as crystal," one of them calmly declares.
The film makers have their own ideas about their interviewees' complicity, as demonstrated by the emphasis they place on that particular remark.
But their approach is restrained as they allow each of these six veterans to reminisce about everything from the condition of their movie cameras (which are well maintained and have yielded high-quality home movies) to the indelible sights they have seen.
"Here we're going into Warsaw, and this is a tour of the buildings destroyed in '39," one man says, casually describing his images of wholesale destruction.


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt  *
Allnet Communication Services Inc., Bingham, Mich., a unit of ALC Communications Corp., is offering $85 million of 9 percent senior subordinated debentures due in 2003 at 99.187 to yield 9.125 percent through Paine Webber Inc.
Noncallable for five years, the debentures are rated B-2 by Moody's Investors Service Inc. and B- by Standard &amp; Poor's Corp. *
Buckeye Cellulose Corp., Memphis, is offering $70 million of senior notes due in 2001 at 100 to yield 10.25 percent through Merrill Lynch &amp; Co.
Noncallable for five years, the notes are rated B-2 by Moody's and B by S.&amp; P.


No One Believed Penelope Gilliatt Plagiarized
To the Editor:
I read your May 11 obituary of Penelope Gilliatt with sadness.
Not only because of her premature death, but because you touched on a 15-year-old incident involving a profile of the novelist Graham Greene and charges of inaccuracy and plagiarism, which no one who knew Penelope Gilliatt or her work ever believed.
You quote from The New York Times Book Review of 1971: "She is intelligent, economical, poignant, highly contemporary. She is also innovative." That held true for all her work.
Penelope Gilliatt was altogether unlikely to plagiarize anybody's work and was certainly not known for inaccuracy in other profiles.


A Morality Play
The Measured Breaths Theater Company, under the direction of Robert Press, is to present the American stage premiere of Emilio Cavalieri's "Representation of Body and Soul" and Weill's "He Who Says Yes" beginning tonight at 8 at Musical Theater Works, 440 Lafayette Street, East Village.
Believed to be the first published opera in western music, "Representation of Body and Soul" is a setting of a morality play in which the body and soul struggle with temptations.
"He Who Says Yes" is based on a 14th-century Japanese Noh play about a boy who goes on a religious quest to save his mother.
The performances, which are sung in English, will be presented through Monday, and again from May 28 through 31.
Tickets are $15.
Information: (212) 334-8402.


RESULTS PLUS
COLLEGE BASEBALL  St.
John's Wins Big East Tournament  Mike Maerten pitched a three-hit shutout, allowing only one runner past first base, as St.
John's won the Big East tournament yesterday with a 9-0 victory over UConn in Bristol, Conn.
The Redmen (25-18) earned an automatic bid to the National Collegiate Athletic Association tournament, while Connecticut finished the season at 27-17.
Earlier in the day, the Huskies had a five-run seventh inning en route to their 10-9 victory over second-seeded Seton Hall (30-18). (AP) SOCCER  Arsenal Wins F.A.
Cup on Overtime Goal  Defender Andy Linighan scored a goal seconds before the final whistle in overtime, giving Arsenal the 2-1 victory over Sheffield Wednesday yesterday to capture the replay of the Football Association Cup final at Wembley Stadium outside London.
Arsenal won its fifth F.A.
Cup title and became the first team to capture both major English cups in one season, having defeated Sheffield Wednesday in the League Cup final last month.
During the injury time added to the overtime, Linighan was less than five yards from the net when he headed a corner kick from Paul Merson through the hands of goalkeeper Chris Woods.
Ian Wright put Arsenal ahead in the 33d minute with his 30th goal of the season, the most in English soccer.
In the 58th minute, Chris Waddle tied the score.
The replay was forced by a 1-1 draw last Saturday. (AP) TENNIS  Sampras and Chang Lead U.S.
Over Russia  The United States defeated Russia, 3-0, yesterday without losing a set in the World Team Cup in Dusseldorf, Germany.
Top-ranked Pete Sampras beat Aleksandr Volkov, 7-5, 6-1, and Michael Chang breezed past Andrei Chesnokov, 6-1, 6-4.
In the doubles, Richey Reneberg and Patrick McEnroe beat Volkov and Andrei Olhovskiy, 6-3, 6-4.
Sergi Bruguera won both in singles and doubles to lead defending champion Spain past Switzerland, 2-1, and set up a semifinal tomorrow against the United States. (AP) Raymond Wins N.C.A.A.
Title: Top-seeded Lisa Raymond of Florida dominated North Carolina's Cinda Gurney, 6-3, 6-1, in Gainesville, Fla., to win her second consecutive National Collegiate Athletic Association singles title.
Raymond become only the second N.C.A.A. player to win consecutive singles titles.
Stanford's Patty Fendick did it in 1986-87.
Raymond, a sophomore from Wayne, Pa., finished the year 34-0 and will turn pro next month. (AP)


BMW Adds Value and Safety as Selling Points in its New Campaign Aimed at a Broader Audience.
FOR 18 years, BMW has proclaimed itself "the ultimate driving machine." Now, BMW of North America, in the first work from its new agency, also wants drivers to think of its luxury sports car as the ultimate value machine and the ultimate safety machine.
"What we want to do is appeal broader," Victor Doolan, the executive vice president of sales and marketing for BMW, said yesterday during an interview at the BMW Gallery -- that is luxury auto marketer talk for a showroom -- at 320 Park Avenue in Manhattan.


Kelly Doesn't Want F.B.I. Job, He Says
The New York City Police Commissioner, Raymond W. Kelly, said yesterday that he did not want to be considered as a candidate for F.B.I. director and intended to stay in his present post "because there is no greater law-enforcement job in America today."
An article in The New York Times yesterday quoted Clinton Administration officials as saying Mr.
Kelly was one of several possible candidates under consideration to replace the current director, William S. Sessions.





Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
6.50
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
3.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.00
2.94
3.81
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
2.95
2.96
3.67
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.06
3.06
3.78
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
5.70
5.68
7.07
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
6.99
6.97
7.86
TELEPHONE BONDS
7.92
7.90
8.81
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.02
6.03
6.61
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


A Key to Flu Virus Infection Is Identified
Researchers say they have identified a spring-like mechanism on the surface of flu viruses that plays an important role in the viruses' infection of human cells.
Scientists at the Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research, in Cambridge, Mass., said early evidence suggested that a similar spring mechanism may also be important in the infection of other viruses, including H.I.V., which causes AIDS.


No Headline
"This is a group that gathered because of a sincere feeling that the President's package was lopsided on taxes and didn't have enough spending cuts. I have to commend anyone who's courageous enough to propose a solution." -- SENATOR JOHN H. CHAFEE, Republican of Rhode Island, of the four Senators proposing an alternative tax plan.  [ A16:1. ]


Cubans in Exile Want Embargo to Go On
To the Editor:
Rolando Prats Paez's opinion about Cuba in "Hard Line, Hard Luck for Cuba" (Op-Ed, May 10) is factually and morally questionable.
Most Cubans living in exile -- and not only those he calls "ultraconservative" -- are in favor of the embargo (there have been surveys about this) because most of us know that the suffering of our relatives, friends and fellow Cubans there don't have anything to do with the embargo, but with an ineffectual system that tries to impose an obsolete ideology over the economy as a sort of straitjacket.


Johnson Named to Olympic-Selection Panel
MAGIC JOHNSON and seven officials from N.B.A. front offices were named to the panel that will pick the United States men's basketball teams for the next world championships and Olympics.
Only two of the committee's 10 members -- Davidson Athletic Director TERRY HOLLAND and Duke assistant coach TOMMY AMAKER -- were from college programs.
USA Basketball, the sport's governing body in the United States, said N.B.A. players were expected to make up the bulk of the teams, as they did for the 1992 Olympics.


Venezuelan Leader Quits to Face Trial
President Carlos Andres Perez said today that he would surrender his powers in order to defend himself against corruption charges in an impeachment trial.
The president of the Senate, Octavio Lepage, is expected to become Acting President on Friday.
Within 30 days, Congress is to elect a President to serve until Feb. 2, the end of Mr.
Perez's five-year term.


Key Clinton Technology Nominee Withdraws
John A. Rollwagen, the computer expert President Clinton had chosen as an architect of his technology policy, withdrew his nomination as Deputy Secretary of Commerce today amid a persistent investigation into insider stock trading.
The withdrawal of Mr. Rollwagen marked a major setback for Mr. Clinton.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-9  BRITISH HOUSE BACKS UNITY  The House of Commons passed the bill to ratify the Treaty on European Union, moving Britain closer to becoming the 12th and final country to support it.
The bill now goes to the House of Lords.
A1  U.S AND RUSSIA UNITE ON BOSNIA  The United States and Russia agreed to forge a strategy with other European nations that accepts, at least for the moment, the territorial gains made by the Serbs in Bosnia.
A1


Citicorp's New Cost-Cutter Has Less Room to Wield Ax
Citicorp's hiring of Christopher J. Steffen, a cost-cutting virtuoso who abruptly quit Eastman Kodak three weeks ago, brought applause but no ovation from Wall Street yesterday.
Mr.
Steffen will bring greater discipline and efficiency to the nation's largest banking company, analysts said.
But as one of six management committee members, they added, his power will be too limited to attempt the sort of vast changes he had planned at Kodak.


Dinkins Campaign Headquarters Discloses Computer Tampering
Computer tampering at the campaign headquarters of Mayor David N. Dinkins has resulted in the deletion of sensitive financial and fund-raising files, campaign officials said yesterday, adding that they did not know if a break-in occurred.
They said that once the tampering was discovered, the information on those files was restored.
Officials of the campaign, whose headquarters are on two floors in an office tower at 330 West 42d Street, said they discovered the tampering early Tuesday morning.
They said 15 files of information in their computer system had been affected.


Blue Cross Investigation Pointed To Deep Problems, Officials Say
The board of Empire Blue Cross and Blue Shield forced the resignation of the company's top executive, Albert A. Cardone, after an internal inquiry revealed deep management and morale problems inside the nation's largest nonprofit health insurance company, board members and others said yesterday.
Over the last several weeks, board members, long characterized as rubber stamps for Mr.
Cardone, began interviewing his subordinates and heard complaints of Mr.
Cardone's confrontational and autocratic style, said board members and government officials who spoke on the condition of anonymity.


Sounds Around Town
Earl King and Robert Ward
Earl King and Robert Ward, Tramps, 51 West 21st Street, Chelsea, (212) 727-7788.
Earl King is New Orleans's best active songwriter, and a flamboyant old-school rhythm-and-blues performer.
He'll play guitar behind his back, between his legs and, at 59, do a fine duck walk.
Robert Ward released a fine blues album a few years ago; they're both celebrating the release of new albums.
Shows tonight and tomorrow night are at 8:30 and 11:30; tickets are $12.
Lou Donaldson's Be-Bop
Lou Donaldson, Fat Tuesday's, 190 Third Avenue, at 17th Street, Gramercy Park, (212) 533-7900.
Mr.
Donaldson is one of the finest be-bop saxophonists alive: his records never do him justice.
If that weren't enough, he's also a funny singer and storyteller and an acidic judge of character, and he has the wisdom to have hired Herman Foster, a great eccentric of the jazz piano.
Shows today through Sunday are at 8 and 10 P.M. and midnight (no third set on Sunday).
The cover is $20 and the minimum is $10.


Oakley, a Playoff Laureate With Elbows
The word "play" does not accurately define what Charles Oakley does for the Knicks.
There is nothing playful about the way he devours rebounds.
There is nothing playful about the way he defends.
Ask anyone who has ever collided with Oakley's chiseled body, or felt the force of his forearm, or felt the wrath of his temper.
Play time is over the instant Oakley steps on the court.
And when Oakley thinks of facing the Chicago Bulls in the Eastern Conference championship series, play is the last thing on his mind.


Winston Burdett Is Dead at 79; Covered World and War for CBS
Winston Burdett, a radio and television correspondent for CBS News who covered major events in World War II, the Middle East and Washington, died on Wednesday in the Villa Flaminia Clinic in Rome.
He was 79 and had lived in Rome since 1956.
His death followed a long illness, said Tom Goodman, vice president for communications at CBS News in New York.


E-II Holdings Rejects Bid From Icahn
A $1.18 billion all-cash offer by Carl C. Icahn to acquire the bankrupt E-II Holdings Inc. was rejected yesterday by the company and its creditors.
In separate letters, lawyers representing the company and the creditors detailed their objections to Mr.
Icahn's offer, which was presented to E-II's board of directors on May 14.


Corrections
A map yesterday with a front-page article about the New Jersey economy showed an incorrect location for Dover Township, one place in New Jersey where jobs grew most quickly in the 1980's.
It is in Ocean County, and includes Toms River; the town of Dover is in Morris County.


It's Teflon Harazin, For the Time Being
In announcing the dismissal of Jeff Torborg as the Mets' manager, Al Harazin said no one person should be singled out for blame for the team's dreadful start.
"I certainly accept my share," said the general manager, the chief architect of this failure of a team.
But while Torborg will not go to Shea Stadium today to take his seat in the Mets' dugout, Harazin will be sitting in his office in the executive suite.
He still has a job.


132 Dead in Colombian Jet Crash
The wreckage of a Colombian jetliner that was reported missing Wednesday night was discovered near a mountain top in northwest Colombia today.
None of the 132 people on board are believed to have survived.
The plane, a Boeing 727 belonging to SAM Airlines, is thought to have crashed into a mountain and caught fire.
Fragments of the wreckage were scattered in a radius of about two-and-a-half miles.
The flight was carrying 84 Colombians and 48 foreigners, including 7 Americans, airline officials said.


Art in Review
Fred Tomaselli
Jack Tilton Gallery  47 Greene Street  SoHo  Through June 12
Fred Tomaselli might be called the Philip Taaffe of pharmaceuticals.
Like Mr.
Taaffe, Mr.
Tomaselli's paintings float a decorative, often ornately patterned beauty before the eye.
But instead of borrowing motifs from other works of art or craft, as Mr.
Taaffe does, Mr.
Tomaselli builds his images from over-the-counter pills and the leaves of plants from which drugs both medicinal and recreational are derived.


Earnings Plunge for Sony and Matsushita
Battered by the rising yen and slack demand, Japan's two consumer electronics leaders, the Sony Corporation and the Matsushita Electric Industrial Company, today reported steep drops in earnings for the fiscal year that ended March 31.
Like other members of Japan's once mighty consumer electronics industry, Sony and Matsushita have been buffeted by economic problems in Japan and Europe and a lack of new hit products.
Now, as the Japanese economy shows early glimmers of recovery, the companies are being rocked by the sharp rise of the yen, which makes their products more expensive abroad and makes revenues from foreign operations worth less when converted into yen.


Art in Review
Willem de Kooning
C &amp; M Arts  45 East 78th Street  Manhattan  Through next Friday
Anyone who cares about painting must see these works by Willem de Kooning from the 1970's.
Big, luscious, brilliantly colored and executed with a kind of breathtaking freedom, they not only underscore Mr. de Kooning's stature as one of the greatest artists of the second half of the 20th century but they also make clear that the 70's were years of tremendous productivity for him, which may well turn out to seem as fruitful in the context of his career as the landmark decades of the 40's and 50's.
He was painting at full steam then, with a consistency and denseness of expression that demands that a viewer give steady, serious attention to these works, full as they are of rich, complex crisscrossing patterns of strokes that overlap and merge and burst into passages of effulgent color.


RUSSIANS CALL SUB A NUCLEAR DANGER
Russian scientists have issued their most dire warning yet on the threat posed by the nuclear submarine Komsomolets, which sank in the North Atlantic off Norway four years ago.
They warned that in the next few years plutonium from its nuclear warheads could leak, spread more than 60 miles and possibly poison major fishing grounds.
Western scientists discounted the new estimate yesterday, saying the Russians were fanning public apprehension in an attempt to raise money for a proposed cleanup of the cold-war relic, which lies some 300 miles off the Norwegian coast in waters more than a mile deep.


The Movies That Inspired Martin Scorsese
MARTIN SCORSESE was a teen-ager when he first saw Irving Lerner's B-movie melodrama "Murder by Contract," one of many obscure Hollywood films that left a searing impression on him.
"It's an example of an American B movie that is 100 times better than the film it played with on a double bill," the director recalled in a recent telephone interview.


For Riley, Winning Ugly Is Beautiful to Behold
The Knicks have ample time to prepare for Sunday's Game 1 of the Eastern Conference championship series.
However, they are not taking any chances.
Coach Pat Riley put the Knicks through a three-hour practice yesterday, one of their longest of the playoffs.
After a day off Wednesday, the players welcomed the work.
Since last May, when the Chicago Bulls eliminated the Knicks in an emotional and exhausting conference semifinal series that lasted a full seven games, New York has wanted a rematch.
On Sunday at Madison Square Garden, the rematch begins.


The Night Skyline Has a New, and Historic, Feature


Small Paragraph in Tax Measure Would Mean Bigger Bills for Some
A provision of the tax bill, inserted without debate as the House Ways and Means Committee drafted it last week, would draw many taxpayers into the highest tax brackets next year.
It would do this by delaying the usual annual adjustment of the tax tables to compensate for inflation.


Drug Labeling Abroad Is Criticized
More than two-thirds of the labels for American-made drugs sold in developing countries are seriously deficient and potentially dangerous, a Congressional agency said today.
After a seven-year study, the Congressional Office of Technology Assessment said in a report that among 241 American-made drugs in four developing countries, 68 percent had labels with medically important omissions or additions.


26,000 Cubans Partly Blinded; Cause Is Unclear
A disease that impairs vision and affects the nerves has struck almost 26,000 Cubans, predominantly adult men, health officials in Havana say.
The Government has invited foreign experts to investigate.
A neurologist from Columbia University's medical school who has examined patients in Cuba said the epidemic was apparently caused by a nutritional deficiency, probably a lack of vitamin B1, thiamine.


Power-Tool Duties Set
The Commerce Department today assessed import duties ranging from 46.75 percent to 54.43 percent on circular saws, belt sanders and other professional electric tools from Japan.
In acting, the Commerce Department confirmed its decision last winter that the tools were being sold at unfairly low prices in the United States.
The duties will only be collected if the International Trade Commission also rules that the tool imports from Japan, which totaled $166.5 million last year, are hurting American producers of electric tools.


Corrections
A picture caption in The Home Section yesterday, with a profile of John Guare, misidentified the woman with Mr.
Guare on the set of "Six Degrees of Separation." She was the actress Stockard Channing.


CHRONICLE
The Lincoln Center Theater gave itself a fund-raising party last night at the Vivian Beaumont Theater, where some of Broadway's stars, playwrights and producers rubbed elbows, sang songs and entertained those ready to help raise more than $250,000.
Called "An Evening with WENDY WASSERSTEIN and Friends," the fund-raiser celebrated her contributions to the theater in general and especially her Broadway hit "The Sisters Rosensweig" at the Ethel Barrymore Theater.


Hevesi Throws Hat in Ring For Comptroller's Office
State Assemblyman Alan G. Hevesi formally kicked off his campaign for New York City comptroller yesterday with a thinly veiled attack on the incumbent, Elizabeth Holtzman.
While Mr.
Hevesi, a Queens Democrat, labored to define the race as a two-way matchup, Herman Badillo, the former Congressman from the Bronx, continued to loom as a possible candidate, with lines of communication to the mayoral campaigns of both Mayor David N. Dinkins and his Republican rival, Rudolph W. Giuliani.
By the end of the day, Mr.
Badillo still had not decided whether to enter the race or even whether he would seek the Republican line, his associates said.


The Value of Colon Cancer Tests
Science finally confirmed last week that laboratory screening tests can help reduce the death toll from colon and rectal cancers.
The National Cancer Institute and the American Cancer Society have been recommending that Americans age 50 and over get an annual test for hidden blood in stool samples.
But there was precious little evidence that it saved many lives.
Five trials, enrolling more than 300,000 patients, failed to demonstrate a reduction in mortality.
But last week, in the most definitive study yet, researchers reported that annual testing for hidden blood in the stool could help doctors cut the mortality rate for colorectal cancers by a hefty 33 percent.
Applied widely, the test could thus save 20,000 lives from among the 60,000 deaths from colorectal cancer in the U.S. each year.
The tests enable doctors to detect tumors and precancerous polyps at an early stage, when they are easiest to remove and most curable.


Spectrum Stock Plummets On Doubts About Royalties
Motivated by the skeptical commentary of a popular stock market reporter, investors in Spectrum Information Technologies Inc. have finally begun to do what the insiders have done for weeks: sell.
Dan Dorfman of CNBC helped touch off a huge selling spree in Spectrum, which has been the most actively traded over-the-counter stock for the last three days.
Shares of the company plunged $5.75 yesterday, to $6, in Nasdaq trading.


Dusk's Magic: As the Day Ends, the Fun Begins; Museums
Art used to be something you looked at primarily during the day or not at all.
Most museums closed at 6 P.M. sharp, with major ones holding evening hours to one day a week (usually Tuesday or Thursday).
But in the last few years, the museum world has discovered that later is better -- more convenient to a more diverse audience -- and a quiet revolution in art-viewing hours has begun.
Now not an evening passes when you can't look at art in some Manhattan museum, large or small, from 6 to 8 P.M.
These hours between day and night are among the best for esthetic enjoyment.
They enable the visitor to avoid the weekend crush so prevalent at major museums, or to fit in visits to less prominent institutions when they find themselves in the neighborhood.
Twilight art viewing need compete neither with workday or evening obligations nor with leisurely weekend pursuits, like spending Saturday in the park or Sunday on the couch.
And it seems that the very brevity of these dusk hours encourages a special kind of concentration and enjoyment, something like the museological equivalent of wine tasting.


Software Maker's Net Up Sharply
Buoyed by a resurgence in the sales of mainframe computer software, Computer Associates International yesterday reported that its net income increased 71.8 percent in the fourth quarter and 50.7 percent for its 1992 fiscal year.
The company said its mainframe software business grew 21 percent during the year against a backdrop of declining sales of large computer systems.


Review/Film; Ullmann Directs an Extended Diary
In the diary fragment that opens and closes Liv Ullmann's dour, stately film, "Sofie," the title character compares the flow of human life to currents in a river.
People pop up and sail for awhile until the current closes around their lives again, she reflects.
The two-and-a-half-hour film, which follows the life of an intelligent, attractive, middle-class woman in late 19th-century Copenhagen over two decades, is a ruminative poetic diary that at heart is really an extended elaboration of that image.
"Sofie," which opens today at the Angelika Film Center, is the directorial debut of Ms.
Ullmann, the Swedish actress and author who has starred in nine Ingmar Bergman films.
Inevitably, "Sofie," which was adapted by Ms.
Ullmann and Peter Poulsen from Henri Nathansen's 1932 novel, "Mendel Philipsen &amp; Son," has a strong Bergmanesque ambiance.
In scene after scene, the camera draws back from the characters to study the distances between people and to suggest the mortal apprehensions that lurk below the surface of the most convivial family gatherings.


Coke to Spend More On Its Classic Brand
The Coca-Cola Company said yesterday that it would increase spending on its "Always Coca-Cola" campaign for Coca-Cola Classic by more than $21 million this summer and fall because of what it called "the initial success of the campaign."
The campaign has been intensely followed since it began in February because it marked the first time that a Hollywood talent agency, the Creative Artists Agency in Beverly Hills, Calif., had been given the lead role in creating ads for a giant consumer brand.
In a statement, Charles B. Fruit, the vice president of global advertising and media services at Coca-Cola, said the levels of awareness for the campaign "are running very high." Initial research also showed what the company called "statistically significant increases" in factors like the intent to purchase and likability.
The company did not release the figures from the research.


U.S. Says 165 Concerns Help Belgrade Defy U.N.
Stepping up the economic pressure on Belgrade, the United States today identified a worldwide network of 165 Serbian companies that it said were being used by Belgrade to defy United Nations sanctions.
The Administration also barred American companies from doing business with the Serbian concerns and urged foreign governments to freeze the assets of the companies.


Art in Review
'Odilon Redon' 'Selections From the Woodner Family Collection'
The Drawing Center  35 Wooster Street  SoHo  Through May 28  'Odilon Redon' 'Lithographs'
Fitch-Febvrel  5 East 57th Street  Manhattan  Through June 30
Anyone who knows Odilon Redon (1840-1916) chiefly from his glowing floral pastels will be surprised to encounter the fin-de-siecle decadence that saturates his graphic work.
Although this French artist was a contemporary of Monet and Renoir, he viewed the materialist bent of Impressionism with deep ambivalence, espousing instead an art of subjectivity and imagination.


Corrections
A picture caption yesterday about a boy looking at a painting at the Metropolitan Museum of Art misidentified the work in some copies.
It was Veronese's "Mars and Venus United by Love."


It's Not Rocket Science: Raiders Want Ismail
The Los Angeles Raiders have made a multiyear offer to RAGHIB (ROCKET) ISMAIL that would pay the receiver-kick returner more than $1 million per season, his agent said.
BOB WOOLF said an agreement could be reached within a week.
"Things are definitely heating up," Woolf was quoted as saying in yesterday's editions of The Los Angeles Times.
"Nothing has been agreed on, but I'm satisfied that things are moving along."


Sports of The Times; Taskmaster Takes Over Ragtag Army
WIPE that smile off your face, soldier!
Who do you think you're talking to?
Stand at attention!
Capitaine Green joins the French Foreign Legion today, and for openers he is going to straighten out all the gossipers and whiners and second-guessers and malingerers and backbiters in his clubhouse.
And then he'll go to work on the players.


Screenings and Lectures On the Films of Scorsese
"Mean Screens: Martin Scorsese at the Movies" opens tonight and runs through June 27 at the Walter Reade Theater, 165 West 65th Street, at Lincoln Center.
Admission to each double feature is $7; $5 for members of the Film Society of Lincoln Center; $4 for the elderly). The box office opens daily at 1:30 P.M. Information: (212) 875-5600.
The Tisch School of the Arts at New York University is sponsoring two free lectures in connection with the series.
Mr.
Scorsese will discuss his work and the importance of film history in "An Evening With Martin Scorsese," on June 4 at 7 P.M. at Schimmel Auditorium, New York University, 40 West Fourth Street, Greenwich Village.
"The Art of Collaboration: Working With Scorsese," a panel discussion featuring people who have worked with Mr.
Scorsese, will take place on June 5 at 2 P.M. at Saklad Auditorium, 345 East 24th Street, Manhattan.
Lecture information: (212) 998-1599.


Review/Film; From 'Rambo' to Rodham, Smirking All the Way
Is nothing sacred to the makers of "Hot Shots! Part Deux"?
Nope.
Not a thing.
In their latest sendup of Hollywood-style heroics, the team behind this deliciously silly satire takes aim at every imaginable target from "Sea Hunt" to Saddam Hussein (who is revealed, at least by this account, to have a fondness for chintz).
And the comic carnage doesn't stop there: "Hot Shots!" also trifles with hit films from "The Wizard of Oz" to "Basic Instinct," along the way revealing the secret of "The Crying Game." Don't even consider seeing it unless you can find humor in a line like this: "These men have taken a vow of celibacy, like their fathers and their fathers before them."
As directed shamelessly by Jim Abrahams (one-third of the original "Airplane!" team) and written by Mr.
Abrahams and Pat Proft, this second "Hot Shots!" parody relies on a dependable method, if not an especially classy one.
The film makers are happy to lob jokes at their audience with head-spinning speed, content in the knowledge that at least some of these missiles will hit the broad side of the barn.
So "Hot Shots!  Part Deux" had better be watched closely for its quick takeoffs, sneaky background action and various female characters who (as the closing credits indicate) happen to have "Rodham" as their middle names.


Body of Boy Found in Bag With Garbage
The bruised, pajama-clad body of an unidentified boy about 3 to 5 years old was found yesterday in a trash-compacted bag at the base of a garbage chute in a housing project in Brooklyn, and the authorities said the child's death was an apparent homicide.
A maintenance man carrying bags of compacted trash to a curb became suspicious at the weight of one bag, and, opening it, found the body at 2:30 P.M. in the basement of a building in the Linden Houses in East New York, the police said.


Art in Review
Joel Shapiro
Pace Gallery  32 East 57th Street  Manhattan  Through June 18  Pace Gallery  142 Green Street  SoHo  Through June 18
Joel Shapiro's debut exhibition at Pace, spread over the gallery's uptown and downtown spaces, is an uneven affair.
This sculptor has certainly been busy in the last two years, judging from the variety of sculptural forms offered here, but some editing would have made this a tighter, better show.


Diner's Journal
Location, Location and Prices
In this age of assiduous down-scaling in the restaurant business, it's surprising to see a pasta house retool with the notion of becoming a major player among midtown restaurants.
Colors, formerly R. J. Colors, faces two obstacles in its quest: first, a secluded location in the Park Atrium just east of Park Avenue, between 46th and 45th Streets; and second, its prices, with dinner appetizers between $8 and $11 and main courses from $21 to $26.
The prices are not out of line considering what the chef is trying to do, it's just that this location may not sustain them.
The new chef at Colors is Erik Blauberg, formerly of Bouley.
The consultant in the transition was Frank Valenza, an experienced restaurateur who owns the popular restaurant 222 at 222 West 79th Street.


What Justices Do Off the Bench: Many Find Travel Is Broadening
Shunning personal publicity, avoiding television cameras, Supreme Court Justices lead what appear on casual observation to be sedate, even cloistered lives.
But this week the public got a glimpse of an extracurricular life that for many members of the Court is surprisingly rich in activities off the bench.
The Justices, along with all other Federal judges, filed their annual financial disclosure statements, opening a window not only on their bank accounts and stock holdings but also on their busy travel schedules.


Orphans of the 1950's, Telling of Abuse, Sue Quebec
Herve Bertrand remembers the day well -- March 18, 1955 -- when a nun told him and the others in his third-grade class at the Mont Providence orphanage in north Montreal that they had all been declared "mentally deficient."
He was 12 and did not fully realize the implications.
The nun, Sister Colette Francoise of the Sisters of Providence, was in tears.
Outside the small windows of the massive redbrick structure, the sullen gray sky was like a slab of cold steel.


The Green Approach: Motivate, Loudly
The New York Mets have gone through the first part of baseball's version of the good cop-bad cop routine.
Now they get Dallas Green.
Green, who will take over the Mets tonight in place of the fired Jeff Torborg, is already all but a larger-than-life figure in the minds of Mets fans.
For their fervent hopes and his assignment are obvious: spark the listless Mets, even if he has to be the worst nightmare come true to a team adrift in the National League East.


Abroad at Home; Sleaze With Footnotes
When a partisan ideologue publishes a book that purports to expose an opponent as corrupt, would any sensible reviewer accept its factual assertions without checking, and praise it as an impressive investigative study?
One would think not.
But that, amazingly, is what has happened with a book called "The Real Anita Hill: The Untold Story." It is by David Brock, a right-wing polemicist whose work on the book was supported by conservative foundations.
One of the foundations is headed by William Simon, who was a leader of the Citizens' Committee to Confirm Clarence Thomas.


James W. Miller, 91; Professor and Ex-Dean
Dr.
James Wilkinson Miller, a professor of philosophy and former dean of the College of William and Mary, died Wednesday at the Pines Convalescent Center in Williamsburg, Va.
He was 91 and had lived at the center.
A spokeswoman for the Pines said the cause was heart failure.


CHRONICLE
The Lincoln Center Theater gave itself a fund-raising party last night at the Vivian Beaumont Theater, where some of Broadway's stars, playwrights and producers rubbed elbows, sang songs and entertained those ready to help raise more than $250,000.
Called "An Evening with WENDY WASSERSTEIN and Friends," the fund-raiser celebrated her contributions to the theater in general and especially her Broadway hit "The Sisters Rosensweig" at the Ethel Barrymore Theater.


State to Cover Toxic Waste at 7 Sites in Stratford
Seven hazardous waste sites here pose such a public health hazard that the state will spend $5 million to cover the waste immediately with nonporous material, state officials said today.
Among the sites are locations at the ballfields at Wooster Intermediate School, the recreation area adjoining Short Beach and the Housatonic Boat Club, a private boatyard.
Officials said children age 6 or younger who might have been exposed to toxic materials at the sites should be tested for lead contamination.


Last Chance
Here is a sampling of shows in New York City that are to close soon: Closing This Weekend  "AND BABY MAKES SEVEN," Circle Repertory at the Lucille Lortel Theater, 121 Christopher Street, Greenwich Village.
A comedy by Paula Vogel about the imminent arrival of a baby in a gay household.
Through Sunday.
Performances: tonight at 8; tomorrow at 2 and 8 P.M.; Sunday at 3 and 7:30 P.M.
Tickets: $32.50 to $35.
Information: (212) 239-6200.


Defense Depicts Japanese Boy as 'Scary'
The fatal shooting of Yoshihiro Hattori, 16, has until now been largely seen as a result of a tragic mismatch of cultural styles: a young Japanese exchange student unused to weapons, trustingly approaching a suburban American householder for whom guns are second nature.
But that scenario, one that has become a Japanese nightmare of America, was turned on its head by a defense lawyer today in a packed Louisiana courtroom.
On the night of Oct. 17, he said, Yoshihiro Hattori was acting in a menacing, "aggressive" fashion, like a stranger invading someone's home turf.
And the home was defended by a .44-magnum with a laser scope.


Review/Photography; Images That Showed How a Camera Makes Poetry
Few books in the history of photography have had as powerful an impact as "The Americans," by Robert Frank.
In the 35 years since it was first published, Mr.
Frank's somber view of life in the 1950's has shaped the vision of countless younger photographers with its demonstration of the poetic possibilities of the medium.
The Houk Friedman Gallery is presenting a selection of Mr.
Frank's photographs made between 1948 and 1960, many of which were included in "The Americans," last published by Aperture in 1978.
Other pictures in the exhibition appeared in Mr.
Frank's autobiographical book, "The Lines of My Hand" (Lustrum, 1972; reprinted by Pantheon in 1989), while still others have seldom if ever been seen before.


On My Mind; Trickle-Down Mercy
The best way for the U.S. to help the Chinese people win relief from daily oppression is to keep enriching the Chinese economy through trade.
Yes, that will also enrich the treasury of the Communist Government and its ability to enforce Communist order in the country.
But a strengthened economy with a flavor of capitalism, however controlled, will lead to liberalization of the dictatorship, help moderates take over when the old men die and so in the long run benefit the Chinese people.


Introducing Bonds of the Half-Century
Just as the United States Treasury is cutting back on 30-year bonds, corporations are edging into the 50-year bond business.
It may not yet be a trend, but it is no longer an oddity.
Three 50-year bonds have been sold by companies this year, including the $250 million 50-year issue sold late on Wednesday by the Consolidated Rail Corporation.
The sale comes just weeks after the Treasury announced it was slashing its annual auctions of 30-year bonds by 40 percent.


Gearing Up on Health Issue
As President Clinton grapples with questions of cost and size in his health-care plan, interest groups are massing on Capitol Hill.
Page A14.


Memorial Service Held for Agents Killed in Assault on Cult


Zabriski Wins In a Playoff
Bruce Zabriski's superiority among golfers in the metropolitan area surfaced again today when he became the first player to capture the Dodge Open for the third time.
The 36-year-old Zabriski, the assistant at Oyster Bay Golf Club on Long Island, edged Mike Gilmore, the assistant at the Stanwich Club in Greenwich, Conn., on the first playoff hole.
Zabriski also won the tournament in 1989 and 1990.


Bantam Electronic Sold
Random House Inc. has acquired the assets of Bantam Electronic Publishing, a division of the Bantam Doubleday Dell Publishing Group Inc., which issues about 45 titles a year.
The price was not disclosed.
Kenzi Sugihara, publisher of Bantam Electronic Publishing since its founding in 1983, will join Random House as division vice president and publisher of the reference and electronic publishing division.


One Network's Case For Doctoring Playoffs
Dennis Swanson tells a story about hockey to make a point about baseball.
The president of ABC Sports is recalling how he lobbied the National Hockey League to alter its plan from airing one Stanley Cup playoff game on a given afternoon to three during the first two weeks of ABC's recent five-week foray into hockey.
"I said, 'You have to regionalize,' " he said.
"You want to grow hockey as a national property, forget one game."


Money Fund Assets Are Up
The total assets of the nation's 632 retail money market mutual funds increased $3.90 billion, to $389.87 billion, for the week ended Wednesday, the Investment Company Institute said yesterday.
The assets of the 396 taxable retail money market funds rose $3.14 billion, to $308.78 billion, while the assets of the 236 retail tax-exempt funds increased $762.1 million, to $81.09 billion.


At the Bar; Conspicuous compassion does not equal bias. That is to say, even a judge is allowed to cry.
When President Clinton listed his prerequisites for the Supreme Court, he included what some see as a contradiction in terms: a lawyer with a big heart.
But as Judge Paula Lopossa of Indianapolis recently learned, big hearts can sometimes prove problematic, at least when worn on one's sleeve.
One day in April 1992, a lawyer named Portia Douglas appeared before Judge Lapossa, not as advocate but as victim.
A year earlier a young man had entered Ms.
Douglas's apartment, shot her in the chest, struck her with his revolver and raped her.
He then placed a pillow over her head and pulled the trigger.
Ms.
Douglas survived only because her forearm blocked the bullet.


Most Divorce Lawyers Serve Their Clients Well
To the Editor:
"Divorce Lawyers Assailed in Study" (news article, May 5) and "Clean Up the Divorce Bar" (editorial, May 6) leave the impression that a majority of divorce lawyers in New York State engage in pressure tactics and other unprofessional practices with their clients.
The overwhelming majority of divorce lawyers are ethical practitioners, dedicated to their clients.
In many cases, if not most, we function under difficult circumstances caused by the emotional upheaval in our clients' lives.
Misconduct of a few attorneys should not stigmatize all.


Newark School Employees Urged to Do Better Work
Newark school officials gathered 4,000 district employees together today for what amounted to a 90-minute pep rally intended to exhort them to greater achievement and thus reduce the risk of a state takeover of the troubled system.
"Fasten your seat belts," said the School Superintendent, Eugene C. Campbell, who promised a range of improvements, including new textbooks, better discipline and a commitment to higher goals.


Chrysler Sues Dealer Over Service
WASHINGTON, May 20
For the first time, one of the Big Three auto makers has sued a dealer to end a franchise because of poor customer service.
In the past, auto makers have often sent representatives to urge improvements in service and, if necessary, to help negotiate the sale of a franchise.


Art in Review
John Constable and David Lucas
Salander-O'Reilly Galleries  20 East 79th Street  Manhattan  Through June 5
About mezzotints, John Constable wrote to a friend in 1825: "As you say, they cannot engrave my color or evanescence, but they can the chiaro oscuro &amp; the details &amp; the taste and with it most of my sentiment." Four years later, he hooked up with a young and gifted engraver named David Lucas and together they produced a series known as "English Landscape," to which a subtitle was added in 1833: "Principally Intended to Mark the Phenomena of the Chiar'Oscuro of Nature."


Tiraspol Journal; The Russians Have Come! When Will They Go?
Visitors to the office of Lieut.
Gen.
Aleksandr I. Lebed, commander of the Russian 14th Army, are cordially invited to peruse photographic albums of atrocities said to have been committed last year by Moldovan forces against civilians of a breakaway region.
There was a war last June in the region, which is populated mainly by ethnic Russians and Ukrainians and called the Trans-Dniester Republic by the secessionists.


On Stage, and Off
The announcement of a new Broadway musical, complete with cast, theater and opening date, often makes it seem as if a show has been conjured out of thin air: one minute it doesn't exist; the next minute it does.
Of course, things actually happen much more gradually; a show appears as a distant speck on the horizon and takes shape as it moves closer.
With this season now history, a few things ahead are vivid enough to see clearly: "The Red Shoes," "Joseph and the Amazing Technicolor Dreamcoat," "Beauty and the Beast," "My Fair Lady" and "Sunset Boulevard," all much ballyhooed musicals, will probably have arrived a year from now.
Beyond those, the landscape is hazy, but there are a lot of possibilities out there.
Probably the closest to reality is "Paper Moon," the father-daughter road story.
It has been in the works since 1986, when the producer Roger Berlind purchased the rights to the well-known film and the lesser-known novel, "Addie Pray," by Joe David Brown, on which the film was based.
Gregory Harrison and Christine Ebersole have already been cast for a production that opens on Sept. 8 at the Paper Mill Playhouse in Millburn, N.J., and Mr.
Berlind said that he expected the show to land on Broadway in November.


British Legislators Approve Pact Forging Greater European Unity
After 204 hours of debate and maneuvering that preoccupied the British capital for more than six months, the House of Commons passed the bill to ratify the Treaty on European Union tonight.
The action moves Britain closer to becoming the 12th and final nation to back a stronger and more united European Community.
After so much political infighting and debate, the vote, 292 to 112, which came shortly after 10 P.M., seemed an anticlimax.
The opposition Labor Party called on its members to abstain on the final vote, virtually guaranteeing passage of the bill.


Senators Put Up A New Obstacle In Budget Fight
An influential bipartisan group of Senators threw a new obstacle in the path of President Clinton's budget plan today by offering an alternative proposal with fewer tax increases and deeper spending cuts.
The new plan itself stands no chance of passing in its present form, but it could provide a starting point for negotiations on changes to the President's plan.
Its announcement raises new questions about whether the President's measures will command enough support to be approved by the House of Representatives next week and about the prospects when the legislation reaches the Senate.
President Calls Plan Unfair
At the White House, Mr.
Clinton denounced the alternative as a shift of the deficit-reduction burden "from wealthy Americans right onto the people just above the poverty line, the elderly and the working poor."


More Remedies Needed In Domestic Violence
To the Editor:
"Domestic-Abuse Law: An Accuser's Painful Choice" (Law page, May 7) points out that only in New York State is the victim in a family violence situation precluded by law from taking civil and criminal legal action simultaneously.
By the 1977 "right of election" law, the victim is forced to make a choice between the two within three days, oftentimes while still suffering from the trauma of an attack.
I have introduced legislation in the New York State Senate (S. 3190) to remedy this grievous fault, enabling victims of domestic violence to take both civil and criminal action.


Critic's Notebook; 'Cheers' Is Dead, but There's Always the Wake . . .
And there you have it.
The bartender nearly got back with the waitress who had left him six years ago, but coming to his senses, he stayed with his real family, the gang at the saloon.
With last night's 275th episode, "Cheers" closed its barroom door.
Given the hype, it's probably not a moment too soon.
NBC's blitzkrieg over the past week -- "Television's greatest night ever," an announcer kept shouting during commercial breaks -- was beginning to make even ardent fans feel weary.
The campaign began to seem less connected to the departure of a wonderful show than to the drumming up of an audience to justify NBC's tab of $650,000 for a commercial minute.


CLINTON ADVISERS OUTLINE BIG SHIFT FOR MALPRACTICE
President Clinton's advisers outlined a proposal today for sweeping change in the handling of medical malpractice lawsuits under which individual doctors would be relieved of legal responsibility for negligence.
Instead of suing their doctors, injured patients would sue insurance companies and health maintenance organizations that employ the doctors.


U.S. CITES ATTACKS ON PLANES BY IRAQ
American warplanes patrolling the no-flight zone over southern Iraq were met with antiaircraft fire on three separate occasions this week but did not return fire, the Pentagon said today.
A Pentagon spokesman said the Iraqi shells all exploded well below the Navy and Air Force fighter planes, and the pilots did not regard them as a threat.
Although some of the antiaircraft fire was guided by spotlights, he said it was unclear whether it was aimed at the American planes.


A Suspect Is Arrested in Rapes
The Yonkers Police Department announced early today that a Bronx man had been arrested as a suspect in a rape in Westchester County and was under investigation in several others.
The suspect was identified as Carlos Gonzales, 26, by Lieut.
William Drain, a spokesman for the Yonkers Police Department.
Lieutenant Drane said Mr.
Gonzales was apprehended in the Bronx about midnight with the aid of the New York City police.


Chavez Withdraws From Fight
A June 19 fight card in San Diego billed as the "Pound for Pound Extravaganza" lost some of its zest yesterday when World Boxing Council junior welterweight champion JULIO CESAR CHAVEZ withdrew.
Chavez has a sore right hand and needs rest following his sixth-round knockout of challenger TERRENCE ALLI on May 8 in Las Vegas, Nev., promoter DON KING told a news conference.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
John A. Rollwagen withdrew his nomination as Deputy Secretary of Commerce.
The former chief executive of Cray Research said it was not an S.E.C. investigation into insider trading that changed his mind but rather his "culture shock" at dealing with government processes.  [ Page D1. ]
A bipartisan group of Senators threw an obstacle in the path of President Clinton's budget plan, offering an alternative with fewer tax increases and deeper spending cuts.  [ A1. ]


Brown Is Here, There and Now Nowhere
Larry Brown, who normally stays on a job for a good two or three years, gave the Los Angeles Clippers 15 months.
Today, he resigned as the Clippers' head coach, apparently to explore other options, and the Indiana Pacers are already requesting an interview.
"Yes, he's high on our list," said Pacers President Donnie Walsh, a former teammate of Brown's at the University of North Carolina.
Two days ago, Walsh fired his coach, Bob Hill.


A Bipartisan Disservice
Senators David Boren, Democrat of Oklahoma, and John Danforth, Republican of Missouri, proposed a deficit reduction plan yesterday that would, they say, cut about $120 billion of hated taxes and $160 billion of spending out of the Clinton budget plan.
And it would.
But what the Senators -- joined by the Democrat J. Bennett Johnston of Louisiana and William Cohen, a Maine Republican -- didn't say is that their plan would also shift tax burdens from South to North and from the rich to the middle class.
It would also victimize some elderly poor and disabled families.


Market Place; What's Behind the Investor Buzz for a Noise-Reduction Company.
A GENERATION ago, the whispered investment tip was "plastics." Today, should the inside dope be "noise"?
Anybody watching the stock action of Andrea Electronics for the last few months could easily think so.
After two years of trading between about $3 and $9, shares in the developer of a noise reduction system based in Long Island City, Queens, have exploded to a degree rarely seen on Wall Street: Rising from a low of $6.625, the shares hit a high of $36.75 in December, an almost sixfold increase.


Dusk's Magic: As the Day Ends, the Fun Begins; Music
For most working folks, dusk means the job is over.
For musicians, who work vampire shifts, dusk is barely the beginning.
As a career improves, from opening act to headliner or from lounge-jazz provider to club headliner, the hours grow later.
Only when a musician reaches the concert circuit do things get a little easier; a performer can, with luck, be finished before midnight.
Now and then, a full-fledged concert starts before sundown.
The Roches, three sisters who write smart, pointed, heartfelt songs and harmonize them with boundless ingenuity, are to perform at 7 tonight at a benefit concert for Arts at St.
Ann's, the Brooklyn Heights Episcopal church at Clinton and Montague Streets.
The Roches may see some daylight, although a group called Hudson Shad is opening; tickets are $35 for the concert, $100 for the concert and a party afterward, and $200 for concert, party and dinner.
Information: (718) 858-2424.


H. E. Galley Jr., 64, Editor and Author Of Liturgical Books
Howard Evans Galley Jr., author and editor of Episcopal liturgical works, died yesterday at Christ Hospital in Jersey City.
He was 64 and lived in Jersey City.
The cause was pneumonia and complications from emphysema and lung cancer, said Lois Pagliaro, a deacon of the Church of St.
Luke in the Fields in Manhattan, where Mr.
Galley was a parishioner.


TV Weekend; Cambodians' Turn for Children to Turn American
"Why did the Cambodian people have to leave their own country to live in this strange, foreign land?" a woman asks at the start of "Cambodians in America: Rebuilding the Temple." The question, not unfamiliar in the United States, is at the heart of tonight's affecting hourlong report on the adapting pains of the latest immigrant group to discover that the freedom, security and economic opportunities that brought them to America carry a high price in the traditions that sustained them at home.
The answer to "Why?" goes back to the Khmer Rouge, the Maoist-inspired Cambodian guerrillas who killed a million of their own people in the 1970's.
The 1980's brought invasion from Vietnam and a civil war that keeps driving refugees to Thailand and from there around the world.
About 140,000 Cambodians have found their way to the United States.


Chairman: Psychology And Magic
Harold E. Vogt, the new chairman of Empire Blue Cross and Blue Shield, is the 58-year-old president of the Westchester County Chamber of Commerce.
Mr.
Vogt, a native of Clifton, N.J., earned a bachelor of science degree in psychology from Fairleigh Dickinson University in Rutherford, N.J.
For several years he taught psychology at Fairleigh Dickinson while also working with troubled children in the Clifton school system.


First, Tar Beach. Now, Tar Museum?


Review/Photography; Images That Showed How a Camera Makes Poetry
Few books in the history of photography have had as powerful an impact as "The Americans," by Robert Frank.
In the 35 years since it was first published, Mr.
Frank's somber view of life in the 1950's has shaped the vision of countless younger photographers with its demonstration of the poetic possibilities of the medium.
The Houk Friedman Gallery is presenting a selection of Mr.
Frank's photographs made between 1948 and 1960, many of which were included in "The Americans," last published by Aperture in 1978.
Other pictures in the exhibition appeared in Mr.
Frank's autobiographical book, "The Lines of My Hand" (Lustrum, 1972; reprinted by Pantheon in 1989), while still others have seldom if ever been seen before.


Housing Nominee Is Attacked
Calling Roberta Achtenberg an intolerant gay-rights activist unfit for high office, conservative Republicans have begun a strenuous campaign to block her appointment as Assistant Secretary of Housing and Urban Development.
Republican strategists have noted that President Clinton has suffered political damage from his support for gay rights, and the campaign to defeat Ms.
Achtenberg appeared to be part of a strategy to underscore differences between the two parties.


Dedication Urged at Rutgers
Under gray skies, Rutgers, the State University of New Jersey, celebrated its 227th commencement yesterday.
The main ceremony, held at the Louis Brown Athletic Center in Piscataway, was the centerpiece of five days of exercises at campuses throughout the state.
The university will award more than 9,700 degrees at those ceremonies.


Bail Denied for Man Accused Of Resisting Search in Bombing
A three-judge panel yesterday denied an appeal for bail in the case of a man charged with resisting a search of his apartment in the World Trade Center bombing investigation.
Later in the day, another judge heard oral arguments on a motion that the man, Ibrahim A. Elgabrowny, was frisked illegally during the search.


Is That A Ball Club Huddled in The Cellar?
The manager's desk will be stacked with sheets of statistics and reports for Dallas Green's arrival today.
The clubhouse will be clean and orderly.
Impressive nameplates will hang above a handful of lockers -- Saberhagen, Gooden, Murray, Bonilla, Franco, Johnson.
The looks, of course, will be deceiving.
The scene, after all, is a mess.
The players haven't lived up to their reputations.
The statistics are frightful reading.
Green inherits a basement outfit 14 games back of the leaders in the National League East.


Restaurants
Take an Italian restaurant and place it on a marginal street, develop an improbably large and ambitious menu, refuse to accept credit cards and what do you have?
An establishment that is so popular it doubles in size after a year-and-a-half.
Cucina, on Fifth Avenue in Park Slope, Brooklyn, is a handsome, casual place owned by Anthony Scicchitano, who has a string of pork stores in New York, New Jersey and Connecticut called A.&amp; S., and by Michael Ayoub, the chef, who worked at Claude's in Manhattan and at Water's Edge in Queens.


Judge Dismisses Contempt Case Against Close-Mouthed Lawyer
A Manhattan judge has thrown out a highly unusual criminal contempt charge against a lawyer who refused to tell a grand jury who had paid her legal fees.
Legal experts said yesterday that the case was intriguing because it was virtually unheard of to file a such a charge against a lawyer.
They said the case was the only one of its kind in New York State.


The Spoken Word
RADIO DISCUSSION, WNYC (820-AM).
A series of recorded interviews and discussions sponsored by the New York Public Library and WNYC continues with "The Poetry of Three Wars: World War I, World War II and Vietnam," with the author Paul Fussell.
Sunday at 4 P.M.
PHILOSOPHICAL LECTURE, Tiffany Hall, 2 East 37th Street, Murray Hill.
Stephen Cox and David Kelley speak at a celebration of the 50th anniversary of Ayn Rand's novel "The Fountainhead," sponsored by the Institute for Objectivist Studies.
Tomorrow at 1 P.M.
Admission: $50; $25 for students.
Information: (800) 374-1776.


Review/Ballet; Canadians Embrace Dance of This Century
Les Grands Ballets Canadiens, which presented the second program of its City Center season on Wednesday night, tends to come across as a company primarily concerned with 20th-century creativity in its infrequent visits to the New York area.
An exception was the November 1991 performance of "La Sylphide," August Bournonville's 1836 classic at the State University College at Purchase, N.Y., when the Montreal troupe performed locally under its new director, Lawrence Rhodes, for the first time.


Panel Expanding List for Base Closings
A Presidential commission studying which military bases to shrink or close is planning to add about 20 sites to the list the Pentagon has proposed, panel members said this week.
The Defense Base Closure and Realignment Commission will consider the additional bases out of fairness to comparable installations that Defense Secretary Les Aspin has recommended be closed or reduced, commissioners said.
The Pentagon had identified 43 large installations and 122 smaller sites for closing or consolidation.


Art in Review
'Ree Morton' 'Works From 1971-74'
Brooke Alexander Gallery  59 Wooster Street  Through June 5
This spare and playful show retrieves an almost forgotten artist, Ree Morton, who was born in 1937, began making art in her late 20's and died in an automobile accident shortly before her 41st birthday, in 1977.
Like several other artists of her generation, including Joel Shapiro and Elizabeth Murray, Morton responded to the austere inventions of Post-Minimalism and Conceptual Art in resoundingly personal ways.


Budget Rebels Defy Parties' Leaders
The first serious challenge to President Clinton's tax plan springs mostly out of an odd sort of no man's land between the two major parties, a wilderness where philosophies overlap and the residents have adapted to political survival without outside help.
It appears to be an exceedingly small place.


Art in Review
Brice Marden
Matthew Marks Gallery  1018 Madison Avenue (at 78th Street)  Through June 26
There are not many contemporary artists whose latest show one is always eager to see.
Brice Marden is among them.
This exhibition of recent paintings, prints and drawings leaves no doubt about his mastery of the kind of refined, sensuous and extremely beautiful abstraction he has been pursuing for several years.
It is an art of intricate balance in which lines, like calligraphic markings, create patterns of various densities that at their most spare have a certain haiku elegance and that at their most entangled remain somehow airy and delicate.
In some cases, the starting point seems figurative but the sources are invariably obscured.


NOTEBOOK: Boxing; Chesseburger, Cheeseburger for Bowe
Riddick Bowe's trainer said, "What's the big deal?" But Jesse Ferguson's co-manager claimed the heavyweight title was more attainable when Bowe weighed in today at 244 pounds for Saturday night's defense of his two crowns.
When Bowe got off the scales and someone said "244 pounds," a "Whoa!" arose from the several hundred reporters and hangers-on at the Loews L'Enfant Plaza Hotel.
Ferguson, meanwhile, came in at 224 for his challenge against the unbeaten holder of the World Boxing Association and International Boxing Federation titles.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball
BALTIMORE ORIOLES -- Placed Arthur Rhodes, pitcher, on the 15-day disabled list.
Called up Jamie Moyer, pitcher, from Rochester of the International League.
BOSTON RED SOX -- Signed John Stratton, Jr., catcher, and assigned him to extended spring training.


Rally in Philadelphia Supports Board to Monitor the Police


Corrections
An article in Business Day yesterday, about the stock market and the Dow Jones industrial average's record closing high, misstated the average's previous high and the date it was reached.
On May 12, the Dow closed at 3,482.31, a record that was not surpassed until Wednesday.


With Nannies and Families, CBS Courts Adults
Seeking to extend its winning streak in prime time, CBS announced a new fall lineup of programs yesterday that emphasized the network's current strength with adult viewers.
The network made fewer changes than either ABC or NBC, leaving its strongest nights, Sunday and Tuesday, intact from last season.
CBS will add five new half-hour comedies, including one starring Faye Dunaway, three hourlong dramas and one new news-magazine program to its lineup.


Byrd Is a Father of Year And Man of the Moment
Walking without crutches or cane and with a smooth, steady stride, Dennis Byrd has returned to New York for a weeklong stay that began yesterday when he received a father-of-the-year award at the Sheraton Manhattan hotel.
Accompanied by his wife, Angela, the former Jets' defensive end hardly looked like a man who fractured a vertebrae in his neck and lost the use of his legs after a collision in a game six months ago.
People who have followed his recovery are amazed at how rapidly Byrd has regained use of his legs.
But Byrd does not marvel over his accomplishments.


Critic's Notebook; Ever-Shifting Odds At Cannes Festival
"JUDGMENT," Jack Valenti said here the other night, "is the elf who acts like a computer when you get to that fork in the road."
If that's true, and there's no reason to disbelieve the president of the Motion Picture Association of America, then it's apparent that a lot of elves are at the point of nervous breakdown as the 46th Cannes International Film Festival enters its final days.


U.S. and Russia Agree on Strategy Accepting Serbian Gains for Now
The United States and Russia agreed today to forge a common strategy with other European nations that accepts, at least for the moment, the territorial gains made by the Serbs in Bosnia.
The goal would no longer be to roll back any of the gains achieved by the Bosnian Serbs in 14 months of fighting, but rather, in the words of a senior Administration official, "to contain and stabilize the situation and to put the brakes on the killing."


League Plan Sent to FIFA (Stay Tuned)
The United States Soccer Federation has sent a proposal to FIFA, the sport's world governing body, to begin a professional league in the United States several months after the World Cup tournament next year.
According to TONY MEOLA, the goalkeeper for the United States national team, the U.S.S.F. delivered a 300-page outline last week to FIFA for a league that would begin either in the fall of 1994 or the winter of 1995.


Students Stabbed With Hypodermic Needle
As many as 18 girls who are students at P.S. 46 in Harlem may have been stabbed with a hypodermic needle in school on Tuesday, and a 13-year-old boy who is a student at the school has been charged in the case, a spokesman for the Police Department said last night.
Police Officer Andrew McInnis said the stabbings apparently took place during school hours in a hallway at the school, which is at 2997 Eighth Avenue, at the Polo Grounds housing complex at 155th Street.


Complaint by Clinton Friend Led to Ouster of Travel Staff
Bombarded by accusations from Republicans that the White House dismissed its travel staff to reward friends and relatives, the Clinton Administration today disclosed that the action came after a close friend of President Clinton sought White House business opportunities for colleagues in the travel business.
Administration officials also acknowledged that the travel agency that is temporarily taking over the White House travel accounts once had business, financial and political ties to Mr.
Clinton and his associates.
Last year, the agency helped pay off old Clinton campaign debts.


Councilman Blames Cuts On Reprisal
A New York City Council committee chairman charged yesterday that a major road repair project in his district was stripped from next year's budget by the Dinkins administration to punish him for holding hearings investigating the city's contracting process.
The chairman of the Committee on Contracts, Stephen DiBrienza, said a high-ranking administration official threatened to cut financing to his district on April 28 after the first day of hearings into a $200 million contract that the city had tentatively awarded to a company implicated in a 1986 bribery and bid-rigging scandal.


Curt Riess, Author And Journalist, 90; Expert on Nazi Era
Curt Riess, a refugee from Nazi Germany who returned as an American war correspondent to record the demise of Hitler's Third Reich, died on Wednesday at his home in Switzerland.
He was 90 and lived in a suburb of Zurich.
Comfortable in English and German, he became a prolific trans-Atlantic author in both languages, producing a stream of newspaper and magazine articles, novels, biographies, screenplays and plays.


Dusk's Magic: As Day Ends, The Fun Begins
FOR many New Yorkers the hours of dusk -- or roughly between 5 and 8 P.M. -- are a mundane interregnum that bridges leaving work and going home, or heading out for the evening.
It's a transitory time, when the commuter tide cascades through so many urban sluices and residents engage in the weary tussle of mass transit.
Steinbeck called every rush hour in New York City "a Pamplona." That still rings true.
But if we lift our heads and downshift for a moment, it is evident that the world of dusk involves much more than locomotion.
In many cities around the world, the early evening hours are a peak time for socializing.
In Madrid, residents "dar la vuelta," which means stroll repeatedly around the shop-lined plaza, picking up friends along the way before a late dinner.
In Paris and Rome, dusk is the time to congregate over an aperitif at a cafe, or meander the boulevards when many shops stay open late in summer.


New Chief: Computers And Sports
Donald L. Morchower, who was named acting chief executive of Empire Blue Cross and Blue Shield , is a former semiprofessional basketball player experienced in computer and systems technology.
"I think I'm in shock; this whole thing has just come so quickly," Mr.
Morchower said yesterday.
"Now I've got 9,300 employees to be concerned about."


School Headmaster Quits Because He Lacks Degree
The headmaster of a private school here has resigned after it was found that he lacked a college degree.
Christopher B. Howard, 42 years old, headmaster of the Unquowa School for five years, submitted his resignation to the school's 21-member board this week, effective Sept. 1.
He began work at the school 15 years ago as a student teacher and taught English before being promoted to headmaster.


At What Point Is Pay Too High?
How much pay should the chairman and chief executive of a small public-utility company get?
At Citizens Utilities, which is based in Stamford, Conn., $21.6 million seems to be the right number.
That's what Leonard Tow, a 64-year-old economist who runs the little-known company received last year, according to an independent valuation by a leading pay expert.


Suicide Law Struck Down, for Now
Michigan's new law banning assisted suicide and aimed at Dr.
Jack Kevorkian was struck down today by a county judge in Detroit.
Judge Cynthia Stephens of Wayne County Circuit Court ruled that the law, enacted in February, violated the state Constitution because it had been passed by the Legislature without public hearings and contained more than one objective.


Review/Theater; Self-Worth, As Taught By a Bizarre Affliction
Susie, the perplexed heroine of Jacquelin Reingold's "Tunnel of Love," has a bizarre problem.
She was born with C.A.V., which stands for Congenital Absence of the Vagina.
That leads Ms.
Reingold into a wild-reaching fantasy about what women have to put up with in their pursuit of femininity.
In this one-act play in the Ensemble Studio Theater's annual marathon, Susie (Amelia Campbell) is surrounded by a covey of cartoon doctors offering to correct her anatomical deficiency while also suggesting outlandish varieties of cosmetic enhancement.
If she accepted the advice, Susie would turn into a bionic woman.
All this, says the playwright with tongue firmly in cheek, is a move to reawaken the ardor of Susie's boyfriend.


An M.B.A. Is Withheld
Officials at the Harvard Business School said yesterday that a master of business administration degree would be withheld from a student indicted on Monday on insider-trading charges, pending resolution of the case.
Daniel Young, 30, of Commack, L.I., was charged with using inside information to make a $500,000 profit from the purchase and resale of Colombian Government debt.


Clinton Faces Battle Over a Civil Rights Nominee
Senior Senate Republicans served notice today that they would fight the Clinton Administration over the nomination of Lani Guinier to be the Justice Department's new civil rights chief, arguing that the theories espoused in her academic writings made her unfit for the job.
Ms.
Guinier has suddenly become President Clinton's next major confirmation battle.
Until now Republicans had held their fire; now they have begun to criticize her openly, and some Senate Democrats have begun to fret privately.


Hoisting a Few to Say Goodbye to Themselves; At Tavern in Larchmont, the Appeal of 'Cheers' Can Be Seen in the Barroom Mirror
It could have been a scene out of "Cheers."
About two weeks ago, one of the regular patrons at the Larchmont Tavern walked into the men's room and discovered a set of false teeth sitting atop the toilet tank.
After the owner of the teeth failed to come forward, Anthony Flook, one of the Tavern's bartenders, decided to have a little fun: he put the dentures in a glass of vodka and offered $100 to anyone who could drink it to the bottom.
No one took the dare.


Sounds Around Town
From Charles Busch
"The Charles Busch Revue," the Ballroom, 253 West 28th Street, Chelsea, (212) 244-3005.
Charles Busch, the author, drag performer and star of such Off Broadway comedies as "The Lady in Question" and "Vampire Lesbians of Sodom," leads a genial cabaret revue that spoofs the old Carol Burnett and Judy Garland television variety shows.
If the revue is not always as funny as it wants to be, more often than not its humor lands, as in its "politically correct" version of Walt Disney's "Snow White." Mr.
Busch's flamboyant gowns and wigs are also hilarious in themselves, and he conveys an irresistibly mischievous enthusiasm for the fun of dressing up.
Shows are tonight and tomorrow at 9 and 11:15 and on Sunday at 9 P.M.
Tickets are $20 and $25, and there is a two-drink minimum.
Klezmer Tribute
"A Klezmer Tribute to Dave Tarras," Brooklyn Center for the Performing Arts, Brooklyn College, Flatbush and Nostrand Avenues, Flatbush, (718) 951-4500.
Three of Brooklyn's leading klezmer ensembles, Klezmer Plus, Kapelye, and the Original Klezmer Jazz Band, are to perform a special tribute to Dave Tarras, a Jewish clarinetist, composer and klezmer band leader of the 1930's and 40's.
Klezmer Plus will perform European dance tunes and wedding music.
Kapelye will play music of the Yiddish theater, and the Original Klezmer Jazz Band will offer big-band swing arrangements of Tarras's favorite pieces.
Show time is Sunday at 2 P.M., and tickets are $15; $10 for students and the elderly.


The Art Market
Andy Warhol got yet another 15 minutes of fame two weeks ago, but it wasn't the kind the artist would have liked.
When 16 of his works went on the auction block in New York in a 24-hour period with disastrous results -- only two sold, and they went for very low prices -- it was the talk of the art world.
The poor sales created a domino effect in the entire Warhol market.
They brought to the forefront lingering questions about how many great Warhols actually exist, forcing dealers and collectors to reassess their holdings.
The sales have clearly affected the value of the artist's estate, currently the focus of a bitter lawsuit.
And all of this is unfolding just a year before the Andy Warhol Museum is to open in Pittsburgh.


Big Board and Amex Uncovered Short Sales Rise
The number of shares shorted on the New York and American stock exchanges were near record levels early this month, providing a sign of growing bearishness that has not so far proved wise.
The Big Board reported that the overall short position for trades through May 7 was 994.1 million shares, up 2.8 percent from a month earlier and second only to December's billion shares.


CITIZENS UTILITIES' PAY TO CHIEF CRITICIZED
The California Public Employees' Retirement System angrily criticized the directors of Citizens Utilities this week for paying the company's chief executive an estimated $21.6 million last year for what is essentially part-time work.


E-II Revamps Debt Plan To Offset Offer by Icahn
E-II Holdings Inc., the bankrupt holding company that has become the rope in the tug-of-war between the investors Carl C. Icahn and Leon Black, announced yesterday that it was modifying its plan of reorganization to give its creditors more than they would have received.
The company also said its revised plan would give creditors a better deal than a proposal by Mr.
Icahn to buy the company for $1.18 billion.
E-II, which owns Culligan water purification systems, Samsonite luggage and the maker of Botany 500 suits, did not provide details of its modified plan, which it will present at a bankruptcy court hearing on Monday.


The Birthday of Malcolm X Is Remembered With a Parade


Religion Notes
People Do Believe
Reports of the death of religion are greatly exaggerated, it is apparent from a survey of people in a dozen nations.


Observer; The Trodden Lament
Did you ever have the blues when everybody else had the greens?
The editor noticed I was monopolizing them.
"You ought to be ashamed of yourself for hogging all those blues," he said.
He was trying to get my goat and would have if I'd had one, but I'd just sent it to the New York Mets after learning the Mets were getting ready to fire the manager because their players were so incompetent.


Reviews/Dance; Love, Jealousy, Betrayal to the Tune of Ireland's Troubles
American Ballet Theater emphasized the richness of its repertory on Tuesday night at the Metropolitan Opera House by offering the season's first performances of stylistically contrasting works by Agnes de Mille and George Balanchine.
"The Informer," which dates from 1988, is surely Miss de Mille's finest creation of recent years.
It has only a loose connection with Liam O'Flaherty's novel and John Ford's film of the same name.
Yet like the book and the movie, it depicts conflicts between the Irish and the English in Dublin.


8 Convicted In Antitrust Case in Japan
In a conclusion to a closely watched antitrust case here, a Tokyo court today found eight companies guilty of fixing prices of plastic film used for wrapping food.
The eight companies received fines of six million to eight million yen, ($54,000 to $73,000).
Fifteen executives of the companies were given suspended sentences of six months to one year in jail.


Daughters Day at Dept. of Education
To the Editor:
The conclusion that Take Our Daughters to Work Day was for white middle-class families (The Week in Review, May 2) is not borne out by the experience we had in the Department of Education.
The building cafeteria was jumping at lunchtime with the voices of girls -- many neither white nor middle class.
A van full of students from two Washington inner-city schools were "sponsored" for the day.
For many, the experience widened the vistas of otherwise circumscribed lives.


Alfred Whittle, 69; Admiral Built Career Around Submarines
Alfred J. Whittle Jr., a retired four-star admiral who was a longtime commander of Navy submarines and went on to develop submarine technology as a civilian, died on Tuesday at his home in Arlington, Va.
He was 69.
His son Alfred J. Whittle 3d, a retired Navy commander, said the cause was cancer.


U.S., in Bosnia Policy Shift, Offers U.N. Air Protection
The Clinton Administration is now telling the Europeans it is willing to use air power to protect United Nations peacekeeping forces guarding safe havens for Muslims in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
But President Clinton reiterated his opposition to any American soldiers participating on the ground while the war continues, even as part of the peacekeeping effort.
Secretary of State Warren Christopher informed the Europeans of the shift in the American position in meetings with Foreign Minister Andrei V. Kozyrev of Russia on Thursday and with Foreign Secretary Douglas Hurd of Britain today, senior European officials said.
The shift is also reflected in a draft statement of principles, written by Mr.
Christopher as a basis for an anticipated joint announcement by the allies, the officials said.


Classical Music in Review
Oratorio Society of New York  Carnegie Hall
It may have seemed slightly impish of Leonard Bernstein to respond to a commission from the Chichester Cathedral with a group of Psalm settings in Hebrew.
But Bernstein undoubtedly considered the work's life beyond the 1965 premiere, and since then the bright, rhythmically vital "Chichester Psalms" have found a place in the repertory.


Andretti May Catch a Ride With Foyt
JOHN ANDRETTI, who came to the Indianapolis Motor Speedway this May without a ride and has spent most of the month helping other drivers go fast enough to qualify for the Indianapolis 500, may get to drive in the race on May 30 after all.


Cal Running Back Completes Degree
California running back RUSSELL WHITE graduated with a degree in social welfare after shunning the 1992 National Football League draft to finish school.
White had been projected as a first-round pick if he had entered the draft after his junior year.


Building for a Better Tomorrow


New Magic Praised at Juilliard
James DePreist, conductor and music director of the Oregon Symphony, told 235 graduates that they were the new magicians, communicating their art with an effect that is magical, and he urged them not to remain aloof but to become involved in raising the artistic consciousness of society.
Mr.
DePreist was the keynote speaker yesterday in New York at the 88th annual commencement ceremonies of the Juilliard School.
During exercises at Alice Tully Hall in Lincoln Center, 114 undergraduate degrees and 121 graduate degrees were conferred.
Mr.
DePreist was made an honorary Doctor of Music.


Corrections
A movie review in Weekend yesterday about "Sophie" misstated the nationality of its director, Liv Ullmann.
She is Norwegian, not Swedish.


Coast to Coast, Workers Say Fickle Economy Is a Riddle: The West; From Boom to Bust And at Loose Ends
In these hard times, more and more fathers have been appearing in the afternoons to pick up their children at the Coyote Canyon School, unemployed and at loose ends here in what was recently one of the fastest-growing regions in the country.
The fathers, who are former aerospace workers, construction men and real estate brokers, stand in the baking sun outside the new $8 million school that began to retrench as soon as it opened last year, cutting back staff positions and increasing class size as the money melted away.


Fed Panel Was Urged To Lift Rates
Two Federal Reserve governors called for raising interest rates when the central bank's main policy-setting committee met in March, and some economists say the two might have won more support at last Tuesday's meeting because of the big jump in inflation in April.
According to the official summary of the March 23 meeting, two Fed governors, Lawrence B. Lindsey and Wayne D. Angell, called for an immediate increase in rates to fight inflationary pressures, saying such a move was needed to prevent a more drastic rate increase later on.


Regard Celibacy as a Grace Not Given to All; A Certain Dissonance
To the Editor:
The Rev.
Paul E. Dinter's article (Op-Ed, May 6) on clerical celibacy brings to mind a resolution passed by a majority at a general assembly of priests of the New York Archdiocese in the 1970's.
The modest resolution asked that a study be made with a view to considering optional celibacy as a possible element in the life of the Roman Catholic Church.
The resolution was never implemented.
In the 1960's and 70's thousands of priests left their ministry, with most entering marriage.
Many were known to me as people of ability, intelligence and spirituality, who continued the practice of their faith.
Many would have desired to continue in their priestly ministry as married men.
Church policy prevented this.


The Dallas Era Begins: Let's Focus, Fellows
It was Day One of the Dallas Green regime, and it was obvious that Mets players and their new manager were getting to know one another.
The learning period was significant on many levels, but no more so than on the decision-making level.
For Al Harazin, the Mets' general manager, eagerly awaits the returns, not so much from the first impressions of his players, but from Green's first impressions of the team.


Mets Lose, but Green's Job Isn't in Jeopardy. Yet.
The heat, the passion, the aggressiveness were all there, just as advertised, just as Dallas Green had promised.
Unfortunately for the new Mets manager, also present last night at Shea Stadium was the same team that cost Jeff Torborg his job Wednesday.
A 4-2 loss to the Atlanta Braves brought to a halt what euphoria had greeted Green in his first appearance in a Mets uniform.
It also brought to Green's attention some of the kinds of plays and pitching that have helped dig the Mets into such a deep hole in the National League East.


Acrobats on Wheels
To the Editor:
"I expect to be killed by a bicycle," writes 84-year-old I. W. Burnham 2d (letter, May 5).
His expectation is shared by lots of pedestrians in New York City, who are cycled at, into and around by these acrobats on wheels.
Cycling uptown, downtown, east or west, off the sidewalk or on, against the traffic, with the traffic, red light, green light.
No need for a license, insurance, registration, identification, nothing except a keen sense of maneuvering.
The city hasn't got a clue how to enforce the law on bicyclists.
MICHAEL MISCH Croton-on-Hudson, N.Y., May 14, 1993


New York City's 32 School Boards Get New Faces but Not New Views
Amid the ideological warfare over teaching about sexuality and related matters in New York City's schools, voters elected more new faces to community school boards than ever before.
But despite a complement of dissenting voices, the ideological cast of those boards is unlikely to change.
With the results of the May 4 vote almost complete, an analysis shows that about 50 of the winners were candidates whose views were championed by the Christian Coalition, Pat Robertson's group.
But they will mostly sit on boards whose prevailing views were already conservative on social issues.


No Headline
"I think about the low interest rates, and figure maybe it's time to buy something. But then I think about a friend of mine. He's got a new baby, a big house payment, two car payments. And he just got laid off." -- FLOYD RUCKER, a veterinarian's assistant from Kansas City.  [ 1:4. ]


A Shuffle of Warehouse Clubs
The long-anticipated shakeout in the warehouse club industry has begun.
The Kmart Corporation announced yesterday that it would close three of its Pace Membership Warehouse stores and sell 14 others to Wal-Mart Stores Inc., which operates a competing chain called Sam's Club.


CHRONICLE
The 50 members of the American Academy of Arts and Letters, who each have a carved chair at the academy's headquarters at 633 West 155th Street in Manhattan, have decided after much soul searching and ego checking that they are no different than the 200 members of the parent National Institute of Arts and Letters.
So, they have agreed to merge the two bodies under the academy's name.
The merger was announced Wednesday at the academy's 53d annual induction and awards ceremony.
ARTHUR SCHLESINGER, the historian, was the keynote speaker and he used the occasion to poke a little fun, noting that William James declined membership in the inner circle that is the academy on the ground he would never join anything that included his younger brother, Henry.


Unwelcome Limelight for a Little Rock Travel Agency
World Wide Travel Service, the company at the center of the controversy surrounding the White House travel office, has its roots in one of Arkansas's leading banks and a history of aggressive growth.
Officials at the company's headquarters, on the second floor of a three-story office building on the banks of the Arkansas River, declined to comment on the controversy today before the White House said it was dropping the service.


CHRONICLE
CONDOLEEZZA RICE, a 38-year-old former special White House assistant for national security affairs in the Bush Administration and an expert on international security and the former Soviet Union, has been appointed provost of Stanford University in Palo Alto, Calif.
Ms.
Rice, a professor of political science and assistant director of Stanford's Center for International Security and Arms Control, is the daughter of a Presbyterian minister in Birmingham, Ala., and her appointment was viewed by Stanford's president, Gerhard Casper, as marking a generational change at Stanford.


ECONOMY OF RUSSIA MAKES SOME GAINS
The Russian economy has made some gains in recent weeks, with inflation down to about 17 percent a month and new pledges by the Government and the Central Bank to get better control over the budget deficit, the issuing of credits and the inflation rate.
Those pledges have secured a new agreement between the Government and the International Monetary Fund intended to provide $3 billion to finance the Russian budget deficit.
The financing is aimed at reducing sharply the amount of domestic credits issued by the Central Bank and the inflation they cause, Russian officials and Western diplomats say.


What Were They Thinking?; When Yesterday's Clean Fill Is Today's Toxic Waste
Asbestos is old news in this old town on Long Island Sound, where the cancer-causing mineral fiber was used for decades in manufacturing automobile brakes at Raybestos Manhattan Inc. and its successor, Raymark Industries.
But for a community that long earned its paychecks from the brake factory on East Main Street and knew that waste laced with asbestos was buried around town, the announcement by state officials on Thursday that lead poisoning may be the factory's greatest toxic legacy came as a surprise.


Richard Murphy, 81 Prolific Scriptwriter For Movies and TV
Richard Murphy, who wrote the screenplays for "The Desert Rats," "Boomerang!" and "Compulsion," died on Wednesday at Cedars-Sinai Medical Center in Los Angeles.
He was 81 and lived in Beverly Hills.
The cause was complications from a stroke two years ago, said his niece, Carol Ward Dudley.


Review/Cabaret; Charles Busch on Drag and 'Dragnet'
One of the funniest bits in "The Charles Busch Revue," a playful if ramshackle parody of the old "Carol Burnett Show," is a delirious spoof of the kind of quasi rock-and-roll production number that was a staple of television variety shows in the 1960's.
To the melodramatic strains of "Town Without Pity," Mr.
Busch impersonates a slithery teen-age tramp, glued into a skin-tight red vinyl dress, who is accidentally killed while being fought over by two leather-jacketed youths.
As in his plays like "Vampire Lesbians of Sodom" and "The Lady in Question," the skit illustrates Mr.
Busch's skill at taking pop kitsch and using drag to give it several extra jolts of silliness.
Among New York's drag performers, he is certainly the most congenial.
Instead of freezing into imperious divalike poses and spewing hostile sexual challenges, he is a man who revels in the opportunity to get himself up in drag, the more flamingly tacky the better, and create a party around it.


Khmer Rouge Issue Warning on Election
The Khmer Rouge rebels warned today that internationally supervised elections scheduled to begin on Sunday would "put fuel on the flames of war" in Cambodia and accused the United States of plotting to destroy the Maoist guerrilla group.
The rebels, who are threatening to sabotage the United Nations-sponsored elections with violence and who have already been blamed for the deaths of 10 United Nations peacekeepers, said the election results would serve only to give legitimacy to the current Vietnamese-installed Government.


Riverbank State Park to Open Next Week


'Witching Hour' Turmoil Pushes Dow Down 30.45
The stock market fell broadly yesterday in moderately heavy trading, as the "double witching hour" added a final bit of turmoil to a hectic week.
The Dow Jones industrial average gyrated wildly after setting records for two consecutive days.
It fell sharply after the opening bell, recovered quickly by 10 A.M., and languished for much of the day.
But around 3 P.M., the Dow plunged in earnest, losing some 46 points, following a rise in gold prices in the afternoon.


Helton Leaves Dolphins for Houston Job
KIM HELTON, a veteran of college and pro coaching, was named coach at the University of Houston yesterday.
Helton, a former Houston Oilers offensive-line coach, resigned a similar position with the Miami Dolphins to sign a five-year contract with the Cougars at a base salary of $125,000 plus fringe benefits.
He replaces JOHN JENKINS who resigned April 17. (AP)


Travel Outfit Tied to Clinton Halts Work for White House
After a third day of embarrassing disclosures about the ouster of its travel office, the White House tonight abruptly announced the withdrawal of the Arkansas travel agency with close ties to President Clinton that it had selected to take over the operation.
The White House also confirmed that a partner of Mr.
Clinton's Hollywood friend Harry Thomason had inquired about doing business with the travel office.
The White House press secretary, Dee Dee Myers, said today that she initially gave the partner some encouragement at the time but that he was later rebuffed by the travel office.


Gas Attendant Is Assaulted; Law Is Faulted
A gas station attendant was critically injured late Thursday when a man ran him over with a truck.
As the attendant lay bleeding, the man took his wallet, the police said.
Gasoline dealers seized on the incident to attack a town law that bars self-service gas stations, arguing that the attendant -- Muhamad Khokhar, 33, of Huntington Station -- would not have been hurt if he had been operating the station from inside a bullet-proof security booth.


Texas School Finance Plan Is Still Undecided


Three New Offerings, Two of Them Firsts
Value investors have been successful lately and the Scudder Value Fund is riding the wave.
Unlike growth managers, who pick stocks based on greater-than-average anticipated earnings, value managers buy shares they consider cheap relative to what they think the company is worth.
Because the share prices are relatively low, value funds tend to be more conservative.
By owning shares of both types, investors add diversification.
The Scudder fund carries no sales charges.
The Putnam Balanced Government Fund is the first to mix fixed-rate and adjustable-rate mortgage securities in one fund.
Fixed-rate issues tend to yield more, but they have more volatile prices than adjustable-rate issues.
Combining the two should produce higher yields than adjustable-rate mortgage funds -- the fund currently yields just over 5 percent -- plus steadier share prices than regular Ginnie Mae funds.


Partial Fingerprint and Krazy Glue Lead to Rape Suspect
A man suspected of 11 rapes in four counties was arrested in the Bronx on Thursday night and charged with robbing and raping a young woman in her Yonkers home on May 3, the police said yesterday.
It was a partial fingerprint, brought into focus by vapors of Krazy Glue, that led detectives to the suspect, said Robert K. Olson, the Yonkers Police Commissioner.


Better Yields in Canada? Perhaps, but With Risk
CANADA these days offers more of interest to United States citizens than its much-studied health-care plan.
In fact, it offers lots of just that -- interest.
In the search for yield to replace income lost when certificates of deposit or Treasury securities bought at higher interest rates come due, Jay Goldinger, chief investment strategist of Capital Insight Inc., a Beverly Hills, Calif., brokerage house, has found an answer that delights him: two-year Government of Canada notes.


Executive Changes
GOOD GUYS INC., San Francisco, the consumer electronics retailer, appointed Thomas A. Hannah senior vice president for stores.
MADISON SQUARE GARDEN CORP., New York, a unit of Paramount Communications Co., named Aimee Kaye senior vice president for human resources.


Reno Summons F.B.I. Director to Discuss His Job
The Director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation, William S. Sessions, was summoned today by Attorney General Janet Reno to discuss his future at the law-enforcement agency.
The hurriedly arranged half-hour meeting suggested that Ms.
Reno had finally made up her mind about Mr.
Sessions after weeks of considering a critical internal ethics report on his conduct.


New York City's 32 School Boards Get New Faces but Not New Views
Amid the ideological warfare over teaching about sexuality and related matters in New York City's schools, voters elected more new faces to community school boards than ever before.
But despite a complement of dissenting voices, the ideological cast of those boards is unlikely to change.
With the results of the May 4 vote almost complete, an analysis shows that about 50 of the winners were candidates whose views were championed by the Christian Coalition, Pat Robertson's group.
But they will mostly sit on boards whose prevailing views were already conservative on social issues.


James A. Murphy, Architect and Editor, 54
James A. Murphy, an architect and editor at Progressive Architecture magazine, died on Sunday at his home in Westport, Conn.
He was 54.
The cause was a heart attack, said his daughter Diana.


Reviews/Dance; A Buffet of Tap Styles, All Served With Energy
The dancing sometimes gets lost in the tide of poetic ruminations, displays of style and hints of history lessons presented by tap companies today.
But the Jazz Tap Ensemble of Los Angeles largely bucked the trend on Tuesday night when it opened a two-week season at the Joyce Theater (175 Eighth Avenue, at 19th Street, Chelsea).
Relaxed, enjoyably provocative dancing and music were the order of the evening in this first of three programs.
The headdresses and heap-big-brave poses in the Condos number were an embarrassment here.


Chester B. deGavre, 85, a Leader In World War II Airborne Combat
Chester B. deGavre, a retired brigadier general and woodcarver of miniature birds, died on Sunday at his home, Deep Creek Plantation, in Onancock on the eastern shore of Virginia.
He was 85.
His wife, Teresa Cameron deGavre, said the cause of death was cardiovascular collapse.


A Repeat of 'Cheers' Finale
Couldn't hear Ted Danson over the noise at your "Cheers" goodbye party?
Missed Norm's last beer because you were stuck at the office?
Well, "Cheers" fans, fret no longer.
NBC will rebroadcast the final episode of the series tomorrow night from 7 to 9.


Jerusalem Journal; More Generals Switching From Bullets to Ballots
One day in March, Maj.
Gen.
Amram Mitzna of the Israel Defense Forces took off his uniform, and said farewell to arms after three decades.
The next day, Mr.
Amram Mitzna was back in his native Haifa, pumping hands and looking for votes in the Labor Party primary for mayor.
It turned out not to be an enormous leap, he says.


Wedding Joy, With Separate Checking
Last Saturday Ann Kilbride, a video producer, and Daniel McCarthy, a computer network salesman, both of Hoboken, N.J., were married.
This may presuppose a merger of their financial lives.
But don't count on it.
Not surprisingly, they would both like to maintain some fiscal independence.
"Dan is more conservative than I am," said Mrs.
McCarthy.
"So it may be easier. I still want to be able to buy something at the Gap without having Dan worry about it."


Nightmare of Torture in Ethiopia Is Relived in an Atlanta Court
Three years ago Edgegayehu Taye, an Ethiopian immigrant who works as a waitress at a hotel here, thought she saw a ghost.
There, a few feet away, working as a bellman in the same hotel, was a former Ethiopian government official -- a man she said she remembered from her nightmarish days in an Addis Ababa jail in the late 1970's.


VENEZUELA SENATE AUTHORIZES TRIAL
The President of Venezuela's Senate, Octavio Lepage, became Acting President today after the Senate voted unanimously to authorize the Supreme Court to try President Carlos Andres Perez on corruption charges.
Mr.
Perez, 70, is not expected to regain presidential powers because a Supreme Court trial would likely continue beyond Feb. 2, the date his five-year term expires.


It Won't Be a Soft Job For Smith to Stop Pippen
In the four times they have opposed each other this season, Scottie Pippen of the Chicago Bulls has outscored Charles Smith of the Knicks, 69-49.
He has outrebounded him, 29-14; he has surpassed Smith in assists, 14-9, and he has topped him in steals, 10-4.
But Smith's team won three of the four games.


Managing the Waste Stream
The Clinton Administration's decision to freeze new construction of hazardous-waste incinerators buys valuable time to bring reason to a politically emotional issue.
But a truer test of the Administration's imagination, even its political courage, is whether it also uses that time to review the whole universe of environmental laws that govern the disposal of dangerous wastes.
Carol Browner, Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency, announced that the agency would clamp an 18-month moratorium on the licensing of new incinerators.
In the meantime, the E.P.A. will tighten regulation of 171 unlicensed boilers and industrial furnaces that companies use to burn their own waste -- the bulk of the 5 million tons of hazardous waste incinerated every year.


After a Child's Gruesome Death, Few Can Remember His Name
His image is captured on a police snapshot.
He was a little boy, black hair, brown eyes, probably 5 years old.
Late last night, the police said they had learned his identity, but would not reveal it because they were still searching for his mother.
On Thursday, the boy's bruised body, strangled and beaten, was found at the bottom of a trash compactor in the Linden Houses in Brooklyn.
After a day of canvassing the East New York neighborhood, the policelearned that the boy had relatives in Jersey City and went there to find out more.


Coast to Coast, Workers Say Fickle Economy Is a Riddle
The sun poked through the clouds, vanished, then gave way to rain as Floyd Rucker and Vivian Kizer stepped inside a gleaming downtown shopping mall here, where they did more looking than buying.
They have talked about buying a new house and having a baby.
But the nation's economy, fickle as the spring sky in Missouri, has put their plans on hold.
"I think about the low interest rates, and figure maybe it's time to buy something," said Mr.
Rucker, a 29-year-old veterinarian's assistant.
"But then I think about a friend of mine. He's got a new baby, a big house payment, two car payments. And he just got laid off. He doesn't know what he's going to do."


ANGOLA TALKS FAIL TO SET CEASE-FIRE
Negotiations for a peace settlement in Angola ended in failure tonight after the warring factions were unable to agree on a cease-fire.
"I'm afraid the war is going to go on and probably to intensify," said Margaret Anstee, the United Nations special envoy to Angola, who mediated nearly six weeks of talks held here.


Despite Reassurances, Jabbings at a School Leave Anger
Lenora McLeod was watching television on Tuesday night when her 11-year-old granddaughter, Shakeia, walked into the living room of their apartment in Harlem, collapsed on the couch and began sobbing.
"I have AIDS," Shakeia said.
A classmate had jabbed her in the arm at Public School 46 that afternoon, and she was certain that the weapon had been a contaminated hypodermic needle, she said.
Startled, Mrs.
McLeod called the police and took Shakeia to a hospital, plunging them into an ordeal that has shaken the family and called into question the school's handling of the incident.


Review/Television; Docudrama on the Heels of the News
Little more than a month after the Texas fire that claimed the lives of David Koresh and 71 other people, at least 17 of them children, NBC is racing into prime time, tomorrow at 9 P.M., with "In the Line of Duty: Ambush in Waco." The elapsed time between news story and television docudrama grows ever shorter as networks scramble to exploit a seemingly inexhaustible based-on-fact marketplace.
Event television has a whole new meaning nowadays.
Actually, this movie, produced and directed by Dick Lowry and written by Phil Penningroth ("When the Bough Breaks"), was already in production when Federal agents decided on April 19 to end a 51-day standoff with the Branch Davidians, Koresh's religious cult.
In "Ambush in Waco," the events that led to the fatal February confrontation that began the standoff are traced from two points of view, that of the cultists and that of the agents from the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms.
In the final scene, one agent says, "You know, guys, we could be here for a long time."


Like Old Times: Boggs Goes 4 for 4 as Red Sox Wins
Wade Boggs returned to Fenway Park, his home for 11 major league seasons, and played out a self-described "fairy tale." Well, almost.
Boggs, booed so bitterly here last season while batting .259, knocked four singles in four at-bats and earned two standing ovations from the crowd tonight.
In his fifth trip to the plate, with two outs and two on in the ninth inning and the Yankees trailing by five runs, he earned a walk, despite an 0-2 count, to load the bases.


How Broadcast Agency Continues to Guard the Public Interest
To the Editor:
In "Dial 1-800-Censor" (Op-Ed, May 7) Sandy Tolan, a documentary producer for public radio, accuses the Corporation for Public Broadcasting of "carrying out a plan to monitor public broadcasting for political content." That's wrong, and he knows it.
Soliciting public comments, as we have begun to do, is hardly censorious.
Indeed, it is democratic.
It is a stretch of common sense to imagine that asking for the views of the public will stifle creativity and lead to "insipid programs that offend no one."
The Corporation for Public Broadcasting has a special obligation to facilitate strict adherence to balance and objectivity in controversial programming.
This is not new.
Congress wrote it into law in 1967, when it created the agency.
The Public Telecommunications Act of 1992 simply reaffirms one of the pillars of Federal support for public broadcasting as we know it.
By recognizing the corporation's accountability for these issues, it strengthens rather than dilutes our role as a heat shield between creative independence and political pressure.


Regard Celibacy as a Grace Not Given to All; Unspiritual Results
To the Editor:
The Rev.
Paul E. Dinter indicates the underlying issue in "Celibacy and Its Discontents" (Op-Ed, May 6): the relationship between sexuality and spirituality.
One may, or may not, believe that the human sexual faculty is a viable (or an appropriate) vehicle of spiritual expression, but one cannot ignore the objective truth that institutionally coerced behavior must produce unintended and, indeed, unspiritual consequences.
Spiritually motivated self-sacrifice must be freely and unreservedly undertaken; otherwise, it becomes a token of conventional pietism -- religiously counterproductive and socially useless.


Getting Out of Town . . . and Making It Work
Michael and Paula Croteau did what many New Yorkers dream of doing: They Moved to the country but kept their business links to the city.
Mr.
Croteau, 32, moves to the city from Vermont in 1986 and built up a thriving graphic design business.
He marries Paula, 36, a fashion consultant, in 1989, After a series of mishaps the couple decided they's had enough of city life.
Mrs.
Croteau was mugged.
Their car was stolen.
Exploding steam pipes drove them out of apartment.
Mr.
Croteau's computers and office furniture were stolen.


Islanders' Arbour Remembers to Forget
All calmed down, Al Arbour said today he didn't even remember the harsh criticism he issued the previous night after Montreal's 2-1 victory in overtime put his Islanders down by three games to none in the Wales Conference final.
The Islanders' coach had suggested that National Hockey League referees were ruling against his team because they wanted an all-Canadian Stanley Cup final between Montreal and Toronto.
If the Canadiens win Game 4 at Nassau Coliseum Saturday night they will sweep the series and fulfill at least half of the Canada scenario.
Then Montreal would await the winner of the Toronto-Los Angeles series in the Campbell Conference.
With its victory Thursday night, Montreal tied a playoff record with its 11th straight post-season victory.


Classical Music in Review
Music by Peter Schickele  Bargemusic
As a counterweight to his annual P. D. Q. Bach evening, the composer and satirist Peter Schickele presents a "serious" concert once a year, drawing attention to his chamber and vocal compositions.
This year's event took place on Monday night at Bargemusic in Brooklyn and on Tuesday night at Merkin Concert Hall.


Alter Crosses Party Lines to Back Giuliani for Mayor
Creating what he called a "multiparty fusion movement" to bring together disparate political and racial groups in New York City, Rudolph W. Giuliani, the Republican-Liberal candidate for mayor, reached across party lines yesterday to introduce Susan D. Alter, a Democratic councilwoman from Brooklyn, as his choice for City Council president.
Ms.
Alter, a 14-year veteran of the City Council, used their joint news conference to announce her bid to be the Council's president, a position to be renamed public advocate.
She said her decision to join the Giuliani camp had evolved in the last several weeks and her political defection had caused her a minimum of Angst.
"It was easier than I would have liked it to have been," she said.
Badillo Vacillates
The announcement, made at a news conference yesterday morning at Mr.
Giuliani's campaign headquarters on Lexington Avenue, came as Herman Badillo, another Democrat and Mr.
Giuliani's choice for comptroller, continued to dodge questions about his possible move to join the Giuliani slate.
Shortly after Ms.
Alter's announcement, Mr.
Badillo, speaking at a luncheon at the City Club of New York, repeated that he had not decided whether to accept Mr.
Giuliani's offer.
"I haven't decided," he said.
"And I am not likely to decide for some time."


Phillips-Van Heusen Goes Outside Family for Chief
After handing the management baton to Phillips family members for the last 112 years, the Phillips-Van Heusen Corporation has anointed Bruce J. Klatsky, its president and chief operating officer, to steer the apparel manufacturer into the 21st century.
Mr.
Klatsky, who has no family ties to the Phillipses but has spent the last 22 years at the company, will become chief executive on June 1.
The company, which makes Van Heusen shirts, Bass shoes and other clothing, said he would become chairman next year, when Lawrence S. Phillips, the great-grandson of the company's founder, retires.


Review/Film; Peeping Tom's Guide To Modern Voyeurism
Sharon Stone is seen practicing her golf putts in "Sliver," which is one of many good reasons this film was kept under wraps until it opened yesterday.
Faced with the challenge of following up Ms.
Stone's sensational appearance in "Basic Instinct," the makers of "Sliver" have wound up violating what should have been sacrosanct rules.
Among them: Sharon Stone should not appear in roles that require her to do laundry.
Or go to the supermarket.
Or talk about Pavarotti.
Or trade pleasantries with her neighbors.
Or toss little cocktail parties.
Or generally be nice.
But in "Sliver," playing a book editor named Carly Norris, Ms.
Stone comes across as the kind of person who wears underwear, even if Joe Eszterhas's exceptionally crass screenplay does include a scene in which she takes it off in a restaurant. (If Ms. Stone isn't careful, this could become a trademark gesture, the kind of thing that winds up in a Las Vegas act 30 years down the line.) It is as if Mr.
Eszterhas, who also wrote "Basic Instinct," has lost track of why this actress could so stunningly embody sexual power and menace in his earlier tale.


Any Three-Peat Pays Riley
Nobody would accuse Pat Riley of 2-timing his own team, but if the Knicks lose 2 the Chicago Bulls next week and the Bulls go on 2 win the National Basketball Association championship, it would be a case of the 3d time's a charm 4 both Riley and the Bulls.
The reason is that back in 1988, after the Lakers had won a second straight N.B.A. title and were hoping for a three-peat in 1989, Riley, the Lakers' coach, registered the terms "3-peat" and "three-peat" as trademarks.
That means he would be entitled to royalties if the terms are used on T-shirts and other items, as would seem likely if the Bulls three-peat this year.


As Unity Nears, Europe Faces Woes
As it completes the ratification of the Treaty on European Union, the European Community now faces the task of overcoming the severe economic problems that have undercut its ability to carry out the treaty's major aims.
Plagued by recession and resurgent economic nationalism, the community has all but given up on moving in step toward the creation of a single currency and a powerful European Central Bank by the 1999 deadline set out in the treaty, despite its approval this week by Danish voters and by Britain's House of Commons.


Coast to Coast, Workers Say Fickle Economy Is a Riddle
The sun poked through the clouds, vanished, then gave way to rain as Floyd Rucker and Vivian Kizer stepped inside a gleaming downtown shopping mall here, where they did more looking than buying.
They have talked about buying a new house and having a baby.
But the nation's economy, fickle as the spring sky in Missouri, has put their plans on hold.
"I think about the low interest rates, and figure maybe it's time to buy something," said Mr.
Rucker, a 29-year-old veterinarian's assistant.
"But then I think about a friend of mine. He's got a new baby, a big house payment, two car payments. And he just got laid off. He doesn't know what he's going to do."


Ballot Boxes Arrive as a Tense Cambodia Prepares for Elections


White House Follies; The Gang That Can't Fire Straight
Bill Clinton's staff must be giving the man serious heartburn.
This week, his minions managed to turn an administrative shake-up into a public relations fiasco that left the White House looking inept, callous and self-serving.
On Wednesday, the White House dismissed all seven members of the White House travel office and asked the F.B.I. to investigate them.
The office arranges travel for news organizations covering the President and commercial travel for the White House staff.


Gen. Joseph Smith, 91, Is Dead; Headed Berlin Airlift Operations
Lieut.
Gen.
Joseph Smith, a major figure in the Berlin Airlift, died on Wednesday at the Andrews Air Force Base hospital in Maryland.
He was 91 and lived at a military-retirement community in Fort Belvoir, Va.
The cause of death was respiratory heart failure, his family said.


Review/Theater; De Sade, Via Many Filters But Clear
By staging a production of astonishing lucidity and theatricality, Ingmar Bergman has reinvented Yukio Mishima's "Madame de Sade." In his hands, it becomes a political power play as well as a shocking discourse on the guises of evil.
Written in 1965, five years before Mishima's ritual suicide, the play is about the Marquis de Sade "as seen through women's eyes." De Sade never appears on stage, but we hear in grotesque and sometimes glowing detail about the paradoxes of his perversity.
Mishima, who evidently identified with de Sade, paired opposites: the sacred and the profane, the beautiful and the horrific.
The greater truth about the character of de Sade is that he is whatever the women and the world want him to be.
For one of the women he is a lovable vampire.
At the end of the play there is the suggestion that his decadence has not only destroyed women but may also have contributed to the French Revolution.


CHRONICLE
DOUGLAS FAIRBANKS JR., who still looks like the dashing swashbuckler he played in his movie career despite his 83 years, was cited on Wednesday in San Francisco by CARE, the relief organization, for his naval service in World War II and his post-war efforts in delivering CARE packages to starving war victims.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
6.50
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
3.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.00
2.97
3.74
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
2.99
2.95
3.67
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.11
3.06
3.77
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
5.78
5.70
7.02
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.04
6.99
7.82
TELEPHONE BONDS
7.95
7.92
8.77
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.04
6.02
6.61
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Islamic Movement Came to U.S. in 1920
To the Editor:
"Black Muslims Enter Islamic Mainstream" (front page, May 3) misses a key historical factor on the introduction of Islam in America.
The Ahmadiyya Movement in Islam, an orthodox universal community, was the first successful organized effort to introduce Islam in the Unit ed States and was most successful among African-Americans.


Corrections
An article yesterday about President Clinton's haircut aboard Air Force One named his hairstylist incorrectly.
The stylist is Cristophe of Beverly Hills, Calif.


Richardson Will Remain With Razorbacks
Arkansas Coach NOLAN RICHARDSON talked to the Atlanta Hawks yesterday about their coaching vacancy, but will stay put at the school.
"After meeting with them and listening to what they had to say, I'm more convinced than ever that I'm at the right place," Richardson said in an Arkansas athletic department news release.


Glen Ridge Bail Hearing Hinges on Assault Claim
In a complicated post-trial chapter to the Glen Ridge sex-assault case, the question of continued bail for a man convicted in the assault could turn on another woman's assertion that he also attacked her, a case in which charges were never filed.
A New Jersey appeals court has ordered a special hearing into whether Christopher Archer, one of three men convicted of assaulting a mildly retarded friend with a bat and a broom, is too dangerous to remain free.
The only topic to be reviewed is a student's assertion that Mr.
Archer sexually assaulted her at Boston College in October 1990.
The Boston College student has never filed a formal complaint against Mr.
Archer with Massachusetts authorities, and he has never been charged with a crime in the case.


Coast to Coast, Workers Say Fickle Economy Is a Riddle: The East; Things Are 'Flat But Improving'
Pest control may not be a leading economic indicator, but Chris Pickering, an exterminator here, says his business is highly sensitive to the economic well-being of his customers.
His business was flat last year, Mr.
Pickering says, but it has been improving slightly this year.
"That means people here don't think the economy is all that bad," said Mr.
Pickering, 26, the manager of a Terminix International office in a middle-class corner of Philadelphia.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball American League  BOSTON RED SOX -- Signed Joseph Barksdale, pitcher and assigned him to Fort Myers of the Gulf Coast League.


Casino Bill Allowed to Die In Connecticut
The Las Vegas gambling industry's high-stakes drive to legalize casino gambling in Connecticut ended today in retreat, when legislative leaders and representatives of Mirage Resorts jointly agreed to let the proposal die for the year without even taking a vote that they said would be sure to fail.
The announcement represented a major victory for Gov.
Lowell P. Weicker Jr., who led the forces against the casino plan through a five-month battle of wits and wills with Mirage Resorts' chairman, Stephen A. Wynn.


Memorial Service Held for Council Chairman of the District of Columbia


NEWS SUMMARY
International 2-5  ANGOLA PEACE TALKS FALTER
Talks on a peace settlement in Angola ended in failure in the Ivory Coast when the warring factions were unable to agree on a cease-fire, after a U.N. envoy mediated nearly six weeks of negotiations.  1  G.M.
SEEKS CRIMINAL ACTION
General Motors has asked Germany to take criminal action against Jose Ignacio Lopez de Arriortua, its purchasing czar who defected to Volkswagen, saying he and others took confidential documents when they left several weeks ago.  1  'SELF-CLEANSING' IN BOSNIA
While fighting continues across Bosnia and Herzegovina, droves of refugees are abandoning their homes in what aid workers call "self-cleansing" as all three Bosnian factions are pressing other ethnic groups to leave.  4
Clinton backs air power to protect U.N. troops at "safe havens." 4
Danube River countries say sanctions have cost them $12 billion.  4  VENEZUELAN LEADER IS REPLACED
A political opponent of free-market economic changes became Venezuela's Acting President after the Senate voted to authorize the Supreme Court to try Carlos Andres Perez on corruption charges.  3  A WARNING FROM KHMER ROUGE
The Khmer Rouge warned that U.N.-supervised elections scheduled to begin on Sunday would "put fuel on the flames of war" in Cambodia and accused the U.S. of plotting to destroy the Maoist guerrilla group.  3  RUSSIA WINS AID ON DEFICIT
Russia has reduced inflation, and the Government and the Central Bank have pledged to get better control over the budget deficit, the issuing of credits and the inflation rate.
In response, the International Monetary Fund plans to provide $3 billion to finance Russia's budget deficit.  5  EUROPE IS FACING MORE HURDLES
The European Community is confronted by severe economic problems that have undercut its ability to carry out the major aims of the Treaty on European Union as member countries are faced with recession and economic nationalism.  5  Jerusalem Journal: Generals are switching from bullets to ballots.  2  National 6-8  AIDES SPLIT ON HEALTH CARE
President Clinton's advisers are deeply divided over the size of the standard package of medical benefits to be guaranteed by Administration's health-care plan.1  UNCERTAINTY ON ECONOMY
Although the recession has been declared over, many Americans say they remain uncertain about the economy and are fearful about their jobs.  1  TRAVEL AGENCY IS DROPPED
The White House unexpectedly dropped the travel agency with close ties to President Clinton that it had selected to take over its travel account.  1
The company in the travel office affair has aggressively grown.  8  CONTEMPT CHARGE OVER ARCHIVES
A judge cited the White House and the Archivist of the United States for contempt of court for failing to carry out his order to preserve computer records.  6  U.S.
DEFINES MENTAL ILLNESS
The Government has officially defined "serious mental illness," a standard to help determine who is eligible for treatment in clinics that receive Federal funds.  8  TORTURE TRIAL IN ATLANTA
An Ethiopian immigrant who moved to the United States accused a co-worker of a long list of brutalities on behalf of the Ethiopian Government years ago.  6  UEBERROTH STEPS DOWN
Peter Ueberroth resigned as head of Rebuild L.A. amid criticism that the group, which aimed to improve the economies of troubled neighborhoods, was faltering.  6  The Attorney General met with the F.B.I. chief to discuss his tenure.  7  Religion Notes: A worldwide survey shows a strong belief in God.  25  Metro Digest 21  NEW FACES, SAME IDEOLOGY
Amid the ideological warfare over the teaching of sexuality and related matters in New York City's schools, voters elected more new faces to local school boards than ever before, but the ideological cast of those boards is unlikely to change.  1  APPOINTMENT BY COMMISSIONER
Gen.
Joseph Smith; headed the Berlin Airlift operations.
Chester B. deGavre, a leader in World II airborne combat.
Editorials/Op-Ed 18-19  Editorials  Managing the waste stream.
White House follies.
The President's locks.
A mighty fall in Venezuela.
Letters  Russell Baker: The trodden lament.
Peter J. Gomes: Back in the military closet.
Pei Minxin: Don't link China trade to human rights.
Paul L. Leventhal: The coming age of plutonium.


ECONOMIC ADVISERS CAUTION PRESIDENT ON MEDICAL COSTS
Some of the Clinton Administration's top economic officials told President Clinton on Thursday that they had serious questions about the cost and scope of the ambitious health-care plan being developed by Hillary Rodham Clinton, people who attended the meeting said today.
As Mr.
Clinton nears crucial decisions on his health plan, his top advisers remain deeply divided on a question at the core of the proposal: how generous to make the standard package of medical benefits that would be guaranteed to all Americans.


3 Nations Disagree On Trade
American demands for penalty provisions to enforce labor and environmental safeguards in a North American Free Trade Agreement ran into stiff opposition from Canada and Mexico at a negotiating session here this week.
On the basis of the three days of talks, it was unclear whether President Clinton would be able to meet his self-imposed deadline of submitting tough supplemental accords to Congress by mid-July.
The main agreement, incorporating 4,000 pages of text, was signed last year and if ratified would go into effect on Jan. 1.


N.C.A.A. Confirms Violations at Pitt
The University of Pittsburgh, accused of of 15 recruiting violations in football and one in basketball, said yesterday it planned to cooperate with investigators from the National Collegiate Athletic Association.


Girl Attacked by Pit Bull
A 13-year-old girl was attacked by her aunt's pit bull in the hallway of a building at 217 West 63d Street near Amsterdam yesterday, the police said.
The girl, Jessica Galarza, was bitten on the leg, said Sgt.
John McCluskey, a police spokesman.
When police officers arrived, the dog turned on them, he said.
The animal was subdued with a tranquilizer dart and taken to a shelter for evaluation.
The girl was listed in good condition at St.
Luke's-Roosevelt Hospital Center.


Classical Music in Review
Opera Manhattan  Church of the Heavenly Rest Fifth Avenue and 90th Street Performances on Wednesday and Friday
As Faure aged, his understated music took on a reclusive air.
The deflected emotions and dour elegance demanded more than a listener of good will, in fact a kind of investigative reporter, someone to measure the lyrical symmetries, note the coolheaded adventures into modulation and pry into the deep feelings to which Faure offers only clues.


Best Duels Taking Place at 400 Meters
In a sport where best rarely meets second best, the men's 400 meters remains one of track and field's few showdown distances.
Whether it is because the runners are more daring, or simply because they have fewer competitive alternatives, the fields for this distance are often awesome.
Today at Wien Stadium in Manhattan, there will be another all-star meeting when Quincy Watts meets Steve Lewis and other world-class runners in the Reebok New York Games.


A Judge Issues Contempt Order In Archives Case
A Federal judge cited the White House and the Archivist of the United States today for contempt of court for failing to carry out his order to preserve the computer records of the Bush and Clinton Administrations.
Judge Charles R. Richey of Federal District Court here said Bush Administration officials had damaged some of the backup computer tapes of the National Security Council that he had ordered preserved.
He also ruled that the Clinton Administration had failed to write proper guidelines to preserve new White House computer records adequately.


Classical Music in Review
Carol Vaness  Soprano Alice Tully Hall
Carol Vaness's recital on Wednesday night reached for the poised, the exquisite, the ironic: songs and arias of Mozart, Rossini, Poulenc, Griffes and Meyerbeer.
The soprano's voice is as fluid and winsome as ever, even though her talents did not always make the most of a subtly challenging program.


Awards for Film on Reston
A documentary film about James B. Reston, the former New York Times columnist, Washington correspondent and executive editor, has won two awards: the Golden Eagle Award of the Council on International Nontheatrical Events and the Worldfest Silver Award.
The film, "James Reston: The Man Millions Read," was produced and directed by Susan Dryfoos, the New York Times historian.
The executive producer was A. William Kelly, the chief executive officer of WVIA-TV in Pittson, Pa.
The awards make the film eligible for an Oscar nomination and for placement in international festivals.


In New York 5 Months, Woman From Germany Dies Homeless
For several months, she made her home in a dank crawl space underneath a footbridge across from the United Airlines terminal at Kennedy International Airport, the police said yesterday.
That's where her body was found Thursday, they said, next to the suitcases that contained her passport, letters to her family and an unused ticket home.
The police say she was a 27-year-old German woman who arrived in New York City on Jan. 14.
They are not saying who she was until they reach her parents in Dusseldorf.


Still Caring for the Aged, Albeit a Bit More Slowly
WHEN Gertrude Landau was 32 years old, she became the director of the first senior center in the world.
That was 50 years ago, and now, having gone from theory to practice, she was describing the changes she had seen in the lives of old people.
"We had no words like gerontology, and even senior citizen didn't come into use until 1951," Ms.
Landau said, discussing the time in 1943 when as a social worker she volunteered to administer a room in the Bronx where old people came to play pinochle, drink coffee and listen to a radio.
"There were no retirement communities. We didn't know about Alzheimer's."


Byrd Stalks November Ghosts
As the car entered the Lincoln Tunnel from Manhattan, heading toward Giants Stadium, Dennis Byrd felt a tinge of excitement and nervousness.
He recalled it was the same mix of emotions he would feel on the same trip on game days.
There was no football game here today.
But Byrd wrestled with his emotions as he returned to the field where his life changed forever.


Bridge
One of the country's biggest suburban clubs moves to new and more spacious quarters today, with a reopening party at 1 P.M.
After 17 years in Manhasset, L.I., the Vanderbilt Club will operate a full daytime schedule of games and a partial evening schedule at 2500 Marcus Avenue in Lake Success, L.I.
Information is available from (516) 328-9704.
The proprietor, Frank Schuld, likes to experiment with new bidding ideas.
On the diagramed deal, played a quarter of a century ago, he made a weird response of three no-trump to an opening one-heart bid.
By agreement this showed a long, solid major suit, and landed his wife, Diana, in seven spades from the South position.
She became one of the few players ever to attempt a grand slam with a void in the trump suit.


Corrections
The Advertising column in Business Day on May 12, about the marketing of Death cigarettes, referred incorrectly to a similarly named vodka and to a dispute over its name.
The vodka is still sold under the name Black Death.
Federal regulators have sought to revoke approval of the Black Death label and force the vodka's marketer and distributor, Black Death U.S.A. and Cabo Distributing of El Monte, Calif., to rename the vodka Black Hat.
But in October, a Federal district court judge in San Francisco ruled in favor of the vodka's marketer and distributor.


Corrections
A chart in Business Day yesterday with an article about the compensation of Leonard Tow, chairman and chief executive of Citizens Utilities, misstated the value of his pension in some editions.
The pension has a total value of $18 million, not $18 million a year.
The article also misidentified a member of California's Public Utilities Commission.
He is Norman D. Shumway, a former Congressman from Stockton, Calif., not Dr.
Norman D. Shumway, the noted heart surgeon.


Conflict in Cyprus
To the Editor:
Contrary to your May 12 report of a Russian veto to a change in financing of the United Nations peacekeeping force on Cyprus, the Cyprus conflict did not come "to a head with the Turkish invasion in July 1974 and the partition of the island." The legal and justified intervention of Turkey (per the Treaty of Guarantee of 1960) was preceded by, and was the direct consequence of, the Greek military regime's coup of July 15, 1974, aimed at the takeover of the island by Greece.


Pilots Cool To Northwest Debt Deferral
The Air Line Pilots Association gave a lukewarm reception yesterday to reports that Northwest Airlines had asked its bankers to defer payments on its $2.14 billion debt.
"We don't consider it restructuring to push a debt payment back a year or two," said an association spokeswoman in Minneapolis.


The Motivator Delivers His First Monologue
In imploring his listeners not to give up on the 1993 Mets, Dallas Green hit on a sad fact of baseball life yesterday.
"I really feel confident," the Mets' new manager said toward the end of his first news conference, "that we can reach these guys and we can make them play with a little bit more aggressiveness and enthusiasm than you've seen in the past."


Inquiry on Gay Sailor Only Gathered Facts
To the Editor:
With surprise and disappointment I read "Shape Up, Navy" (editorial, May 11), which states: "Why can't the United States Navy, a service of proud tradition, conduct credible inquiries when things go wrong in the ranks? That question is raised anew by the latest botched investigation -- into the murder of a gay sailor by a shipmate near a base in Japan."
Words like "bungled," "fumbled" and "botched" are not usually associated with an investigation that results in two guilty pleas, one of them to a murder charge.


Regard Celibacy as a Grace Not Given to All
To the Editor:
In a time of shifting sexual mores, when physicians, psychiatrists, teachers, youth leaders and others are caught up in scandal, there is no reason Roman Catholic priests should be spared.
Since the Catholic Church is the chief institutional defender of "traditional" sexual ethics, it is no surprise that proponents of the sexual revolution take particular delight in the exposure of priestly misconduct.
In "Celibacy and Its Discontents" (Op-Ed, May 6), the Rev.
Paul E. Dinter is among those within the church who deplore "dysfunctional Catholic sexual ethics." He focuses his attack on "mandatory celibacy."
It is indeed mandatory for priests of the Latin rite to be celibate, but it is not mandatory for anyone to be a priest.
Father Dinter correctly notes that "Most men and women are meant to seek holiness by enacting their sexuality, not by avoiding it."


Hrudey Helps Kings Take 2-1 Lead
The Toronto Maple Leafs-Los Angeles Kings series has come to this: split ends.
During a melee in Game 1 the Maple Leafs Coach, Pat Burns, threw some verbal ammunition at rookie Kings Coach Barry Melrose, including, "Why don't you get a haircut."


White House Follies; The President's Locks -- Grid and Curly
The haircut that tied up two runways the other day at Los Angeles International Airport looks like the stuff of instant legend.
President Clinton, whose hair was the problem, will probably be hearing about it for the rest of his term.
It also raises the persistent question of how much inconvenience and expense Americans are willing to bear for their President's travels.
It's good for a President to get around the country, and the Secret Service is rightly rigorous in mobilizing local police as he moves about.
History teaches us that the men who occupy the White House need special protection.


More Bosnians Give Up Homes to Their Enemies
As fighting continues to rage across Bosnia and Herzegovina, droves of refugees are now abandoning their homes in a grim twist on the "ethnic cleansing" campaigns that have defined the objectives of the civil war in the Balkans, international aid workers said here today.
"In the beginning things were simple," said Urs Boegli, operations coordinator for the International Committee of the Red Cross.
"The authorities wanted the people out, and the people wanted to stay. Now, the authorities want them out and the people want to go. They're saying that they just want to get out."


Review/Pop; A Double Serving of Up-to-Date Country
It is no mystery why country music is the fastest-growing and arguably the most artistically vigorous segment of American pop music right now.
As both Clint Black and Wynonna Judd, two of country music's biggest stars, demonstrated at Radio City Music Hall on Tuesday and Wednesday nights, the music has expanded and modernized its vocabulary over the last decade without losing its soul or its sense of identity.
If most country music still directs itself to white, rural working people, it has also become increasingly suburbanized and has assimilated many of the stylistic elements of old-time rock-and-roll, a genre that has come to seem quaint to a younger, post-punk rock audience.
And unlike rock and hip-hop, country music reveres traditional standards of songwriting craft and celebrates polished voices, instrumental virtuosity and ensemble teamwork.
If its songs are often formulaic, they are unfailingly and reassuringly tuneful.


A Mighty Fall in Venezuela
As the United States' second-largest oil supplier and one of Latin America's longest-running democracies, Venezuela merits special attention.
The downfall of its flamboyant President, Carlos Andres Perez, on charges of massive embezzlement of public funds poses no obvious threat to the oil flow.
And it just might check the undermining of democratic morale that provoked two nearly successful coup attempts within 16 months.
Mr.
Perez has been modern Venezuela's dominant political figure, serving as President for 9 of its 34 years of democratic rule.
He has also thrust himself into the international spotlight, offering himself as a mediator of the violent conflicts that have convulsed Nicaragua, El Salvador and Haiti.


INSIDE
U.S. Backs Bosnia Air Shield
The Clinton Administration is telling European allies it is willing to use air power to protect United Nations peacekeepers guarding "safe havens" for Muslims in Bosnia.
Page 4.
Poison Under Ground
Toxic sludge buried in Stratford, including under a town park, has Connecticut officials seeking lead testing for all children under 6.
Page 21.
Contempt Charge Over Files
A judge cited the White House and the Archivist of the United States for contempt of court for failing to preserve computer records.
Page 6.


Results Plus
GOLF Waite's 67 Keeps Him in Lead at Kemper Grant Waite shot a four-under-par 67 to stay in the lead at the Kemper Open in Potomac, Md.
The nine-under 133 total by Waite, a New Zealand native in his second year on the tour and without a payday of more than $12,000, gave him a two-stroke lead over Tom Kite, who shot a 65. (AP)


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY KELLY DRAWS PRAISE FOR POLICE CHANGES
After seven months in office, Police Commissioner Raymond W. Kelly has surprised some of those who thought he would be too much of a police insider to change anything about the department.
Indeed, Mr.
Kelly, a 30-year police veteran, is getting good reviews from unlikely sources, including some prominent blacks at first skeptical of having a white as commissioner.
Others who monitor the police point to his appointment of an outspoken chief to evaluate community policing.
The chief's job it to find bad news and tell it to his boss.
Page 1.
NEW SCHOOL BOARDS TO RESEMBLE THE OLD
Even though more new faces were elected to community school boards in the May 4 election than ever before, the ideological cast of those boards is unlikely to change.
The new conservative board members, for example, will mostly join boards that were already conservative.
But dissenting voices added in many districts could mean a proliferation of curriculum disputes in the city's 32 districts.
Page 1.
GIULIANI PICKS A RUNNING PARTNER
Rudolph W. Giuliani, the Republican-Liberal candidate for mayor, reached across party lines to introduce his choice for City Council president.
The candidate, Susan D. Alter, a 14-year Democratic councilwoman from Brooklyn, said her decision "was easier than I would have liked it to have been." Page 23.
FEARS RAISED BY STUDENTS' PRICKING
At least 11 children were pricked while at their school, P.S. 46 in Harlem, and before the police determined that the weapon was just a safety pin, the children feared that they had been infected with AIDS by a hypodermic needle and were rushed to hospital emergency rooms.
The parents are critical of the school's handling of the episode.
Page 23.
Five months after she apparently arrived from Germany, a woman was found dead under a footbridge at Kennedy International Airport, where she apparently had been living.
Page 23.
REGION  ARREST MADE IN 11 RAPES
The police say a partial fingerprint led to the arrest of a Bronx man suspected of 11 rapes in four counties.
He has been charged with robbing and raping a young woman in her Yonkers home.
Investigators had nicknamed the man they were seeking "Scarface" because of a three-inch scar all the victims said they had seen on his right cheek.
Page 24.
ANOTHER HEARING IN GLEN RIDGE CASE
A New Jersey appeals court has ordered a special hearing into whether Christopher Archer, one of three men convicted of assaulting a mildly retarded schoolmate, is too dangerous to remain free.
The issue is another woman's assertion that he sexually assaulted her at Boston College.
The student never filed a formal complaint against Mr.
Archer and he has never been charged with a crime in the case.
Page 24.
GAS DEALERS ATTACK SELF-SERVICE BAN
Gasoline dealers in Huntington Station, L.I., held a demonstration asking for repeal of a town law that bars self-service stations after an attendant was robbed and run over by a truck.
The dealers said operating a station from inside a bulletproof security booth is safer.
Huntington is the only Long Island town that prohibits self-service operations.
Page 24.
About New York by Michael T. Kaufman Page 23 Chronicle Page 20


Sanctions Have a $12 Billion Ripple Effect Along the Danube
The United Nations sanctions imposed on Yugoslavia have cost the other Danube basin nations more than $12 billion in the last 11 months, more than they have cost Yugoslavia, the governments of countries in the basin say.
With the tightening of the sanctions by the Security Council on April 26, the Danube basin countries' losses in transportation, trade and industry are expected to grow in the coming months.


Review/Pop; Five Women and a Mix of Traditions
Birdcalls and monkey cries, five-part Renaissance madrigal harmony and the ricocheting counterpoint of the Babanzele pygmies, the tight microtonal turns of a Syrian melody and the bluesy wail of a spiritual, boot-stomping dances and cartwheels: those were only a few of the ways Zap Mama sparked its songs on Tuesday night at the Grand.
Zap Mama, a five-woman vocal group from Belgium, is a utopian multicultural dream.
It uses the most ancient instruments -- voices and percussion -- to turn traditions from all over the world into blithe, playful, unabashedly modern music.
While one song, from the group's album "Adventures in Afropea 1" (Luaka Bop/Warner Brothers Records) draws on a traditional young girl's song from Zaire, another mimics the sounds of starting and driving a recalcitrant car, with two women pretending that a mike stand is a jack.


U.S. Defines Mental Illness As Standard for Treatment
The Federal Government has officially defined "serious mental illness" as it prepares for the first national estimate of the number of people suffering from a condition that keeps them from leading a normal life.
The definitions provide a national uniform standard with which all the states can work, said Dr.
Frank Sullivan, acting director of the new Federal Center for Mental Health Services. .
He said the states would help determine who is eligible for treatment in state and local clinics that receive Federal funds and where patients are treated at no cost or at reduced rates.


Sports of The Times; New Rocky Yells He's 'The New . . .'
JESSE FERGUSON had just earned a unanimous 10-round decision over Ray Mercer in February when he was asked a question: Had the Philadelphia heavyweight read in the newspapers how Mercer had been blueprinted for a title fight with Riddick Bowe?
"I don't read the paper," he said, "because my name ain't in it."


COMPANY BRIEFS
AMERICAN DRUG SCREENS INC., Oklahoma City, plans to buy three Malaysian latex glove factories from MBF International for about $25 million in cash and stock.
CORNING INC., Corning, N.Y., acquired DeYor Laboratories and DeYor/ Southwestern through its Corning Lab Services unit and plans to merge them with its Metpath Inc. network of clinical testing laboratories.


Developers of Advanced TV Are Seen as Close to Accord
The three remaining rivals in the race to set a standard for high-definition television are near an agreement to form an alliance and produce a unified system within the next nine months.
People close to the talks said the three groups had agreed in principle on the basic technical features of a unified system as well as a way to divide royalties that eventually come from building television sets and studio equipment.


Women Learn to Walk a Beat at the Russian Police Academy


Classical Music in Review
New Amsterdam Singers  St. Peter's Church 54th Street and Lexington Avenue
Those wonderful choruses in the British Isles must be an irresistible resource for any composer, especially those close at hand.
The delightful program offered by Clara Longstreth and the New Amsterdam Singers on Wednesday evening, "Glorious Britten," went punningly beyond its title to offer a cross section of 20th-century works by British composers including Elgar, Vaughan Williams, Gerald Finzi, Thea Musgrave and Edmund Rubbra.
Britten was indeed the focus, with performances of his "Rejoice in the Lamb," "Five Flower Songs" and "Hymn to St. Cecilia."


Ueberroth, Amid Criticism, Quits Post at 'Rebuild L.A.' Consortium
A year after being appointed to attract jobs and economic hope to this city's troubled neighborhoods after the riots last spring, Peter V. Ueberroth resigned today as head of Rebuild L.A. amid growing criticism that the group was faltering.
Mr.
Ueberroth, the former baseball commissioner who was best known for organizing the highly successful 1984 Summer Olympics here, came under fire in recent months for what critics said had been Rebuild L.A.'s failure to attract enough corporate support to create meaningful jobs.


Q &amp; A
Generation-Skipping Tax Q. If a person of substantial means who inherits a large amount from his parent disclaims a part of it to let money go directly to his own children, what happens with the generation-skipping tax?
JOYCE HERBERT MANN, Manhattan A. Under a disclaimer, beneficiaries file a formal document with the court stating that they do not wish to accept some or all of a bequest from a will.
A generation-skipping transfer tax, or G.S.T.T., whose purpose is to prevent the very wealthy from avoiding estate tax, is assessed when a bequest is made to a generation beneath the donor.
But you can transfer up to $1 million to a lower-level generation without falling under this tax.


Ferguson, at Least, Finds Odds Appealing
To the dreamers, it is Everyman, at 36 years of age, getting his shot at glory.
It is priceless.
To the oddsmakers, it is more prosaic: Jesse Ferguson, aging sparring partner to the stars, meets younger, bigger and brasher world heavyweight titleholder Riddick Bowe Saturday night.
If you like Bowe, put up $40 to win $1.
More likely, people are putting up $1 to win $32 betting on Ferguson.


Consumer Confidence Tumbles
Confidence in the economy and in the Clinton Administration's handling of it took another tumble in May, suggesting that consumer and business spending is likely to remain so-so and that the President's political troubles are still growing.
The latest surveys of consumers and businesses show that the resurgence of hope that occurred between the election of President Clinton and his economic policy speech before Congress in mid-February has been totally erased by anxieties over higher taxes.
Indeed, approval of the President's economic policies has plunged in the last month while disapproval has grown dramatically.


Sutton Hires His Son to be an Assistant
SEAN SUTTON will again be with his father, Oklahoma State's EDDIE SUTTON, when the 1993-94 college basketball season begins.
But this time, he'll be an assistant coach.


G.M. Is Seeking Criminal Action Against Officer Who Joined VW
The General Motors Corporation said today that it had asked German law-enforcement officials to take criminal action against the former head of its global purchasing operations, Jose Ignacio Lopez de Arriortua, because G.M. believes Mr.
Lopez and others took confidential documents when they left the company several weeks ago.
Mr.
Lopez, an engineer who helped revive General Motors' European operations in the 1980's before being transferred to Detroit, stunned the automotive world when he resigned after nine months in the United States.
He left G.M. to become a top executive with Volkswagen A.G., Germany's largest auto maker and one of G.M.'s biggest competitors in Europe.
Several Executives Defected
Six other G.M. executives, three from Detroit and three from the company's Adam Opel A.G. division in Europe, followed Mr.
Lopez to VW later in March.
The defections prompted G.M. to obtain a court injunction blocking VW and Mr.
Lopez from "systematically hiring" G.M. executives.


Financial Troubles Mount for Aga Khan
The Milan stock exchange today suspended trading in the shares of corporations controlled by one of the world's wealthiest men, the Aga Khan, after creditor banks moved to seize the companies' assets.
The suspension of trading in the Fimpar holding company and the Ciga luxury hotel chain came after more than a year of mounting financial difficulties for the Aga Khan, whose farflung investments in Italian tourism have suffered heavily from the recession.


Kelly, a Savvy Insider, Remakes Police Force
When people who monitor the New York City Police Department are asked what impresses them about Commissioner Raymond W. Kelly's first seven months, they mention an obscure bureaucratic move: the appointment of Assistant Chief Aaron H. Rosenthal to evaluate the new community policing program.
"That little move with Rosenthal," says Michael E. Smith of the Vera Institute of Justice, "caught me off guard totally."


Business Digest
Companies
General Motors has asked Germany to take criminal action against Jose Ignacio Lopez de Arriortua, its purchasing czar who defected to Volkswagen, saying he and others took confidential documents when they left several weeks ago.
Mr.
Lopez stunned the auto world when he unexpectedly resigned after nine months in the United States.  [ Page 1. ]


RECORD REVIEWS
Butthole Surfers: 'Independent Worm Saloon' Capitol 0777 7 98798 2 3; CD and cassette.


Islanders Stay Alive On 3-Goal Spree in 3d
Facing elimination before a supportive home crowd, the Islanders stayed alive in the Stanley Cup playoffs tonight, coming from behind to take a 4-1 victory over the Montreal Canadiens at Nassau Coliseum.
The victory was the Islanders' first in the Wales Conference finals, which Montreal leads by three games to one.
Game 5 will be Monday night in Montreal.
The winner of this series plays either Los Angeles or Toronto in the Stanley Cup final.


Art That Goes Beyond Social Content
During the last 30 years, Melvin Edwards has put together a compelling body of work that deserves to be better known.
The retrospective of 130 of his welded steel sculptures here at the Neuberger Museum of Art is an important step in that direction.
The strength of Edwards's sculpture has a lot to do with its openness.
It is an art of inclusion and diversity, both accessible in its materials and forms and full of interpretive possibilities.
It draws from African and Asian sources, from African-American quilts as well as from the welded works of Julio Gonzalez, David Smith, Calder and other European and American artists who may come more readily to mind.
Edwards's sculptures vary in scale: there are works of a grand, public kind quite different from his intimate, private ones.


Nancy Cramer, Robert Brown
Nancy Carter Cramer, the daughter of Mrs.
George G. Jones of Greensboro, N.C., and the late Harry Cramer, was married yesterday to Robert Joseph Brown, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Peter Campbell Brown of Rye Brook, N.Y.
Mrs.
Brown is a development associate at the Ronald McDonald House in New York, which provides lodging for families with children who are undergoing hospital treatment away from home.
She graduated from Duke University.
Her father was an executive vice president of Texfi Industries, a maker of textile products, in Greensboro.


Election in Paraguay
To the Editor:
The headline "Dirty Democracy in Paraguay" (editorial, May 14) may have given a misleading impression about the presidential election.
As an election observer in a mission sponsored by the National Democratic Institute for International Affairs and the Carter Center, I attested with my fellow participants that the election, representing the first democratic transfer of power in Paraguay's history was by and large fair, not dirty.


Ocean Swath:


4 More Years of Sacks
Kansas City Chiefs linebacker DERRICK THOMAS, the National Football Leader's sack leader the past four seasons, has agreed to a series of contracts that will keep him with the team for four more years.


Crear Respects, and Beats, His Elders
Mark Crear felt the frustration of racing against a group of hurdlers of the thirtysomething generation.
"There were so many big names in this race, and they're all getting older," the 24-year-old Crear said yesterday after he won the 110-meter high hurdles at the Reebok New York Games.
"But they're still there, and I'm trying to break my way through.


Results Plus
GOLF Kite Takes the Lead Tom Kite, showing no signs of the back injury that has plagued him for the past two months, shot a two-under-par 69 yesterday to take a one-stroke lead over Grant Waite after three rounds of the Kemper Open in Potomac, Md.
Kite started the day two shots behind Waite but needed only four holes to take the lead.
Kite carried a four-stroke lead into the back nine but hit into the water on No. 12 en route to a double bogey.
Waite had two bogeys over the first four holes yesterday but finished with a 72.
At 208 were Jay Delsing, John Inman, Steve Lamontagne and Lee Janzen. (AP)


Q and A
Feeding Pigeons Question: I live in a co-op on the Upper East Side in Manhattan.
An elderly woman who rents in the building on the 18th floor throws a bag of bird seed from her window each morning; it lands on the roof of a five-story building.
Each morning, pigeons swarm in the area awaiting their next meal.
This is disturbing, since the birds leave their droppings on my window.
I believe that this is also a health violation.


State Information
To the Editor: I have just completed a book of brief biographies about each of the 50 states and the District of Columbia.
I twice sent pages to the states' historians or archivists for fact-checking and never heard back from six: Alabama, Arkansas, Indiana, Louisana, Maine and Missouri.
JEROME AGEL  New York, N.Y.


Helen E. Knox, R. G. Keilholtz Jr.
Helen Edith Knox, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Seymour H. Knox 3d of Buffalo, was married yesterday to Robert G. Keilholtz Jr., a son of Mrs.
Keilholtz of Solana Beach, Calif., and the late Mr.
Keilholtz.
The Rev.
Michael E. Hartney performed the ceremony at St.
Matthias Episcopal Church in East Aurora, N.Y.
The bride graduated from Yale University.
She is the national champion in the biathlon for ages 30 to 34 and has completed the Ironman competition in Hawaii, the world triathlon championships, six times.
Her father is the chairman and president of the Buffalo Sabres hockey club and president of the Albright-Knox Art Gallery in Buffalo.


Portraits in Oil
Corporate advertising in Britain was once a high art.
During the teens, 20's and 30's -- the golden age of the European poster -- a variety of English businesses, even the Government itself, employed some of the finest graphic designers and painters to promote products, services and ideas.
This was not the hard sell we have come to expect from advertising agencies today; quite often the works were masterpieces of painterly form and typographic elegance.
One corporation, Shell Oil, stood out for its inventiveness.
THE SHELL POSTER BOOK (Godine, paper, $19.95), a collection of the company's finest posters from 1920 to 1952, shows that good design was good business.
The company's poster tradition can be credited to one employee, Jack Beddington, who, despite lack of experience, was placed in charge of advertising after he complained that the company's promotions were mundane.
Under his leadership, Shell's ads were transformed from crass and copy-driven to elegant image-dominated posters with catchy phrases.
Styles ranged from the rectilinear Art Moderne renderings depicting speed by Tom Purvis, to modern country landscapes by Graham Sutherland, Paul Nash and Vanessa Bell, to the Surrealist fantasies of E. McKnight Kauffer and Zero (Hans Schleger).
There were also frequent experiments with Cubist, Expressionist and cartoon styles by veteran and neophyte artists alike.
By the early 50's the quality of the posters had begun to decline, a situation caused as much by the passing of the great artists as by changes in corporate priorities.
As slick as later advertising became, however, it does not surpass the individuality and originality of the posters produced when Shell was fueled by art.


Sara Feldmann, Robert Sheehan
Sara Lynne Feldmann, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Joseph Feldmann of Mamaroneck, N.Y., was married there yesterday to Robert Sheehan, the son of Dolores McKofke of Flushing, Queens.
Rabbi Jeffrey Sirkman performed the ceremony at the Beach Point Club.


Edith Szakacs, Darrin Prescott
Edith Deborah Szakacs, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
George Szakacs of Passaic Park, N.J., was married yesterday to Darrin James Prescott, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
James Pyle of Iliff, Colo.
Rabbi Benjamin Rudavski and Rev.
James Martin officiated at the summer home of the bride's parents in West Tisbury, Mass.
Mrs.
Prescott, 25, is a financial analyst at the First Boston Corporation in New York.
She graduated from the University of Colorado, as did her husband, who graduated magna cum laude.
Her father is the owner and chief executive of Global Wire and Cable Inc., a manufacturer in Passaic, N.J.


Deals and Discounts
NORTHERN EUROPE FLIGHTS Scandinavian Airlines System is offering a special "Visit Northern Europe" ticket that offers discounted flights on certain routes.
The program is available only to passengers who fly trans-Atlantic round trip on S.A.S. to Copenhagen, Oslo or Stockholm, or on Continental to London, Frankfurt, Munich or Amsterdam.
Before leaving North America, those travelers may also buy coupons allowing flights on certain routes in Europe.
The minimum purchase is $327, for three coupons; the maximum is $872 for eight.
The coupons are good for travel on S.A.S. and British Midland between various cities in Scandinavia, Britain, Ireland, Belgium, Luxembourg, the Netherlands, Germany, the Czech Republic, the Baltic states, Poland, Russia and Ukraine.
Travel must begin before Nov. 30.
Call (800) 221-2350.
DOWN UNDER TOUR Qantas Vacations has a 16-night tour of New Zealand and Australia starting at $1,999 a person, double occupancy, including air fare from Los Angeles.
The program includes four nights in Sydney where participants are largely on their own.
The balance of the trip is a bus tour of New Zealand that includes Christchurch; the Franz Josef and Fox Glaciers, Queenstown, Milford Sound, Wellington and Rotorua.
The $1,999 price is good for August departures; the September price is $2,159, October and November $2,239.
Air fare from the East Coast is an additional $310 round trip.
The tour is operated by Jetabout, a subsidiary of Qantas.
Call (800) 641-8772.
ICELANDAIR FARES Icelandair has fares starting at $468 round trip to Luxembourg from Kennedy International Airport in New York or Baltimore-Washington International airport.
That fare is good through June 20 and from Aug. 23 to Oct. 31; the fare from June 21 to Aug. 22 is $568.
Two people traveling together get three free days' use of a rental car.
Flights stop in Reykjavik, Iceland.
Tickets must be bought seven days before departure.
Minimum stay, five days; maximum, 30 days.
Call (800) 223-5500.
CANADIAN HOTELS Canadian Pacific Hotels and Resorts has announced discounts for American Automobile Association members that allow more than 30 percent off the standard room rate at four British Columbia properties.
The A.A.A. rate, good for a single or double room, is $113 at the Waterfront Centre Hotel and $98 at the Hotel Vancouver, both in Vancouver.
The rates at those hotels run through October.
The rate is $98 at the Chateau Whistler Resort in Whistler through Oct. 15, and $125 at the Empress in Victoria through Oct. 11.
Prices are in United States dollars, calculated at 78 cents to the Canadian dollar.
Further reductions have been set for periods in fall and early winter.
Call (800) 441-1414.


Susan Lippert, Jason Kasarsky
YOU could write several slow country-and-western songs about Dr.
Jason Kasarsky and Susan Lippert's love story.
They were married for the first time in 1976, in a snowball wedding -- everyone wore white -- on Long Island.
She was 22, and he was 27.
As newlyweds, they moved into a small apartment in New York and began what turned out to be a brief, wild and, ultimately, very unhappy marriage.


MAY 16-22: CBS's Anchor Team; Connie Chung Signs On With a Solo Practitioner
CBS surprised most of the television world last week by naming Connie Chung the co-anchor of its evening newscast with Dan Rather, who has held that job for 12 years.
CBS has had only three anchors on its newscast since television began.
All have been men -- Douglas Edwards, Walter Cronkite and Mr.
Rather -- and all sat behind the desk alone.
Starting June 1, Ms.
Chung, 46, will be only the second woman to hold a network anchor job, following ABC's unsuccessful experiment with Barbara Walters, who teamed with Harry Reasoner in the mid-1970's.


Tame Baseball
To the Sports Editor:
I read with great interest "Baseball Breaks With Its Television Past," (The Times, May 9).
I am still trying to overcome the depression.
The notion of wild-card playoffs is as anathema to baseball as artificial turf, exploding scoreboards, dome stadiums, the designated hitter, $2.75 hot dogs and $2.50 scorecards.


Batman Returns (The Real One)
IN the twilight, the mouth of Bracken Cave was just empty darkness, but overhead, a red-tailed hawk circled the slate sky.
"The hawks know when the bats are about to come out," Dr.
Merlin D. Tuttle, an ecologist who has devoted his life to saving bats, said in a whisper.


SERBIAN PRESIDENT REJECTS MONITORS
President Slobodan Milosevic of Serbia has tacitly withdrawn an offer to allow international monitors along the border with Bosnia and Herzegovina because he no longer fears American military intervention, an authoritative official said today.
Mr.
Milosevic and President Dobrica Cosic of Yugoslavia, which now consists only of Serbia and Montenegro, told Russia's Foreign Minister, Andrei V. Kozyrev, on Tuesday that they would accept foreign monitors only if Croatia did too and also withdrew all its military forces from Bosnia, according to one of Mr.
Cosic's close advisers.


In the Region: New Jersey; Recent Sales
Carteret  $135,000
1436 Roosevelt Avenue  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 50-year-old colonial; h/w floors, in-ground pool, brick exterior; taxes $3,324.
Egg Harbor  $137,500
5053 Ridge Avenue  4-bedroom, 2-bath, 30-year-old ranch; four-acre lot, in-ground pool, cabana, eat-in-kitchen; taxes $2,000.
Metuchen  $146,000
3 John Street  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 20-year-old bi-level; w/w carpeting, concrete driveway, full basement; taxes $4,096.
Montville  $539,900
5 Morgan Court  5-bedroom, 3-bath, 10-year-old colonial; fireplace, c/a, 2-car garage, central vacuum; taxes $9,127.
Mount Arlington  $148,000
2 Robert Terrace  4-bedroom, 2-bath, 27-year-old bi-level; porch, large wooded lot, eat-in-kitchen; taxes $3,757.
Northfield  $124,900
16 Wilson Drive  4-bedroom, 2-bath, 30-year-old Cape Cod; fireplace, h/w floors, c/a; taxes $3,400.
OTHER AREAS Farmington, Conn.  $515,000
5 Whitehall Place  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 5-year-old cape cod; marble foyer, sunken living room, bluestone patio, 1 acre; taxes $4,877.
Greenburgh, N.Y.  $167,000
9 Hanford Place  3-bedroom, 1 bath, 73-year-old Colonial; dining room, fireplace, full unfinished basement, one-car garage; taxes $2,171.
East Norwich, L.I.  $343,000
14 Split Oak Drive  4-bedroom, 2-bath, 40-year-old split level; dining room, eat-in kitchen, family room, 2 fireplaces, 2-car garage; taxes $6,000.


Pilots Given Leeway to Pick Efficient Routes
Bill Cotton, a United Airlines captain who flies Boeing 757 and 767 passenger jets between Chicago and San Francisco, does not usually think much of flying over Dubuque, as prescribed by the Federal Aviation Administration.
Instead, he often requests permission to fly the great circle route, a curved line that is the shortest distance between points on the globe.
Sometimes, to take advantage of tail winds or avoid head winds, he flies south, over New Mexico, Utah and Nevada, or north over Wyoming and Idaho.


Empire Theater
To the Editor:
I was pained by your inaccurate description of the condition of the Empire Theater's roof  [ "A Film Restores a Bit of 42d Street -- in Faux Decay," March 28 ]  and its comment that the theaters on 42d Street "have continued their slide into decay."


Help Wanted


Joseph Ganim and Jennifer White
Ellen Jennifer White, an associate planner in the planning and marketing department of Yale-New Haven Hospital in New Haven, was married yesterday to Mayor Joseph Peter Ganim of Bridgeport, Conn.
Bishop Edward M. Egan of the Roman Catholic Diocese of Bridgeport performed the ceremony at the St.
Augustine Cathedral there.
Mrs.
Ganim, 27, is known as Jennifer.
She graduated from Widener University and received a master's degree in public health from Yale University.


He's Doctor Do-It-All: Pitcher and a Pounder
Marlins beware.
The Mets, who pledged 24 hours earlier to "bust it to catch somebody" in the National League East, have won one in a row after yesterday's 6-1 verdict over the Atlanta Braves.
For the Mets, who have inhabited a world without forward momentum for months, it qualifies as a major roll.
And, hey, Dallas Green has managed to get his team to .500.


Need to Remain Steadfast Is Stressed at Fordham commencement yesterday on its Rose Hill campus in the Bronx. The university conferred 1,449 bachelor's degrees, 1,524 master's degrees, 131 doctorates and 429 J.D. degrees.   Separate diploma ceremonies for the individual schools followed and will continue through tomorrow evening with ceremonies for the School of Law and the Graduate School of Social Service at Lincoln Center's Avery Fisher Hall.


ENJOY THE GREENERY
Your wonderful set of seven recipes for pea greens is just what we need, with the avalanche of pea greens available in all the markets (Food: "Enjoy the Greenery," by Molly O'Neill, May 2).
At what Chinese Balducci's are these purchased?
Since "they will grow woody and bitter in three days," according to your article, what vendor will tell me how long they have had them?
Wake up, please! ROBERT DI MATTINA Philadelphia


The Ghosts of Graveyards
New York City's surface has been scraped and smoothed over many times in three and a half centures.
The Dutch covered Indian traces and the British covered the Dutch traces.
Farms leveled the forest, and tenements leveled the farms.
Burial places have been no more sacred than any other real estate in the city.
Here are some of the sites that were once thought to be final resting places, but have since been shown as less than final.
Many records are unclear, so it is not always known whether remains were removed before developments covered the sites.
Dates are given where known.


The Pilot Has Turned Off The 'Shrewd Move' Sign
FOR most men, getting a haircut while traveling is a bothersome chore that means searching out a barber in unfamiliar territory and spending $15 or $20.
For President Clinton last week it meant shutting down two runways at Los Angeles International Airport for nearly an hour while a Beverly Hills hair stylist was brought aboard to clip the President's locks before his return to Washington.
The cost in public-relations terms seemed clear, but in concrete terms it was uncertain.
The stylist, Cristophe, is said to typically get $200 a haircut.
But the White House communications director, George Stephanopoulos, said he could not put a price on Mr.
Clinton's because the Clintons have a service contract with Cristophe covering the whole family.
He did not disclose how much the contract was worth.


Perspectives: Building Amenities; Testing New Routes to the Tenant's Heart
TO induce an outburst of lamentation from the executive bosom in Manhattan, ask where the great private dining clubs of the finer office buildings have gone.
The Pinnacle Club is no more in the Mobil Building.
The Cloud Club has evaporated at the Chrysler Building.
The Board Room, at 280 Park Avenue, closed last year.
Downtown, the Wall Street Club at One Chase Manhattan Plaza has folded.


Starks's Task: Keep Cool, and Hot
The word out of Chicago this week was that the Bulls were preparing for John Starks by having Trent Tucker impersonate the Knicks' fiery guard.
Tucker's practice assignment was to be taunted by Michael Jordan and the Bulls into losing his head so he might do something foolish, like using it for a weapon.
When he was presented with this news bulletin, Pat Riley's reaction was to smirk and get on to more pressing matters, like the Bulls' trap presses.
But the Knick coach, in a classic demonstration of elephantine memory, returned to the subject a few minutes later as he was about to take his leave.


Brooklyn Expressway Repairs Assailed
When Allen Swerdlowe looks out of his apartment window in the Fulton Ferry area of Brooklyn, he sees a looming nightmare in which cars and trucks choke the streets of his shorefront neighborhood and nearby areas like Brooklyn Heights.
He says he accepts some disruption as inevitable because of the state's plan to rehabilitate the stretch of the deteriorating Brooklyn-Queens Expressway in the Heights.
But, he and neighbors who share his worries say,the way the work is planned will unnecessarily prolong local backups from the traffic that will be diverted to nearby streets from the heavily traveled highway.


Corrections
The Data Bank chart last Sunday misstated the interest rate paid on six-month Treasury bills on May 14.
It was 3.05 percent, not 6.94.


Off to a Good Start: Tending New Arrivals
PLANTING is now in full swing.
Just about everything can go into the ground.
The goal is to have the plants settle and form new roots promptly so they will be well established by the time summer's heat and drought appear.
Many new plants will be arriving from mail-order sources, too.
And the most important thing to do when they arrive is unpack them with care.
It is essential that the plants are set upright; they can be left in their shipping carton.
The live plants have been packed in an airless box for some time and to keep their leaves turgid and roots alive, the plants must have air promptly.
Sometimes the new plants will be wrapped in plastic, sometimes in wet newspaper, sometimes in sphagnum moss, or some are even shipped in their pots.


WESTCHESTER GUIDE
MORRIS DANCERS
Ten locations in Westchester County will offer a taste of Merrie Olde England next Saturday when the dancers, musicians and jesters of the Mixed Morris Ale perform their annual spring ritual.
Seventeen individual teams based in the Northeast, numbering about 150 dancers in all, will take part in the event.


DAVID GEFFEN, STILL HUNGRY
Geffen does wonderful things for people with AIDS.
He buys art, and he likes the President.
Of course, he has political aspirations.
However, I think Lorenzo de' Medici's reputation is safe for the moment.


Fractured Fairy Tale
THEY were one of those couples whose last names became superfluous.
Henry and Carolyne were like Eleanor and Franklin, Ron and Nancy, Scott and Zelda, Calvin and Kelly, Romeo and Juliet.
Alas, they ended up like Charles and Diana.
Earlier this month, Aileen Mehle, William Norwich and Liz Smith announced in their columns that Henry Kravis, 49, the leveraged buyout specialist, and Carolyne Roehm, 42, the fashion designer, had agreed to disagree, and that the dissolution of their nearly eight-year marriage was imminent.
A spokeswoman for the couple, Ruth Pachman, said later that a trial separation had been agreed to.


When One Is Sick, Two Need Help
PAUL PETER PARADISE, who is 80 years old, sat in a lounge at Griffin Hospital in Derby and talked about his wife of 47 years, who was in one of the rooms down the hall.
Lillian Paradise was gravely ill with leukemia.
For three years, Mr.
Paradise's life had centered on his wife and her illness.
He visited her every day during her numerous hospital stays, gave her body rubs, helped her take her medications and comforted her.


For Many Youths, Carrying Knives Keeps Fear Away
In a barren alley separating a school and a threadbare asphalt playground in Brooklyn, Alex Jimenez reached into his pocket and, with a shrug, whipped out a boxcutter, flicking it open to show its deadly potential.
It is a weapon that he says helps him ward off thugs.
It is also a weapon that keeps him honest with the police.
"All you have to do is pull it out and people back off," the 18-year-old explained, before slipping the blade back into its handle.
"And if the cops catch you with it, you can't get arrested for it."


Pilgrim State Plant Could Help Many


As China Leaps Ahead, The Poor Slip Behind
A NEW way of measuring the world's economies has vaulted China from the ranks of third-world nations to those of the economic powerhouses.
Under calculations being introduced by the International Monetary Fund this week, relying on the buying power of each nation's currency rather than its dollar value, China's economy comes out four times bigger than most previous estimates.
That makes it the world's third-largest, after the United States and Japan.
But the confirmation of China's enormous economic power helps to obscure the unevenness of the nation's economic development.
China may be the world's fastest-growing economy on its way to becoming the world's largest market, but that represents primarily the activity along the country's coastal rim, from the northeastern tip of Manchuria all the way down past Hong Kong.


Your Home: Historic Houses; National Register Status
A SENSE of manifest destiny often overcomes buyers of antique houses.
Once they conquer their anxieties about the cost of upkeep and begin to marvel at the crooked hearth and the wide floorboards and wonder about the lives of the families who lived there, they start talking about a responsibility to have the house put on the National Register of Historic Places.
This is seen as a way to preserve the integrity of the house and its contribution to history.
The idea of having a plaque on the facade is yet another enticement.


Fighter-Pilot Dream, Not So Vicariously
ALL at once the New York City skyline flipped upside-down while a man in a helmet sitting next to me shouted, "Shoot, shoot, shoot, pull the trigger, pull the trigger!" Just above us, or just below us, or wherever "up" was at that moment, a small airplane in a steep bank slid into the circle of my gunsight.
"The trigger, pull the trigger, pull, pull, pull!" the man shouted while I, hanging upside-down somewhere between the Atlantic Ocean and eternity and transfixed by the target so neatly framed in my gunsight, forgot to fire.


A Few Fistsful Of Dulled Silver
To the Sports Editor:
Weep, Met fans.
If Met heads must roll, they should be the heads of the front office, who are expert at trading away gold in return for tarnished silver.
As I write this, Mark Carreon is hitting .419 for the Giants, Tim Teufel is hitting .350 for the Padres, Chris Donnels is hitting .308 for the Astros, Randy Milligan is hitting .289 for the Reds, and Dave Magadan is hitting .357 for the Marlins.
EDWARD FERTIK Brooklyn


CONNECTICUT GUIDE
WEARING THEIR AGENDAS
The Aldrich Museum of Contemporary Art in Ridgefield has mounted an exibition about clothes called "Fall From Fashion," which opens today and runs through Sept. 26.
The clothes are constructed of found objects, along with those traditionally woven or sewn.
Some are comical, threatening, provocative or startling.
They are chronicles of personal, social and political agendas, defining changing gender roles and cultural attitudes.


A SENSE OF PLACE
ON Saturdays such as these when the air is gentle and the sky is cloudless and blue -- our town has a storied look.
This is the season when the trees are so lush they turn the streets to arbors of green.
The shops bulge with new stock; the tennis courts are busy; the restaurants have a wait.
We seem so prosperous this time of year, so utterly secure.
On Saturdays such as these, hardship and mischance appear impossible.
The alcoholics and addicts and mental misfits so ubiquitous in the big city are almost invisible out here.
Almost.
We too, of course, have our drifters and indigents.
The difference is that out here in the land of azaleas and gas grills, here where the cost of lawn care could feed legions of the homeless, hunger seems so improbable.


Hope and Violence as Cambodian Election Begins
After decades of oppression that have brought genocidal terror, wrenching poverty and a civil war, the future of Cambodia may finally be decided by the millions who have suffered quietly for so long and who are being invited today to vote.
As the voting began at 8 A.M., there were no reports of violence, although United Nations peacekeepers held to their prediction of attacks by the Khmer Rouge, the Maoist rebels who have threatened to sabotage the six-day election.
United Nations military observers said there was fighting Saturday night between the rebels and Government soldiers in some areas of the northern countryside.


Dina Santangelo and Red Pfohl
Dina Francesca Santangelo, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Francis R. Santangelo of Harrison, N.Y., and Roger Lee Pfohl Jr., a son of Margaret Mullady of Crystal Lake, Ill., and Mr.
Pfohl of Milwaukee, were married last Friday.
The Rev.
Michael Moynihan performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at St.
Mary's Church in Greenwich, Conn.
Mrs.
Pfohl, a former member of the United States Equestrian World Cup Team, is a horse-show judge.
She graduated from Fairfield University.
Her father, a member of the American Stock Exchange, is a lawyer and financial consultant in White Plains.


Doctors Can Reduce Mastectomy Numbers
To the Editor:
Re "Why Do So Many Women Have Breasts Removed Needlessly?" (Health page, May 5): Our organizations hear from many women who are told by the doctor that they need a mastectomy and that they can be reconstructed immediately, all in one breath.
We believe this makes it easier for the doctor to recommend a mastectomy and for the patient to accept one.
The patient is often so focused on the cancer diagnosis that she barely considers possible complications of reconstruction.
The two surgeries should be discussed separately so that reconstruction does not inadvertently promote unnecessary mastectomies.
ESTHER R. ROME JANE SPRAGUE ZONES Somerville, Mass., May 10, 1993 The writers are with, respectively, the Boston Women's Health Book Collective and the National Women's Health Network.


Unearthing Early Cemeteries, New York Turns Up Politics
For decades and even centuries, they have lain beneath layers of landfill, brick, concrete and asphalt -- largely forgotten as the swarm of progress transformed a hamlet called Nieuw Amsterdam into the nation's largest city.
Now the dead and their hidden cemeteries have risen to the center of an emotional debate over the city's neglected past and what steps officials should take to preserve it.


Balloons And Blooms
A whirl of entertaining and dining and dancing to benefit students, the arts, medicine and Lincoln Center.


Rotten Fascia Boards Often Have to Be Replaced
FASCIAS are the trim boards at the top of the outside walls of a house.
Sloping fascias at the ends of a house or beneath a gable are called rake fascias, and horizontal fascias that cover the ends of rafters are called eaves fascias.
Eaves fascias are vulnerable to decay, especially if the roof and soffits, the boxed areas beneath roof overhangs, are poorly constructed.
Repairing rotten eaves fascias generally consists of replacing the damaged boards.
The job is not too difficult for a moderately skilled amateur, but a helper is needed for handling larger pieces.


The Global Rush to Become a Financial Analyst
CRAM week is coming up for 17,100 young investment professionals, and, if history is to repeat itself, more than 7,000 will flunk.
The Association for Investment Management and Research administers the first of three tests necessary to become a chartered financial analyst on June 5.
This year, a record number have signed up, fueled in part by huge demand by foreigners to join the ranks of C.F.A.'s.
The association this year will be giving the test in 43 locations outside the United States.
Indeed, growth of interest in becoming a C.F.A. is most dramatic overseas, where enrollees have grown five-fold since 1987.
Enrollees in the United States only doubled during that period.


Eileen Corcoran, Stephen O'Connell
Eileen Patricia Corcoran, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Francis X. Corcoran of Upper Montclair, N.J., was married yesterday to Stephen Vincent O'Connell, a son of Christina O'Connell Duggan of Short Hills, N.J., and the late Thomas R. O'Connell.
The Rev.
Frederick Conoscenti, a Roman Catholic priest, performed the ceremony at the Church of St.
Thomas More in New York.
Mrs.
O'Connell, 32, is a respiratory therapist in the neonatal unit at Lenox Hill Hospital in New York.
She graduated from Northeastern University.
Her father retired as a vice president at Merrill Lynch &amp; Company in New York.


Plan on Havens Awaits Details
The agreement by the United States to help protect peacekeepers guarding safe havens for Muslim civilians in Bosnia and Herzegovina does not imply any immediate American military action there.
American officials said today that while the United States and its allies had agreed in principle to set up the safe havens, it would take time to work out how it would be done.


Beach Residents Are Courting Danger
It is our responsibility to conserve the barrier islands for the enjoyment of all Long Islanders, and as a first defense against storms for the mainland  [ "On Fire Island, Chaos Amid Devastation," May 2 ] .
In the battle between the ocean and the barrier island, which is measured in centuries, the island's defense is its ability to move.
Protecting the barrier island means allowing it continued freedom to move in response to the ocean's attack.
Restricting movement with ill-conceived and expensive stabilization projects will make the barrier island more vulnerable to the pounding of the ocean's waves.


Clinton Jabs Democratic Critics Of His Budget and Tax Package
Striking back at Democratic Senators who have challenged his budget and tax package, President Clinton today accused them of protecting wealthy special interests and buckling under to "the big oil lobby."
Mr.
Clinton's unusually sharp remarks against members of his own party, made in his weekly radio address, were directed at the centrist Democrats who have bolted from party ranks to try to revise the President's budget and tax package.


Asian Countries, in Shift, Weigh Defense Forum
Spurred by an arms race that is spreading from China to Indonesia, Japan and other Asian nations have warily begun talks to set up their own regional security forum, a fundamental change in defense policy for countries that have never been able to form alliances and have always relied on the United States to keep peace in the Pacific.
In a meeting here over the last few days, with the blessing and participation of the Clinton Administration, senior government officials from throughout the region met for the first time to talk about threats to the area's stability, from an outbreak of piracy in the South China Sea to the containment of North Korea and the Khmer Rouge in Cambodia.


Traffic Alert
The five-borough Bike New York ride will be held today. Here are the street closings:
Battery Park 6:30-8:30 A.M.


Happy Ever After in Camelot
Robert Goulet sits alone in a brightly lit square of an empty restaurant while a local television cameraman focuses his lens.
"Are we interrupting the news?" Goulet asks.
"No, actually you are the news," the cameraman says.
"Welcome to Buffalo."
And Boston, Milwaukee, Memphis, Cleveland and Schenectady.
The industry that is "Robert Goulet Starring in Camelot" is in the midst of its 22-month national tour, and if you were wondering Whatever Happened to Robert Goulet, you should know that he's alive and well and very big business, especially with the generation of women who still buy panties to throw at Tom Jones.
Last month, at the Wang Center for the Performing Arts in Boston, "Camelot" earned $1,057,000, outdone only by "The Phantom of the Opera" in Dallas.


A Scramble to Meet the West
It is the series fans have wanted since last season.
It will feature great individual players like Michael Jordan, Scottie Pippen and Patrick Ewing.
It will feature two teams that are coached superbly and have relentless defenses.
And the drama will provide long-lasting memories.
The Eastern Conference finals between the Knicks and the Chicago Bulls has been anticipated and analyzed.
But finally, starting with Game 1 this afternoon at Madison Square Garden, the plot will unfold.
Many factors will determine the winner of the four-of-seven-game series.
But as the matchup gets under way, here's a look at five areas that will greatly determine which team goes to the championship finals, and which team goes home.
1. THE JORDON FACTOR:
Jordan's greatness goes beyond his ability to score, to defend and to levitate.
Jordan has a level of pride and intensity similar to two other great players of his era - Magic Johnson and Larry Bird.
The thought of not winning a championship disgusts Jordan.
He thinks of the title as his property now, much the way a boxer protects the title belt.


Salads Returning as the First Course
IT used to be the custom to start dinner with a tossed salad -- iceberg lettuce, cherry tomatoes and a couple of slices of onion topped with blue cheese dressing -- served the same way from coast to coast.
All that changed, of course.
Salads shifted position.
They were served European style, after the main course, and usually consisted of tossed greens in a vinaigrette, often accompanied by French bread and cheese.
Now salads have come back to the beginning of the meal.
It is not unusual when you go to a restaurant to have a wide choice of interesting and complex salads offered as an appetizer.
At home, people are also serving vegetable salads as a first course instead of meat or fish.


VISITORS PROTEST ARRESTS IN TIBET
A delegation of European ambassadors visiting Tibet abruptly canceled a banquet for their hosts tonight and instead expressed serious concern over the arrests of Tibetans who had hoped to make contact with them during their stay.
The weeklong visit by the delegation, including eight ambassadors and five other senior diplomats, ended in disarray today with the cancellation of the banquet for Government officials.
Instead, they held a working dinner at which they expressed concern to their hosts over the arrest of at least three Tibetans and possibly dozens more.


More Military Bases May Hear Taps
An independent commission tentatively added more than two dozen installations this week to the Pentagon's list of bases to close or realign.
The panel said that its actions were preliminary and the final decision will come July 1.
ARMY
Fort Lee, Va.
Presidio of Monterey Annex, Ford Ord, Calif.
Fort Monroe, Va.
Marcus Hook Army Reserve Center, Pa.
Fort Gillem, Ga.
Fort McPherson, Ga.  NAVY
Naval Shipyard, Portsmouth, Va.
Defense Distribution Depot, Norfolk, Va.
Naval Shipyard, Portsmouth, Kittery, Me.
Naval Shipyard, Long Beach, Calif.
Naval Air Station, Oceana, Va.
Marine Corps Air Station, Beaufort, S.C.
Naval Hospital, Beaufort, S.C.
Naval Air Station, Miramar, Calif.
Marine Corps Air Station, Tustin, Calif.
Naval Air Station, Corpus Christi, Tex.
Naval Hospital, Corpus Christi, Tex.
Naval Station, Ingleside, Texas.
Naval Station, Pascagoula, Miss.
Naval Station, Everett, Wash.
Naval Hospital, Great Lakes, Ill.
Ships Parts Control Center, Mechanicsburg, Pa.
Naval Electronics Support Engineering Center, Portsmouth, Va.
Naval Air Facility, Martinsburg, W.Va.
Naval Air Facility, Johnstown, Pa.
Naval Reserve Center, Chicopee, Mass.
Naval Reserve Center, Quincy, Mass.
Naval and Marine Corps Reserve Center, Lawrence, Mass.
Naval Ordnance Station, Louisville, Ky.
Naval Air Station, Memphis, Tenn.
Naval Hospital, Millington, Tenn. AIR FORCE
Plattsburgh Air Force Base, N.Y.
Fairchild Air Force Base, Wash.
Grand Forks Air Force Base, N.D. DEFENSE MAINTENANCE DEPOTS
Tinker Air Force Base, Okla.
Warner-Robbins Air Force Bse, Ga.


Anne E. Miller, E. Q. Sylvester 4th
Anne Elizabeth Miller, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard S. Miller of Lafayette, Calif., was married yesterday to Edmund Quincy Sylvester 4th, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Sylvester 3d of Hinsdale, Ill.
The Rev.
David Buick VanDusen performed the Episcopal ceremony at Beaulieu Gardens in St.
Helena, Calif.
Mrs.
Sylvester, 27, is a vice president in the fixed-income division of Lehman Brothers, the investment bank in New York.
She and her husband graduated from Northwestern University.
Her father is a senior vice president in San Francisco for Shearson Lehman Brothers, the securities brokerage.
Her mother, Julie Miller, is an artist in Lafayette.


Commercial Property: Bankruptcy and its Shadows; When Leases Get Mired in Finance
AS an accounting firm, Ernst &amp; Young is doing just fine.
As a tenant, it's been through the bankruptcy wars.
Nearly three years ago it signed a deal for 44,000 square feet at 380 Madison Avenue, at 45th Street, only to have the building topple into bankruptcy three weeks later.
It took months before the accounting firm got the money it had been promised for alterations to its space, and before Cushman &amp; Wakefield's Jamie Covello, the accounting firm's broker, began to get her commission payments.


Operatic Kickoff


Understanding Shylock
To the Editor:
In his letter of May 9 commenting on my review of John Gross's "Shylock: A Legend and Its Legacy," Richard Weisberg says that I have used "a typical ploy by which traditionalists impose meanings where others seem to have been intended." Seem?
I know not seems.
Why should these seemings be preferred?


Sports of The Times; Mets Show Their Stuff To Manager
THE interior decorator was planning a special niche in the home Dwight Gooden is having built in Florida.
There would be room for the Cy Young Award he won back in 1985 for being the best pitcher in the league.
But Dwight Gooden told Judy Brandy, the decorator, that he needed more room.
There had to be space for the 1984 Rookie of the Year Award because "you only have one shot at winning that." And there had to be room for the 1992 Silver Slugger Award, for being the best-hitting pitcher in the National League, which maintains the glorious tradition of letting pitchers be complete athletes.
Doc Gooden's new trophy niche will reflect his pride in that.


What Mainstream Medicine Fears
As the L.I.
Resource for Holistic Health &amp; Eldercare, I was delighted to see "Growing Numbers Seek Out Alternative Medicine"  [ April 4 ] .
My work with Alison's Healthcare Resources Inc. has sought to educate the public on alternative therapies, to offer referral sources and promote the alternative practitioners.


No Headline
These folks have a right to express their views regardless of how offensive, repugnant, bizarre or wrong-minded they are.
The best protection is don't listen to it. - NORMAN SIEGEL of the New York Civil Liberties Union.  [ 34:3. ]


POSTINGS: The Return of the Big Duck; A 30's Relic Reopening on Long Island
It is sung to the tune of "Over the Rainbow":
Big Duck roosting in Flanders


At Work; A Place for Recovering Addicts
The six men and women who have gathered to talk about recovering from addiction could be poster children for sobriety.
They are in their 20's, 30's and 40's, male and female, racially and ethnically diverse.
All have survived struggles with alcohol as well as other drugs like heroin and cocaine.
All have long since been through detox, a 28-day treatment program and in some cases a relapse or two.
They are in a room telling their stories to a guest because they are either graduates or residents of a new program in New York run by the Hazelden Foundation that allows them to balance a job and a course of recovery.
Maureen G. talks of living on the streets and poking through garbage cans for food, Tony C. of the breakup of his marriage, Mike S. of his "life and death decision" to seek help.
The stories of loss, betrayal and despair are hard to bring into phase with the clear-eyed faces and calm, self-possessed voices.


Patricia Lynch, Anthony Dwyer
Patricia Maria Lynch, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John M. Lynch of White Plains, was married there yesterday to Anthony Fidelis Dwyer, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
James F. Dwyer of Marcellus, N.Y.
The Rev.
John Quinn performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at Our Lady of Sorrows Church.


Deborah A. Zinn, David A. Shiffman
Deborah Ann Zinn, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Matthew J. Zinn of Kensington, Md., was married yesterday evening to David Alan Shiffman, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Howard G. Shiffman of Stamford, Conn.
Rabbi Bruce Lustig performed the ceremony at the Four Seasons Hotel in Washington.
Mrs.
Shiffman, 25, is a tax consultant in the commercial tax department of Ernst &amp; Young in New York.
She graduated cum laude from the University of Pennsylvania and received a law degree from American University.
Her father is a partner in the Washington law firm of Steptoe &amp; Johnson.


Life With Father


Another Laser Also Used for Heart Surgery
"Laser Surgery Making Inroads on L.I."  [ April 18 ]  incorrectly stated that the LAIS Excimer Laser Angioplasty System "is the only laser the F.D.A. has approved for heart arteries." In February of this year final approval was granted to Spectranetics of Colorado Springs to market and sell its excimer laser angioplasty system for use in the coronary vasculature.


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
A HELL OF A WAR By Douglas Fairbanks Jr. Thomas Dunne/St. Martin's, $22.95.


A Niche For the 90's
INSIDE EDGE is a magazine conceived and produced by two Harvard juniors, Aaron Shapiro and Jon Hsu, whose respective dreams are to become "very enterpreneurial" and "to help the homeless after I make my first 100 million."
Of the many things Inside Edge is, it is, above all, an anomaly, a reading experience for people widely believed never to read, a special-interest magazine for young people who appear to have no special interests.


Adriane Stewart and Marcus Haupt
Adriane Stewart, the daughter of Ardelia and Ronald Stewart of Moorestown, N.J., was married there yesterday to Marcus Edward Haupt, a son of Dr.
Mari Molenaar of Princeton, N.J., and Dr.
Edward Haupt of Montclair, N.J.
Judge John Wallace of the Appellate Division of State Superior Court officiated at the home of the bride's parents.
Ms.
Stewart, who is 25, is keeping her name.
She is a candidate for a joint law and M.B.A. degree at Columbia University.
She graduated cum laude from Harvard University.


'Buying Black' Approach Paying Off in Los Angeles
FRUSTRATED by stalled government and corporate efforts to revitalize poor areas of Los Angeles ravaged in last year's rioting, the city's black community has undertaken its own approach to economic development: it is investing in itself.
In the year since civil unrest laid waste to huge tracts of commercial property in South-Central Los Angeles, black community leaders have launched numerous programs to persuade blacks to spend their money in black-owned businesses.
The theory is that this helps create jobs and increase tax dollars to improve schools and public works within black neighborhoods.


Now You See It . . .


Friends, Patrons . . . and Boy George?
A week of parties, held all over New York, celebrated good times, furthered the goals of many worthwhile causes . . . and engendered a case of mistaken identity.


MAY 16-22: Storm Over Miami; Hispanic Majority Defeats An English-Only Rule
Until last week, Spanish, a language spoken by the majority of the 2 million residents of metropolitan Miami, was routinely heard everywhere in Dade County except the halls of government.
But after a stormy public hearing, a newly installed county commission dominated by Hispanics bowed to linguistic realities and voted unanimously to repeal an ordinance that since 1980 has barred the county from conducting its business in any language other than English.
Though in practical terms the change means only that county documents can now be published in Spanish and other languages and that speakers at county meetings can ask to be heard through interpreters, the debate preceding the vote unleashed deep emotions.
An irate defender of the status quo said the commission was intent on having Miami "remain a banana republic," while one of his opponents described the existing policy as "immoral and cruel." When one group began to sing the Cuban national anthem, another, waving American flags, stood up and sang "The Star Spangled Banner."


IN SHORT: FICTION
THE LAW OF FALLING BODIES By Jill Ciment. Poseidon, $19.


Move, Cousin, It's Me Coming!
Maria Mutola was churning down the stretch, on her way to the fastest women's 800 meters ever run in the United States, when she sensed somebody on her right shoulder.
Mutola began to slide into the second lane, then the third, discouraging this interloper from passing.
Elbows were poised, ready for serious action.
With 20 meters left, Mutola could no longer resist.
She peeked.


Tyson's Aviary Needs A New Cornerman
MIKE TYSON, the former heavyweight boxing champion, is looking for someone to tend to his pigeon coop while he's in jail.
Tyson, who is serving a six-year sentence for rape in an Indiana prison, needs a bird-loving person to train and care for his beloved homing pigeons.
The job pays $200 a month.


Lisa D. Walker, Keith A. Murray
Lisa D. Walker, an assistant vice president in private banking at the U.S.
Trust Corporation in New York, was married yesterday to Keith A. Murray, an assistant treasurer at the IBJSchroder Bank and Trust Company in New York.
The Rev.
Thomas Parke performed the ceremony at Bethesda Episcopal Church in Saratoga Springs, N.Y.
Mrs.
Murray graduated cum laude from St.
Lawrence University.
She is a daughter of Dr.
Franklin V. Walker and Jean G. Walker, both of Albany.
Her father is a professor of economics at the State University at Albany.
Her mother is a youth employment counselor for the Town of Colonie, N.Y.


Monticello
To the Editor: I question Rita Reif's contention that Monticello looks more like it did when Jefferson lived there "than it has at any time since his death" ("Monticello Looks Lived In Again," May 2).
The special exhibition in honor of Jefferson's 250th birthday has returned many objects to his house, but what has been lost is the daylight that made Monticello both beautiful and functional.
The protection of the historic artifacts from sunlight has necessitated the installation of tinted filters over every window and glass door, transforming Jefferson's lively, light-filled rooms into dull enclosures.
Jefferson designed his house to admit as much light as possible -- light for reading and writing, light to define architectural form.
It's very nice to see the lap desk on which the Declaration of Independence was written, but I would much rather experience the building as Jefferson intended.


An Overlooked Recycling Solution: Plastic Lumber
To the Editor:
"Who Foots the Bill for Recycling" (April 25) omits one alternative solution to the problem of plastic waste, the reuse of plastics into a different product.
Plastic lumber can be manufactured with all commingled plastics, mainly post-consumer.
This avoids the expensive costs of sorting plastics by type.
After the initial separation of all major components (glass, metal, plastics, wood, etc.), there are practically no other costs.
The only requirement for a successful operation is that the local entities, public and private, understand that recycling is achieved only when somebody buys the recycled product.


Joan E. Dalsheim and Sam Nevin
Joan Elise Dalsheim, the daughter of Edwin Dalsheim of New York and Lynn Zimmer of New York and Rancho Mirage, Calif., was married last evening to John Merritt Nevin Jr., a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Nevin Sr. of Richmond.
The Rev.
Dr.
Zdenek Bednar, a Protestant minister, officiated at the Metropolis Country Club in White Plains.
Rabbi Charles Davidson took part in the ceremony.
Mrs.
Nevin, 26, is an advertising account executive for Art and Auction magazine in New York.
She graduated from Franklin and Marshall College.
Her father, now retired, was the president of Dalsheim Accessories Inc., a manufacturer of costume jewelry in New York.
Her mother is a saleswoman with Julia B. Fee Inc., a real estate agency in Rye, N.Y.
The bride's stepfather, Robert Zimmer, is the founder and senior vice president of the Men's Wearhouse in Oakland, Calif., a chain of men's clothing stores.


Lindsay Soutter, Markley Boyer Jr.
Lindsay Soutter, a daughter of John D. Soutter of New York and Mrs.
Brewster A. M. Righter of Locust Valley, L.I., was married yesterday to Markley Holmes Boyer Jr., a son of Dr.
Boyer of Lincoln, Mass., and Julie M. Boyer of Cambridge, Mass.
The Rev.
Charles G. Newbery performed the Episcopal ceremony at St.
John's of Lattingtown in Locust Valley.
Mrs.
Boyer owns the Lindsay Soutter Company, designers of jewelry in Brooklyn.
She graduated from Princeton University, as did her husband.
Her father is the president of the Pelican Corporation, a diversified holding company in New York, and of the Racquet and Tennis Club of New York.
The bride is a stepdaughter of Mr.
Righter of Locust Valley.


Cambodia, Facing Some Grim Choices, Votes
IN 1955, there was an election in Cambodia.
The ruling party used intimidation, violence, even murder to guarantee its victory in the polls.
And the tactics worked.
Voters who might have supported the opposition stayed home rather than vote.
And the ruling party held onto power.
Four decades later, the leader of that ruling party, Prince Norodom Sihanouk, is back in Cambodia, this time in the role of beloved senior statesman -- the only hope, many Cambodians believe, for a peaceful Cambodia after a generation of civil war and genocide.


With Debate, British Knock Crown Askew
They did not look like a mob of Republicans hellbent on revolution.
There was not a Cromwell or Robespierre in sight.
Rather they seemed a cross section of the British public -- sweet-faced elderly women with rosy complexions, harumphing men in tweed jackets, long-haired intellectuals hiding behind thick-lensed glasses, straggly hair and Oxbridge accents.


Voices on the Mississippi
WAS HUCK BLACK?
Mark Twain and African-American Voices.
By Shelley Fisher Fishkin. 270 pp.
New York: Oxford University Press. $25.


Corrections
A report in the Travel Advisory column on page 3 of the Travel section today misstates the date of Buckingham Palace's opening to the public.
It is Aug. 7, not Aug. 15.


Streetscapes: First Church of Christ, Scientist; A Grand Building Seeks to Protect Itself
"WE hear they're going to let out Larry Hogue soon, and last time he did $15,000 to $20,000 in damage" says Stuart Grayson, referring to the man whose bizarre and sometimes violent behavior led to his confinement in Creedmoor Psychiatric Center in Queens.
Mr.
Grayson, a member of the First Church of Christ, Scientist at Central Park West and 96th Street, is concerned about the stained-glass windows through which, he says, Mr.
Hogue repeatedly lobbed rocks last year.


Protecting Elderly Residents From Predatory Contractors
"IT'S that time of year," said the voice on the other end of the line.
"Time to get your chimney cleaned. We're going to be in your area soon."
One week and a check for $1,050 later, Judith Phillips realized she had been the victim of a scheme.
Although workmen recently spent several hours at her five-bedroom Colonial home in New Rochelle, a subsequent inspection revealed that the chimney was not cleaned, nor did the company complete the extensive repair work it contracted to do, she said.
"They told me it was a danger to my family and that I never should have let it go this long," Mrs.
Phillips said.
"I bought the whole ball of wax."


Sports of The Times; Student Athletes Redefine Model
During the final two years of his life, Arthur Ashe, always a man driven by many passions, worked at a frantic pace to get new programs off the ground and see others to completion.
Last Thursday, one of Ashe's final, and most cherished, projects was realized when 574 student athletes and 80 coaches representing 84 New York City high schools participated in the first Scholar Tutor Athlete Role Model symposium at Madison Square Garden.


Caroline Fitzgerald and Pedro Sifre
Caroline Frances Fitzgerald, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Timothy F. Fitzgerald of Pelham Manor, N.Y., was married there yesterday to Pedro Juan Sifre, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
Pedro A. Sifre of Santurce, P.R.
Msgr.
Hugh D. Curran performed the ceremony at Our Lady of Perpetual Help Roman Catholic Church.
Ms.
Fitzgerald, who is keeping her name, is a project engineer in New York with Ove Arup &amp; Partners, an engineering consulting firm.
She graduated magna cum laude from Tufts University.
Her father is a custodial engineer for the New York City Board of Education.
Her mother is a legal secretary for the law firm of Seacord, Young &amp; Young in New Rochelle, N.Y.


The Ghosts of Graveyards
New York City's surface has been scraped and smoothed over many times in three and a half centures.
The Dutch covered Indian traces and the British covered the Dutch traces.
Farms leveled the forest, and tenements leveled thefarms.
Burial places have been no more sacred than any other real estate in the city.
Here are some of the sites that were once thought to be final resting places, but have since been shown as less than final.
Many records are unclear, so it is not always known whether remains were removed before developments covered the sites.
Dates are given where known.


Split on Gay Tactics for Military Ban
After months of urging Congress and the Clinton Administration to lift completely the ban on homosexuals in the military, leading gay and lesbian figures have split in a disagreement over tactics and the likelihood of success.
The schism, many homosexuals say, jeopardizes the outcome of the military issue.
And, landing amid a fierce nationwide battle for their civil rights, it raises a fundamental question: Who speaks for gay and lesbian Americans?


Efforts Intensify On Child Support
OFFICIALS across the state are intensifying efforts to collect hundreds of millions of dollars in child-support payments owed by tens of thousands of so-called "deadbeat parents."
Adding to the growing strategies being used to track down those who fail to make support payments, Gov.
Jim Florio announced this month that by summer's end the "10 Most Wanted" child-support scofflaws in New Jersey would find their faces emblazoned on posters to be distributed throughout the state.


Julianne LeMense, Darren Crispin
Julianne LeMense, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Joseph M. LeMense of Washington, was married there yesterday to Darren Ginna Crispin, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Bill Crispin of Berwick, Pa.
Msgr.
James F. Montgomery performed the ceremony at the Annunciation Catholic Church.
Mrs.
Crispin, 26, is an assistant production editor at The National Journal, a weekly magazine on government, in Washington.
She graduated from Georgetown University, as did her husband.
Her father is an orthodontist in Washington.


Getting Into Buckingham Without a Crown
With less than three months to go until Buckingham Palace opens its doors to tourists for the first time, about the only thing that seems certain is that it will not be easy to get in.
Within a few days of quietly making them available earlier this month, the palace sold out this year's allotment of group tickets, the only tickets that can be purchased in advance.
Those tickets -- for groups of 25 -- were limited to 800 a day, or about 10 percent of what palace officials expect to be the total daily visitor limit.
A spokeswoman said the group tickets were sold over the telephone, primarily to clubs and other private organizations in Britain.
Plans for next year's distribution of group tickets have not been completed.


New U.N. Index Measures Nations' Quality of Life
The average Brazilian earns $4,718 a year, or slightly more than the $4,542 earned by the average Costa Rican.
But who is really better off when the average Costa Rican lives longer, is better educated and enjoys cleaner water and better sanitation than a Brazilian?
The United Nations gives a clear answer.
Its latest Human Development Index gives Costa Rica a score of .852 out of a possible 1.000, while Brazil gets only .730.


AN ARMY OF THE FAITHFUL
I was both intrigued and saddened by the selection of articles in your April 25 issue.
"An Army of the Faithful" was placed (thoughtfully, I am sure) between "Angels' Angels" and "A Holocaust Rorschach Test." It pains me to think that even today people who consider themselves Christian in the positive sense seek to demean and destroy the lives of others, like some of the brilliant minds who have created "Angels in America," simply because they are homosexual.
The similarity to the intolerance that created the Holocaust and currently exists in Bosnia (Endpaper: "With Broken Glass") is haunting.
LYDIA A. SHRIER, M.D.
New Haven


Audrey Aguilar and Peter Schweinfurth
Audrey Helene Aguilar, an assistant vice president at Bankers Trust in New York, was married yesterday to Peter Frederick Schweinfurth, an associate at Kelso &amp; Company, the merchant bank in New York.
The Rev.
Foster C. Wilson performed the ceremony at the First Presbyterian Church of Rumson (N.J.)


Maybe the Sky Isn't His Limit
Down on the floor of the Chicago Bulls' suburban practice facility was that familiar lean fellow, star of courts, videos and commercials, shaved head gleaming under the gym lights, legs muscular and veiny as a thoroughbred's, in red shirt and shorts, shooting graceful jump shots left-handed.
The wrong hand.
There was still that sweet, sinewy flick of the wrist and the long follow-through and the controlled rotation on the ball.
But was this Michael Jordan, or a perfect imposter?
Or a mirror image?


Here's a Health Care Reform Starter Kit
To the Editor:
Many of the better health care ideas that have been floated are already incorporated in the American health security bill sponsored by Representative Jim McDermott (H.R.1200) and Senator Paul Wellstone (S.491).
This bill has as co-sponsors 59 members of the House and four senators, and it is supported by a number of national organizations.
Others who might otherwise support this bill are waiting for a signal from the White House, and this is a serious error on their parts.
Procrastination guarantees failure.


NEWS SUMMARY


Remembering Irving Howe (1920-1993)
IT was a moody September morning in 1991, and we were walking down Madison Avenue, gossiping about books, when Irving Howe changed the subject.
"Something happened to me in Paris that you might understand" was how he began the least likely conversation we ever had.
"I was in the garden at the Rodin Museum. For a few minutes I was alone, sitting on a stone bench between two long hedges of roses. Pink roses. Suddenly I felt the most powerful feeling of peace, and I had the thought that death, if it means an absorption into a reality like the one that was before me, might be all right."
That was all.
I mumbled something about the importance of such an experience, and said nothing more; illuminations are not occasions for criticism.
But I was filled with gladness for my friend.
He had recently recovered from a rattling period of physical infirmity; and during those months, when he fought his fear with the help of Haydn, and Proust, and the first tranquilizers of his otherwise urbane life, I had wondered whether his urbanity, his intellectual strictness, his decades of dialectic, had adequately prepared him for the times that humble the mind.
I learned, that morning on Madison, that he was not unprepared.


Flag-Waving From a Surprising Corner of Society
Bizarre though it may seem, the Navajo, the Lakota and the Iroquois often emblazoned their own clothing or objects they sold to tourists with the American flag.
And they did it a century ago, within a decade after having been conquered by the United States Army.
The reasons American Indians incorporated the Stars and Stripes into their artifacts are explored in "The Flag in American Indian Art," an exhibition at Fenimore House, through December.
Fenimore House is a private museum operated by the New York State Historical Association.


In Pursuit of Computing's Holy Grail
AT FIRST, the names on the conference rooms seem merely quirky: Dumbarton, York and Edinburgh.
Maybe the boss got carried away after a summer vacation to Britain.
But walk along the tree-lined atrium, up a flight of stairs to the larger meeting rooms, and the clues on the doors get stronger: The Gorge, The Evil Lair.
The names are from Arthurian legend.
And the 300 designers here from the International Business Machines Corporation, Motorola Inc. and Apple Computer Inc. who are trying to transform the computer-chip business have named their building and their make-or-break program "Somerset" -- after the English county where, according to legend, the knights of the Round Table gathered at King Arthur's castle, put aside their differences and set off in pursuit of the Holy Grail.
"It seemed appropriate for what's going on here," explained Bill Goins, an Apple designer.


A Case of Autonomy or Neglect?
Officials at the City University of New York made it clear this month that they did not think much of Dr.
Leonard Jeffries's scholarship.
As they testified in a trial over whether Dr.
Jeffries had been illegally removed from his post as chairman of the university's black studies department, the officials also made it obvious how little scrutiny they had given the department in 20 years.
When the jury sided with Dr.
Jeffries, awarding him $400,000 in punitive damages last week, some jurors said the university did not make a convincing case about the shortcomings of Dr.
Jeffries and his department.
They decided that the only reason he had been removed from his post was to punish him for a speech he delivered in Albany in 1991.
The speech caused a widespread outcry because of Dr.
Jeffries's contentions, including his comments that Jews and the Mafia conspired to put down blacks in Hollywood films.
No Clear Idea of Standards
The jury's verdict suggests a disturbing notion about those whose job it was to oversee Dr.
Jeffries's department: that officials did not have a clear idea of what standards to use to judge its work and that of its faculty, and more importantly, they did not care enough to notice how it was changing or developing.


Who Was That Barber?
HE surfaced last summer as the architect of the revised, ready-for-the-heartland Hillary Rodham Clinton.
His pedigree -- Hollywood -- nicely fitted the gestalt of the new Administration.
And, during what could only be called "a bad hair week" for the Clintons, as The Washington Post so aptly put it, he's surfaced again.
Who is this guy?
NAME: Cristophe Schatteman, a k a Cristophe.


Sharp Spikes, Sharper Elbows
To the Sports Editor:
When Sparky Anderson chastises Buck Showalter for having Pat Kelly steal on a 3-0 count with the Yankees holding a 6-0 lead, he touches us with his concern for the finer aspects of the game: his "hidden rules," his "respect" for the other team and Branch Rickey's wisdom ("Unwritten Rules of the Game," The Times, May 16).


Brief Encounter


Any Looking Glass Would Have To Smile
The madder the hat, the better, or so it seems this spring.
This oversize top hat of red straw, with jaunty ribbons dangling, is suitable for unbirthday parties and other occasions worthy of Lewis Carroll.


Hope and Violence as Cambodian Election Begins
After decades of oppression that have brought genocidal terror, wrenching poverty and a civil war, the future of Cambodia may finally be decided by the millions who have suffered quietly for so long and who are being invited today to vote.
As the voting began at 8 A.M., there were no reports of violence, although United Nations peacekeepers held to their prediction of attacks by the Khmer Rouge, the Maoist rebels who have threatened to sabotage the six-day election.
United Nations military observers said there was fighting Saturday night between the rebels and Government soldiers in some areas of the northern countryside.


Forum for Bigotry? Fringe Groups on TV
On a recent Friday night, drowsy Westchester residents gliding through their cable television channels for something soothing and soporific were startled awake by what they saw on one public-access program.
A colorfully garbed man named Ta-Har who calls himself a high priest of the Black Israelites was brandishing a baseball bat.


Princeton's Defense Dispatches Loyola
Princeton's defense of its national lacrosse championship began impressively today as the second-seeded Tigers trounced Loyola of Baltimore, 12-6, at Palmer Stadium.
The match opened the quarterfinal round of the 12-team National Collegiate Athletic Association's Division I tournament.
In other games, first-seeded North Carolina defeated Army, 14-5; No. 3 Syracuse routed Hofstra, 20-8, and No. 4 Johns Hopkins beat Virginia, 14-10.
So the top four teams moved on.


How a Tax Change Could Help Small Business
To the Editor:
Regarding Amar Bhide's article (Viewpoints, May 9), I agree with Government's inability to help small business.
My experience shows how Government hurts but suggests how it could also help.
Back in, I think, 1981, the I.R.S. rules for paying estimated corporate taxes were changed to require acceleration of the prepayment of those estimated taxes.
Formerly the rule for prepayment was something like "at least 80 percent of the next year's estimate, but no greater than you paid in the preceding year." It meant that a fast-track company with a low income base could defer its payments.
This change was all part of a process to accelerate the payment of taxes.
However, the change siphoned funds from all fast-track companies.


The Boomers' Babies
13TH GEN Abort, Retry, Ignore, Fail?
By Neil Howe and Bill Strauss with Ian Williams.
Illustrated by R. J. Matson. 229 pp.
New York:  Vintage Books.
Paper, $10.


In the Region: Connecticut; Ostriches Ruffle a Subdivision's Feathers
BONNIE and Floyd and Juliet and Gallagher, two mating pairs of ostriches who have lived in the Town of Washington since early last year, could be facing eviction.
Within the next two months Judge Wendy Susco of the Litchfield Superior Court is expected to decide whether their owner, Madeleine Calder, can continue operating a commercial ostrich breeding farm at her four-acre home on Steeples Road.
The birds, quartered in the backyard behind a chicken-wire fence, are reported to have cost $28,000, and Ms.
Calder has spent major additional sums on legal fees defending her right to keep them as granted by the town's Zoning Commission last year.
Her property, in a residential subdivision, is zoned residential-farming.


For Many Youths, Carrying Knives Keeps Fear Away
In a barren alley separating a school and a threadbare asphalt playground in Brooklyn, Alex Jimenez reached into his pocket and, with a shrug, whipped out a boxcutter, flicking it open to show its deadly potential.
It is a weapon that he says helps him ward off thugs.
It is also a weapon that keeps him honest with the police.
"All you have to do is pull it out and people back off," the 18-year-old explained, before slipping the blade back into its handle.
"And if the cops catch you with it, you can't get arrested for it."


Sugar and Spice and Everything Iced
Iced tea on the Veranda.
Iced tea under the magnolia trees.
Iced tea with every meal.
Iced tea may be one of the lasting contributions of Southern society.
Whether an antidote to sultry air, or to pork fat and fried chicken, well-sugared iced tea with lemon and mint leaves is like a cool breeze.
The current affection for regional cuisine has carried iced tea north and west, changing its composition and range of flavors as it has traveled to restaurants in California and Michigan, New York and Oregon where, in the warmer months, it's sometimes served instead of ice water.


Great Men and Tiny Bubbles
FOR GOD, COUNTRY AND COCA-COLA The Unauthorized History of the Great American Soft Drink and the Company That Makes It.
By Mark Pendergrast.
Illustrated. 556 pp.
New York: Charles Scribner's Sons. $27.50.


Guard to Warden to Guard Again, a Prison Odyssey
THERE is no noticeable difference between Lawrence Tilghman and the other guards at the Whalley Avenue Correctional Center in New Haven.
During his eight-hour shifts, Mr.
Tilghman patrols cellblocks and at times has escorted prisoners to hospitals outside the center.
But there is one major, unseen difference: Lawrence Tilghman was the warden at Somers Prison, the state's maximum-security institution north of Hartford.
To say that he is overqualifed for the guard's job is to understate the case.
Indeed, having Mr.
Tilghman work as a guard is akin to putting a general back in the infantry as a foot soldier.


Strong Candidate For Hand of the Year
WHEN bad breaks apparently doom a slam but the declarer brings it home without any error by the defenders, attention must be paid.
Look at all four hands of the diagramed deal and try to discover how to make six spades after an opening heart lead.
And think about whether it could have been defeated.
It appears that South must lose a diamond trick and, rather unluckily, that he has a sure trump loser.
Two losers in a slam spell defeat, but in the arithmetic of bridge one plus one does not always equal two.


ALLIES ANNOUNCE STRATEGY TO CURB FIGHTING IN BOSNIA; U.S. OFFERS PLANES, NOT MEN
After months of discord and vacillation, the United States, Russia and key European allies agreed today on a joint strategy devised to contain the fighting in Bosnia and Herzegovina and to guard enclaves of Muslim civilians besieged by Serbian nationalists there.
The plan, announced by Secretary of State Warren Christopher and the Foreign Ministers of France, Britain, Russia and Spain after a brief meeting here, calls for the United States to use air power if necessary to protect United Nations peacekeepers guarding six Bosnian towns that have been designated "safe havens" by the United Nations Security Council.
Issue Goes to Security Council
But the size and duties of the peacekeeping mission will have to be decided by the Security Council, and Mr.
Christopher did not specify what American aircraft would be authorized to do.
That means that no use of American military force is imminent.


Welcome to the First Getaway of Summer
The classics are generally considered beyond improvement -- perfect expressions of their era.
But that's never discouraged playwrights from uprooting them like shrubs and replanting them in another time and place.
Eugene O'Neill rewrote "The Oresteia" as a saga of Civil War America and baptized it "Mourning Becomes Electra." Larry Gelbart set "Sly Fox," his version of "Volpone," in San Francisco's uncorseted Barbary Coast district, while Joshua Logan moved "The Cherry Orchard" to post-bellum Louisiana and, in deference to the local flora, retitled it "The Wisteria Trees."


The Ghosts of Graveyards
New York City's surface has been scraped and smoothed over many times in three and a half centures.
The Dutch covered Indian traces and the British covered the Dutch traces.
Farms leveled the forest, and tenements leveled the farms.
Burial places have been no more sacred than any other real estate in the city.
Here are some of the sites that were once thought to be final resting places, but have since been shown as less than final.
Many records are unclear, so it is not always known whether remains were removed before developments covered the sites.
Dates are given where known.


The TV Allowance
WHAT: TV Allowance, nicknamed the TV chastity belt.
Think of it as a parking meter for your kids' brains.
HOW: To turn on the set, each kid punches in his or her personal four-digit access code.
The TV Allowance, which looks like an oversize calculator, then subtracts the amount of time spent in front of the tube from the child's weekly allotment.
When the allotment is exhausted, the kid flicks on the set and -- nothing happens!


DAVID GEFFEN, STILL HUNGRY
David Geffen is a great success, especially when the score is kept in dollars and cents, but the foundations of his career are built on a forged document ("David Geffen, Still Hungry," by Bernard Weinraub, May 2).
Did you not think it even slightly unusual for Geffen to arrive at the William Morris Agency "at dawn every morning" to steam open a letter containing the sad truth about his lie and to insert a forged letter on U.C.L.A. stationery?
Am I alone in believing that something is wrong here?
Did you notice the great irony of the infatuation of the Clinton Administration with Geffen -- a group composed of a meritocratic elite -- Rhodes scholars, Ivy Leaguers, etc. -- listening to a man who forged his way into Hollywood?


What's a Network TV Censor to Do?
"Exceptional care must be exercised when showing the 14-year-old being threatened."
"Discretion should be used governing the costuming of the woman in the bikini."
"Lose (expletive), (expletive), (expletive.)"


In the Region: Connecticut; Recent Sales
Darien, Conn.  $265,550
42 Middlesex Road  3-bedroom, 1-bath, 67-year-old colonial; hardwood floors, level backyard, outdoor playhouse, 0.2 acre; taxes $1,926.
Fairfield, Conn.  $256,000
56 Hanford Drive  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 35-year-old split level; eat-in kitchen, in-law suite, fireplace, 113- by 101-foot lot; taxes $3,192.
Farmington, Conn.  $515,000
5 Whitehall Place  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 5-year-old cape cod; marble foyer, sunken living room, bluestone patio, 1 acre; taxes $4,877.
Greenburgh, N.Y.  $167,000
9 Hanford Place  3-bedroom, 1 bath, 73-year-old Colonial; dining room, fireplace, full unfinished basement, one-car garage; taxes $2,171.
Mount Pleasant, N.Y.  $177,500
97 Locust Street  3-bedroom, one bath, 63-year-old ranch; dining room, breakfast room, full unfinished basement, one-car garage; taxes $2,980.
Ossining, N.Y.  $179,500
12 Nelson Avenue  4-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 64-year-old colonial; dining room, fireplace, screened porch, playroom, one-car garage; taxes $4,161.
OTHER AREAS East Norwich, L.I.  $343,000
14 Split Oak Drive  4-bedroom, 2-bath, 40-year-old split level; dining room, eat-in kitchen, family room, 2 fireplaces, 2-car garage; taxes $6,000.
Muttontown, L.I.  $638,000
2084 Edge Road  4-bedroom, 3 1/2-bath, 35-year-old farm ranch; dining room, family room, 2 fireplaces, 2-car garage, 2 acres; taxes $8,800.
Carteret, N.J.  $135,000
1436 Roosevelt Avenue  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 50-year-old colonial; h/w floors, in-ground pool; taxes $3,324.


Barbara Drugan, Kenneth Held
Barbara Irene Drugan, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Neil W. Drugan of New City, N.Y., was married yesterday to Kenneth Prager Held, a son of Dr.
Berel Held of Galveston, Tex., and Dr.
Linda Prager of Houston.
The Rev.
Richard Leonard performed the ceremony at the Unitarian Church of All Souls in New York.
Mrs.
Held, 26, graduated from Cornell University.
Until recently, she was an associate at Smith Barney, Harris Upham &amp; Company Inc. in New York.
Her father is a graphic artist in Metro Litho, a printing corporation in Moonachie, N.J.


Margaret Vettese, Edward Benz Jr.
Margaret Ann Vettese, a lecturer at the University of Pennsylvania School of Nursing in Philadelphia, was married yesterday to Edward John Benz Jr., the chairman of the department of medicine at the University of Pittsburgh.
The Rev.
Susan Kidder, an Assemblies of God minister, officiated at the Heinz Memorial Chapel at the University of Pittsburgh.
Dr.
Vettese, 46, is keeping her name.
She plans to join the University of Pittsburgh in September as an assistant professor of nursing.
She graduated cum laude from Georgetown University and received a Ph.D. in nursing from Case Western Reserve University.
She is a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Domenic J. Vettese of Allentown, Pa.
Her father is a retired oral surgeon there.


Dr. Zanft, Mr. Hutchinson Jr.
Dr.
Olivia Helena Zanft, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert I. Zanft of Forest Hills, Queens, was married yesterday to Daniel Lovett Hutchinson Jr., the son of Mr.
Hutchinson of Ardmore, Pa., and Margaret P. O'Malley of Strafford, Pa.
The Rev.
Timothy D. Dobbins performed the Episcopal ceremony at the Church of the Redeemer in Bryn Mawr, Pa.
Dr.
Hutchinson, 24, graduated magna cum laude from Harvard University and received her M.D. from Columbia University.
She begins a residency in general surgery at Columbia-Presbyterian Medical Center in New York in June.


Revival of the Fittest
THOSE who forget the past are condemned to repeat it.
So are those who remember it all too well.
Take a quick look at the cultural landscape, preferably in your rear-view mirror.
It's the 60's.
"Tommy" is on Broadway.
"Hair" is scheduled for a revival in London.
The Velvet Underground is getting together again.
Jimi Hendrix and the Doors rule.
So do bell-bottoms and "Right on!" politics.


U.S. and Europe Have Different Balkan Aims; History's Bad Example
To the Editor:
I admire the good will of Flora Lewis in "A 19th-Century Balkan Solution" (Op-Ed, May 1), but her view of Balkan history betrays a certain innocence.
I too yearn -- in vain, I fear -- for a revival of the Concert of Europe to patch up the shattered remnants of Yugoslavia, but the Congress of Berlin in 1878 will hardly serve as a model.
Following the victory of the Russians over the Turks in 1878, Bismarck and Disraeli organized the congress to "revise" the Treaty of San Stefano.
In plainer language, Austria, Germany and Britain conspired to strip the Russians and their South Slav proteges of conquests that threatened their own imperial interests in the Balkans and the Middle East.
This created many problems and crises that increased the likelihood of European War:


Pamela Jennings, H. B. Drake
Pamela Newell Jennings, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
William B. Jennings of Skillman, N.J., was married yesterday to Harry Bertram Drake, the son of Nancy Drake of Orinda, Calif., and Harry B. Drake of San Francisco.
The Rev.
Rose Edington, a Unitarian minister, performed the ceremony at the Arlington Street Church in Boston.
Mrs.
Drake, 26, is a sales representative for Merck Inc. in Boston.
She graduated from the University of Michigan.
Her father is the president of Jennings &amp; Company International, management consultants in New York.
Her mother, Hilda Jennings, is an administrator at Princeton University.


Ellen Seiler And Todd Brody
Ellen Seiler, the daughter of Elaine and Leonard Seiler of Orangeburg, N.Y., and Todd Brody, a son of Dr.
Baruch and Dena Brody of Houston, were married yesterday evening in Fair Lawn, N.J.
Rabbi Joseph Radinsky performed the ceremony at the Fair Lawn Jewish Center.
Mrs.
Brody, 23, and her husband, 24, are third-year law students, she at New York University and he at Fordham University.
She graduated magna cum laude from the University of Pennsylvania.
Her father is the executive director of the Schiffli lace and embroidery manufacturers' association in North Bergen, N.J.
Her mother is a substitute teacher for the South Orangetown (N.Y.) Central School District.


Great Men and Tiny Bubbles
FOR GOD, COUNTRY AND COCA-COLA The Unauthorized History of the Great American Soft Drink and the Company That Makes It.
By Mark Pendergrast.
Illustrated. 556 pp.
New York: Charles Scribner's Sons. $27.50.


Yankees' Road Show Again Stars Tartabull
Danny Tartabull left on this road trip with a batting average below .200 and the Yankee Stadium boos still echoing in his ears.
His strikeout total was abysmal, his swing not what it should be, and even when he did hit the ball he had little luck.
The road, however, is Tartabull's friend.


SITTING PRETTY
As a longtime reader of the Hers column, I feel it is my duty to share with you my feelings of utter disgust for Margo Kaufman's essay "Sitting Pretty" (April 18).
Kaufman has equated health with beauty, appearances with value and the loss of a breast with getting a face lift.
She does a great disservice to anyone who has faced the reality of breast cancer without the narcissistic recourse of plastic surgery.
Breast cancer is a health issue of huge import; I doubt your magazine meant to paint it as a laughing matter.
KATHERINE HOOVER New York, N.Y.


Back to College
JEFF JACKSON, who was named a Hartford Whalers assistant coach two weeks ago, resigned on Friday to return to Lake Superior State as coach with the added duties of being the athletic director.


Ornamentation and What Influenced It
UNLIKE works by American craft artists who reach for personal expression in everything they create, the decorated pots and clothing made by the Shipibo women of Peru all bear the same labyrinthine design.
But the Philippines, under the impact of a wide array of cultural influences, has produced a broad diversity of styles.
Two exhibitions at the Newark Museum demonstrate some of the village, tribal and international forces that can affect the ornamentation and styles of ethnic crafts.


Political Memo; 'New Democrats' Say Clinton Has Veered Left and Left Them
Centrist and conservative "New Democrats" who defined Bill Clinton's campaign philosophy and formed the bedrock of his electoral base are frightened and angry over their growing perception that the President, who won office as one of their new breed, has come to look very much like the same old -- liberal -- thing.
"I believe a lot of Democrats who had previously voted for President Reagan and President Bush voted for President Clinton because they really felt he was a different kind of Democrat," said Senator Joseph I. Lieberman of Connecticut, who is a vice-chairman of the Democratic Leadership Council.
The council is the centrist group once led by Mr.
Clinton that defined the New Democrat.


In the Region: Long Island; Recent Sales
East Norwich  $343,000
14 Split Oak Drive  4-bedroom, 2-bath, 40-year-old split level; dining room, eat-in kitchen, family room, 2 fireplaces, 2-car garage; taxes $6,000.
Muttontown  $638,000
2084 Edge Road  4-bedroom, 3 1/2-bath, 35-year-old farm ranch; dining room, family room, 2 fireplaces, 2-car garage, 2 acres; taxes $8,800.
Sea Cliff  $325,000
98 Laurel Avenue  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 22-year-old ranch; dining room, family room w/fireplace, 2-car garage, water view; taxes $5,200.
Shoreham  $235,000
32 Circle Drive  3-bedroom, 3-bath, 24-year-old contemporary; dining room, eat-in kitchen, den, 2-car garage; taxes $4,200.
Westbury  $186,500
710 Salisbury Drive West  4-bedroom, 2-bath, 35-year-old Cape Cod; dining room, living room w/fireplace, basement, 1-car garage; taxes $5,400.
Williston Park  $206,000
106 Harvard Street  3-bedroom, 1-bath 64-year-old colonial; dining room, eat-in kitchen, den, finished basement, fireplace, attic, deck; taxes $3,000.
OTHER AREAS Farmington, Conn.  $515,000
5 Whitehall Place  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 5-year-old cape cod; sunken living room, 1 acre; taxes $4,877.
Greenburgh, N.Y.  $167,000
9 Hanford Place  3-bedroom, 1 bath, 73-year-old Colonial; dining room, fireplace, full unfinished basement, one-car garage; taxes $2,171.
Carteret, N.J.  $135,000
1436 Roosevelt Avenue  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 50-year-old colonial; h/w floors, in-ground pool, brick exterior; taxes $3,324.


Catherine Stifel, Jody Hansen
Catherine Louise Stifel, a daughter of William and Carolyn Stifel of Irvington, N.Y., was married there yesterday to Burnett McAnney Hansen, a son of Donald and Jill Hansen of Portland, Me.
The Rev.
Dr.
Charles R. Colwell performed the Episcopal ceremony at the Church of St.
Barnabas.
Mrs.
Hansen, 28, is the production manager in the publications department of the Philadelphia Museum of Art.
She graduated cum laude from Middlebury College.
Her father is a retired president of the American Kennel Club in New York, and her mother, also retired, was the executive director of the New York Genealogical and Biographical Society.


For Turnback the Alarm, It's a Blast Like the Past
The racing spotlight swung back to the North yesterday for its summertime run, and Turnback the Alarm turned back the clock to her glory days when she outran eight other fillies and won the Shuvee Handicap at Belmont Park.
It was a brave performance that closed with a rousing duel between the two favorites, as Shared Interest challenged Turnback the Alarm stride for stride down the homestretch.
But the gray star of last year's 3-year-old class, who missed 10 months of racing after fracturing a bone in her right rear ankle, battled back with command and scored her first victory since last July, just before she suffered the training accident that imperiled her career.


Slavery on Rise in Brazil, as Debt Chains Workers
Rolling hills cloaked in emerald green sugar cane fields lend a luxuriant air to this rural corner of Rio de Janeiro State.
But, down in a creek hollow where farm workers sleep in hammocks strung in cow stalls, laborers say the alcohol distillery owner does not pay wages -- only scrip redeemable for food.
Toiling from sunup to sundown for food does not fit strict definitions of slavery.
But the laborers' complaints here have swelled a nationwide flood of denunciations of an upsurge of slavery in Brazil.


5,000 for Trainer
KING LEATHERBURY became the third trainer in thoroughbred racing history with 5,000 victories when Blue Highways won the sixth race at Pimlico in Baltimore on Friday.
Leatherbury trails DALE BAIRD and Hall of Fame trainer JACK VAN BERG on the list of winners.
Baird has over 6,100, most at West Virginia's small Mountaineer Park.
Van Berg, who is approaching 5,800, now concentrates on the California circuit.


Deadpanning
To the Editor:
Engravers of tombstones in the 1920's also "resurrected death as an art form" by collaborating with photographers.
They would insert into the tombstone above the inscription photographs of children and adults taken in their coffins or from life.
The photos were protected by a thick glass.
Calvary Cemetery in Queens shows that many of these have survived almost nine decades in perfect shape.
NORA POLINSKY New York


The Merry Games of Love in 'Much Ado'
IN a season short on event, any semblance of the uncommon ingredient that lifts theatergoing from obligatory routine to active anticipation is not to be passed up.
Note, then, the sense of occasion that escorts "Much Ado About Nothing," like it or not, to the McCarter.
Besides marking a return for Michael Kahn to the theater where he was in artistic charge from 1975 through 1979, this is the production with which Mr.
Kahn, in March of last year, opened the new Shakespeare Theater, formerly the Folger, in Washington.
There, for seven years, he has been resident artistic director, transforming it from the stigma of staidness to the possibilities of renewal.


Danielle Kenneally, John F. Neumann
Danielle Samain Kenneally, the merchandising projects manager of Seventeen magazine in New York, was married yesterday to John Flanagan Neumann, the human resources coordinator for the Plaza Hotel.
Msgr.
Edmond Trench performed the ceremony at the Church of the Sacred Hearts of Jesus and Mary in Southampton, L.I.
Mrs.
Neumann, 26, graduated from the University of Richmond.
She is a daughter of Christine Redding and Dr.
John Kenneally, both of Southampton.


Bowe Batters Ferguson
Only seconds into Round 2 tonight, Riddick Bowe sent Jesse Ferguson crashing to the canvas like a felled tree, making him the 34th straight victim for the undefeated World Boxing Association and International Boxing Federation heavyweight champion.
Bowe, 20 pounds heavier than Ferguson at 244, had mauled the 36-year-old challenger in the first round and then sent him down with a left.
But when the count by Referee Larry Hazzard reached 9, Ferguson somehow got to his feet as the round ended.


Speak Loudly, Carry No Stick
The collective blood pressure of the New York Philharmonic undoubtedly shot up last week when Kurt Masur returned for his final programs of the waning season.
Nerves fray at any orchestra when the music director is around, and Mr.
Masur's volatile temperament adds spice to the Philharmonic mix.
This season was bound to be special for the orchestra, with a number of glittery events scheduled to commemorate its 150th anniversary last December.
Yet for longtime Philharmonic watchers, the real celebration lay less in what was presented than in how.
With Mr.
Masur continuing to build fastidiously on his achievements of the previous season, his first as music director, the orchestra consistently played better -- with more spirit and refinement -- than it had in years, perhaps decades.


There's Trout on the Line but No Turkey on the Table
When Ed Van Put invited me on a spring turkey hunt, he said that we would also go fly fishing for trout.
This was, it turned out, an enlightened bit of planning.
On our first morning together we slogged up a rock-strewn hillside at dawn.
Ed's goal was a forested ridge where, only a few days before, he had seen or heard five gobblers.


U.S. and Europe Have Different Balkan Aims; 'Peace With Honor'
To the Editor:
The grand, 19th-century-style European conference Flora Lewis suggests as a solution to the Bosnian civil war (Op-Ed, May 1) is problematic.


Q and A
Studying Spanish Abroad
Q.
Where can I find two- or three-week Spanish language courses, preferably in a resort area of Spain? -- Natalie Margolis, Manalapan, N.J.


Corrections
The Practical Traveler column on April 11 referred incorrectly to Canada's political subdivisions.
A reader's letter dated April 25 pointed out that there are 10 provinces and 2 territories (the Yukon Territory and Northwest Territories), not 12 provinces.
This correction was delayed through an editing oversight.





Amy B. Mullen, Thomas Luster
Amy Bent Mullen, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
George J. Mullen of Bernardsville, N.J., was married there yesterday to Thomas Henry Luster, a son of Marylyn Luster of Warren, N.J., and the late Richard O. Luster.
The Rev.
Alfred M. Niese Jr., an Episcopal priest, performed the ceremony at the Church of St.
John on the Mountain.
Mrs.
Luster, 26, graduated from Colorado College.
She is studying for a master's degree in organization and management at Yale University.
Her father is a senior vice president of business development at Fiduciary Trust International, an investment banking firm in New York.
Her mother, Rachel Mullen, is a columnist for The Bernardsville News, a weekly newspaper, and is an owner of Art and Artifacts, a personal-property appraisal firm in Bernardsville.


Sanchez and Sabatini Share Goals, and More
They are eyeing the French Open, and each other, with a wary familiarity.
Both Arantxa Sanchez Vicario and Gabriela Sabatini consider the absence of three-time defending champion Monica Seles a clear and present stepping stone to glory, and one of them has hired the other's former coach not just to help prevail in Paris, but to maneuver to the world's No. 1 ranking.
Sanchez Vicario has already experienced the high of winning the coveted Paris championship in 1989, when she collected her first and only Grand Slam title at age 17.
She was also the event's runner-up in 1991.


The Ghosts of Graveyards
New York City's surface has been scraped and smoothed over many times in three and a half centures.
The Dutch covered Indian traces and the British covered the Dutch traces.
Farms leveled the forest, and tenements leveled thefarms.
Burial places have been no more sacred than any other real estate in the city.
Here are some of the sites that were once thought to be final resting places, but have since been shown as less than final.
Many records are unclear, so it is not always known whether remains were removed before developments covered the sites.
Dates are given where known.


Data Update
*4*NATIONAL HOUSING TRENDS
*4*(In thousands of units, seasonally adjusted annual rates)
Mar. 93
Mar. 92
Change
Starts
1,134
1,318
-14.0%
Completions
1,096
1,120
- 2.1%
Sales
637
552
+15.4%
*4*Source: Census Bureau, U.S. Department of Commerce
*4*MORTGAGE INTEREST RATES (Averages)
Last Week
Previous Week
Year Ago
New York
Conventional (30-yr)
7.61
7.60
8.80
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
4.71
4.71
6.00
New Jersey
Conventional (30-yr)
7.47
7.47
8.69
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
4.57
4.55
5.82
Connecticut
Conventional (30-yr)
7.51
7.51
8.72
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
4.42
4.36
5.91
Co-ops (N.Y.)
Conventional (30-yr)
7.71
7.74
8.92
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
5.31
5.26
6.38
*4*Indexes for Adjustable-Rate Mortgages*
1-yr. Treasury security
3.27
3.23
4.12
National Mortgage Contract Rate
7.17
7.17
8.14
*Rates on most adjustable mortgages are set 1 to 3 percentage points above these indexes. (Source: HSH Associates)


IN THESE GIRLS, HOPE IS A MUSCLE
I have been waiting a lifetime of Sundays to read Madeleine H. Blais's "In These Girls, Hope Is a Muscle" (April 18).
Articles like this will make "Take Our Daughters to Work Day" and the "Year of the Woman" unnecessary.
It was ironic that, on the following weekend, Monica Seles, a young tennis commando, was stabbed.
Your feature, which so well examined these young athletes' psyches, added a deeper understanding of Seles's wound.
KATE CLINTON Provincetown, Mass.


Barbara Arnold, Robert B. Baird
Barbara Neubauer Arnold, a retired administrative assistant in New York, and Robert Breckenridge Baird, the president of two chemical distribution companies in Southampton, L.I., were married yesterday.
The Rev.
C.
Hugh Hildesley performed the Episcopal ceremony at the Church of the Heavenly Rest in New York.
Mrs.
Baird was the assistant to the president of Delta Kappa Epsilon Club of New York, the social club of the national college fraternity.
She is a daughter of Madeleine G. Neubauer of Providence, R.I., and the late C. Harold Neubauer.
The bride was a widow and her husband, a widower.


Tivoli Gardens Celebrates 150th
Copenhagen's Tivoli Gardens, which so impressed an American tourist named Walter Elias Disney that he decided to pattern Disneyland after it, is celebrating its 150th birthday on Aug. 15.
The park, whose 22 acres of gardens, 28 restaurants and 25 rides are illuminated at night by more than 110,000 colored lights, is honoring itself with a new ride, a restaurant and a museum.
The new Flying Trunk ride is a slow-moving roller coaster that takes visitors through the fairy-tale world of Hans Christian Andersen, who visited Tivoli in 1843.
The ride costs about $1.35 .


Jefferson's Legacy: Dialogues With the Past
The original campus of the University of Virginia the Lawn to everyone here -- was designed by Thomas Jefferson when he was 74, and it is possibly the greatest piece of architecture in America.
That is not a comment I make lightly; neither is it a nod to Jefferson's 250th birthday last month, an event that deserves to be celebrated with honesty rather than hyperbole.
It is merely an observation that comes from 25 years of looking at buildings in this country, and realizing how few of them reach the transcendent.
Frank Lloyd Wright's Fallingwater?
Mies van der Rohe's Seagram Building?
Louis Kahn's Salk Institute?
It is not a long list, and Jefferson's work heads it.
Jefferson's legacy has not always brought great architecture in its wake; it has intimidated more than it has inspired, though one newly completed addition to this campus offers tremendous promise.
Surely of all of the truly great pieces of architecture in this country, the University of Virginia is the most American, the one that best embodies our tendency both to look back at other cultures and to try to make something that is entirely our own.


Deion Passes on the Pads Until Baseball Is Over
With Deion Sanders, everything is constant motion.
Once again, this fall, he will play defensive back and provide chilling kickoff returns for the Atlanta Falcons.
And this summer, he will blaze around the base paths and in the outfield for the Atlanta Braves.


Schoenly Rippel, Robert Lester
Schoenly Shearer Alexandra Rippel, the daughter of Gioconda Crivelli of New York and Florence, and Eric R. Rippel of Milford, N.J., was married yesterday to Robert Anderson Lester, the son of George B. Lester of Woodbridge, Conn., and the late Gertrude Lester.
Mary Wilson, a justice of the peace in Woodbridge, officiated at the home of the bridegroom's father there.


Carla Poleshuk, C. P. Hummel
Carla L. Poleshuk, a daughter of Nina Poleshuk of Hasbrouck Heights, N.J., was married there yesterday to Christopher P. Hummel, a son of William and Marion Hummel of Fairview, N.J.
The Rev.
Robert T. Ulak performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at Corpus Christi Church.
Mrs.
Hummel is the law secretary to Judge Marguerite T. Simon of State Superior Court in Hackensack, N.J.
She graduated from Fairleigh Dickinson University and received her law degree from the City University of New York.


Johanna Markson, Scott Freeman
Johanna Lowry Markson, the daughter of Elaine Markson and David Markson, both of New York, was married yesterday evening to Scott Freeman, a son of Kenneth and Elaine Freeman of Edison, N.J.
Rabbi Deborah Hirsch performed the ceremony at the Manhattan Penthouse in New York.
Ms.
Markson is 30 and is keeping her name.
She and her husband are assistant district attorneys in New York.
She graduated from Connecticut College and received a law degree from George Washington University.
Her father is a novelist in New York.
Her mother is a literary agent in New York.


Corrections
An air fare listing in the Travel Watch column on April 4 included a carrier erroneously under the headings "Restricted Fare" and "Unrestricted Fare." A reader's letter dated April 26 pointed out that the airline, United, does not have direct service on the Chicago-Madrid route.


Pamela Charlston, Robert DeGrood
Pamela J. Charlston, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Harry G. Charlston of Cold Spring Harbor, L.I., was married yesterday to Dr.
Robert Louis J. DeGrood, a son of Mercedes and Louis DeGrood of Miami Lake, Fla.
Msgr.
James Richter performed the ceremony at St.
Patrick's Roman Catholic Church in Huntington, L.I.
Mrs.
DeGrood, 25, is an account executive at Magazine Services Inc., a magazine marketing and sales company in New York.
She graduated from Southern Methodist University.


Marketing Integration Of Schools
The fruit salad had been taken away, the sherbet had been served and now Vincent L. Ferrandino stood in the dining room of the Litchfield Country Club, telling a meeting of the League of Women Voters why Connecticut should racially integrate its schools.
Eighty percent of the inmates in Connecticut's overflowing prisons are high-school dropouts, he began, and black and Hispanic teen-agers in segregated city schools have the highest dropout rates.
"Every time we put a security system in our homes," said Mr.
Ferrandino, the state's Commissioner of Education, "we're paying a price for educational failure."


AN ARMY OF THE FAITHFUL
Sullivan notes in passing that these members of the new religious right work in similar ways to take over school boards.
We here in Framingham, Mass., have just spent a year fighting them off.
The two greatest strengths of the Christian Coalition are voter apathy and ignorance.
When a group of "concerned citizens" arose from nowhere, "spontaneously," to attack our new health curriculum, we didn't know what had hit us.
It was up to The Wall Street Journal and The New York Times to tell us that we were part of a national phenomenon.
Meanwhile, our local papers cover the issues only when pressed to it.


Melissa Collier, Foye Staniford
Melissa Turnbull Collier, the daughter of Mrs.
John B. Hokanson of West Palm Beach, Fla., and Richard T. Collier of Southport, Conn., was married yesterday to Foye McKean Staniford, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Foye F. Staniford Jr. of Lawrence, L.I.
The Rev.
William T. Holt 3d, an Episcopal priest, performed the ceremony at the Church of Bethesda-by-the-Sea in Palm Beach.


Sally Robertson, Mark Laroche
Sally Peirce Robertson, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
William G. Robertson of Simsbury, Conn., was married yesterday to Mark Edward Laroche, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Roland A. Laroche of Albany.
The Rev.
William Low performed the ceremony at St.
John's Episcopal Church in Pine Meadow, Conn.
Mrs.
Laroche, 27, is an account supervisor at the E. Bruce Harrison Company, an environmental communications consulting firm in New York.
She graduated from Williams College.
Her father, now retired, was the director of corporate insurance at Combustion Engineering Inc., now a part of ABB Combustion Engineering Inc., a designer and manufacturer of power equipment in Windsor, Conn.


Sound Bytes; A Big Gap Between C.E.O.'s And Information Officers
"I AM proof that there is life after acquisition," says Sanjay Kumar, executive vice president of operations for Computer Associates International Inc., the $1.5 billion software company based in Islandia, L.I.
Mr.
Kumar joined the company in 1987 when it bought the Uccel Corporation, the software publisher where he was working at the time.
He wound up at Uccel when the company where he was working as a programmer was acquired.
Now he directs industry research and trend analysis for software ranging from mainframes to personal computers.
He left college in 1980 to co-found Exceptional Software Products, a company that developed software for systems as varied as the Apple II and the I.B.M.
System 34 mainframe, and still professes joy at "playing with computers."


A Domestic Dispute; On Health Care, It Is Hillary Clinton Versus President's Economic Advisers
When President Clinton put his wife in charge of devising a plan to revamp health care in America, politicians wondered what he would do if she clashed with his other advisers.
Now they are finding out.
Such a clash over the ambitious plan being developed by Hillary Rodham Clinton emerged at a White House meeting on Thursday.
Health-policy advisers support a comprehensive package of medical benefits while top economic advisers question the scope and cost of such generous coverage.


Spies &amp; Thrillers
We have been reading about the theft of art in the former Soviet Union.
Paul Levine explores the subject in FALSE DAWN (Bantam, $21.95), the latest in the Jake Lassiter series.
Lassiter, a former professional football player, is now a lawyer practicing in Miami.
Mr.
Levine makes a big thing about Jake's being only routinely competent as a lawyer, the same way he was only a competent football player.
Don't believe him.
If Jake can handle everything the way he handles his courtroom sequences in "False Dawn," you'll want him on your side.


Verbatim or Verboten?
Jacques Attali, the ultimate intellectual gadfly and the current president of the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development, seems to be making an inelegant mess of everything from redecorating his headquarters to writing his memoirs.
After barely surviving a furor last month over his bank's extravagance, particularly a decision to spend over $1 million on replacing one kind of marble with another at its London headquarters, the owlish Mr.
Attali is now embroiled in a literary row.


Producer of 'Nunsense' Blocks Nuns' Plan
As a small band of cloistered nuns prepares to move their Monastery of the Visitation to a new site in rural southwestern Massachusetts, the irreverent world of real estate development has revealed itself to them.
The nuns, the Sisters of the Visitation of the Holy Mary, are now under contract with a local developer to sell their century-old block-long granite convent in the western section of Delaware's largest city.


Do They Know How to Hire Tricky Dogs?
Lorne Michaels is putting together his team for the Conan O'Brien talk show, which will replace "Late Night With David Letterman" on NBC in late summer.
A man who works for Mr.
Michaels said that Jeff Ross, the vice president of production at Broadway Video, which Mr.
Michaels owns, would produce the show and that Robert Smigel, a writer at "Saturday Night Live," is being interviewed for head writer with a production role.
"I'm not sure what's happening," Mr.
Smigel said.
He often wrote sketches with Mr.
O'Brien when Mr.
O'Brien was also at "Saturday Night Live."


MAY 16-22: Ohio Incinerator Spared; E.P.A. Increases Oversight Of Hazardous Waste Makers
After years of turmoil in dozens of communities over the safety of incinerating hazardous wastes, the Environmental Protection Agency announced a policy last week to strengthen the Government's oversight and temporarily slow the industry's growth.
The program, developed by Carol M. Browner, the E.P.A.
Administrator, calls for new studies to be conducted at 171 incinerators to determine the risks the plants pose to health and the environment.
More stringent standards will be set for the toxic chemical dioxin and heavy metals that incinerators can release into the atmosphere.
And the incinerators' clients will be required to reduce the volume of hazardous waste.


IN SHORT: FICTION
ALEX HALEY'S QUEEN The Story of an American Family.
By Alex Haley and David Stevens.
Morrow, $25.


Patricia Sanna, Frederick Pouy
Patricia Casey Sanna, a social worker in New York and a flight attendant for Delta Air Lines, was married yesterday to Frederick Richard Pouy, a captain for Delta.
The Rev.
Barber Waters, a United Methodist minister, performed the ceremony in the garden of the Homestead Inn in Greenwich, Conn.


Audrey Wertheim and Barry Phelps
Audrey D. Wertheim, the owner of Wertheim &amp; Associates, a public-relations and party-planning firm in New York, was married yesterday to Barry C. Phelps, the owner of B. C. Phelps &amp; Company, a venture-capital firm in Greenwich, Conn.
The Rev.
Dr.
William E. Foley, an Episcopal minister, performed the ceremony at the Colony Club in New York.
Mrs.
Phelps, 60, is also the executive vice president of McGovern-Wertheim Inc., a sports-management and promotion company in Greenwich and New York.
She is a daughter of Mrs.
E.
E.
Brandon of Sarasota, Fla., and the late Dr.
Hippolyte M. Wertheim, who was the chief of neurosurgery at Bellevue Hospital in New York.


Homeboys


Laser Surgery Is Useful, But It's Not a Panacea
As a surgeon who has not seen fit to embrace laser surgery, I must take exception to some of the statements made in "Laser Surgery Making Inroads on L.I."  [ April 18 ] .
Lasers are making great contributions to surgical care in ophthalmology, arthroscopy, dermatology and minimally invasive surgery.
The unifying concept in these areas is the ability to perform procedures through smaller incisions -- less than half an inch -- or with no incision at all.


The Gift Horse's Mouth
Senator Paul Wellstone of Minnesota won public respect but little gratitude from his colleagues earlier this month.
He embarrassed the Senate into voting for an amendment requiring lobbyists to itemize the gifts, trips and meals given to a member of Congress.
Now it's time for some serious consciousness-raising in the House.
We're talking major therapy here.
Just days after Mr.
Wellstone made his brave stand, about 40 House members and their spouses boarded a train for New York City accompanied by lobbyists who paid part of the cost of a four-day fun and fact-finding trip hosted by Representative Charles Rangel, Democrat of New York.


Cruise Ships: How Safe?
CRUISE ship safety is far from perfect, a new Government study has concluded, and a big problem is that American data do not show how far.
The study, conducted by the General Accounting Office, the investigative arm of Congress, cited a need for improvements in the Coast Guard's monitoring of vessels and in international rules governing emergency preparations.
According to the report, submitted to Congress on March 31, "the Coast Guard needs to more effectively collect and analyze its cruise ship examination results," because it does not keep track of repeated deficiencies.
The report said the Coast Guard needed to give inspectors additional training on international safety standards, because inspectors said they lacked the knowledge to enforce the standards uniformly.


Technology; TV News With a Bare-Bones Crew
TELEVISION news, which takes pride in its on-the-scene immediacy, has always had a behind-the-scenes encumbrance: the crew of technicians and the truckload of materiel that make most TV reporters anything but unobtrusive observers.
But electronic tools that automate and shrink the technology of TV journalism are letting a new breed of reporters concentrate more on news gathering and less on baggage-handling.


THIS WEEKS NUMBERS


All You Need Is Dream, And a Ping-Pong Ball
The National Basketball Association draft lottery is Christmas for basketball grownups.
But instead of Santa Claus sliding down a chimney with gifts, Commissioner David Stern strolls before the television cameras with a bag full of Ping-Pong balls.
When the hyped-up event is over, one team will have been given the opportunity to choose from the best college basketball talent in the country and perhaps turn a franchise around.
Santa Claus wishes he had this kind of clout.
The draft lottery has become one of spring's more anticipated events, serving as a well-publicized prelude to the actual draft.
And sometimes the lottery is worth the hype: Just ask a team like the Orlando Magic, who got the first pick last year and went on to select center Shaquille O'Neal, who has become bigger than even Santa Claus.
This year players like Michigan's Chris Webber and 7-foot-6-inch center Sean Bradley, from Brigham Young University, are among the top prospects for the draft, which will take place on June 30.


The Proof Is In the Score
To the Editor:


U.N. WARNS OF END TO KURDISH RELIEF
The United Nations has warned that aid for the Kurds in northern Iraq, as well as for needy people suffering the effects of the trade embargo in the rest of the country, will be brought to an end within weeks unless Western countries provide more money and supplies.
In a letter sent to the president of the Security Council this week, Secretary General Boutros Boutros-Ghali said the Iraqi Government had agreed to extend the accord under which the United Nations provides relief assistance to the Iraqi Kurds as well as to those in need elsewhere in the country for another six months.


Polly C. Stone, Fridolf Hanson
Polly Campbell Stone, a marketing coordinator with Voyager Asset Management in Minneapolis, and Fridolf Avery Hanson, a student at Wake Forest University, were married yesterday.
The Very Rev.
H.
Douglas Fontaine, an Episcopal priest, performed the ceremony at the Cathedral Church of St.
Mark in Minneapolis.
Mrs.
Hanson, 26, and her husband, 26, graduated from the University of Colorado.
She is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Charles W. Stone Jr. of Wayzata, Minn.
Her father is the president of Stone Machinery, a seller of machine tools, and of the Buck Hill Ski Corporation, which owns and operates two ski areas in Minnesota.


Sound Bytes; A Big Gap Between C.E.O.'s And Information Officers
"I AM proof that there is life after acquisition," says Sanjay Kumar, executive vice president of operations for Computer Associates International Inc., the $1.5 billion software company based in Islandia, L.I.
Mr.
Kumar joined the company in 1987 when it bought the Uccel Corporation, the software publisher where he was working at the time.
He wound up at Uccel when the company where he was working as a programmer was acquired.
Now he directs industry research and trend analysis for software ranging from mainframes to personal computers.
He left college in 1980 to co-found Exceptional Software Products, a company that developed software for systems as varied as the Apple II and the I.B.M.
System 34 mainframe, and still professes joy at "playing with computers."


Optimism Can Slip Into Fatal Solipsism
THE great Russian-Danish theoretician Aron Nimzovich counseled optimism as a strategic outlook.
Presumably, he did not mean one should overestimate one's position.
But it is common to contemplate and analyze only one's own plans, as though there were no opponent.
This kind of blindness by an otherwise strong player showed up in the game between the grandmasters Grigory Kaidanov of Lexington, Ky., and Joel Benjamin of Manhattan in Round 7 of the Hudson International Tournament on April 20 at Pace University in Pleasantville, N.Y.


Being Rich, or Perhaps Money Isn't Everything
DAVID RICH is an advertising executive.
Carolyn Rich is a speech consultant.
They are the very model of a successful suburban couple, which is to say the Riches are rich, but that doesn't matter.
In the very hotel room where they spent their wedding night 18 years ago, David tells Carolyn that he loves her more than ever, but that doesn't matter either.


Millions Agree: Bonds Is Worth Every Penny to the Giants
In the words of Larry Baer, the team's executive vice president, the new owners of the San Francisco Giants took "big-time heat" for their second most expensive transaction of last winter.
"We took big-time heat from other owners, from the city because we were trying to get lease concessions and, although I'd say the reaction was 80 percent positive, from some fans saying, 'That's a lot of money.' Now we hear nary a word from anyone about his contract. In fact, people are saying he deserves a raise."


A Day For Fishing, Even in Battery Park City


Comeback of '75 Alive at Coliseum
The sign held by fans in Section 334 at Nassau Coliseum tonight read, "We Came Back in 1975." The one hanging in Section 208 proclaimed, "We Remember 1975."
These were just two of the reminders to the Islanders that it was in 1975 when they came back after losing the first three games to capture the playoff series against the Penguins.


Natasha Pearl, Mark Turchan
Natasha Pearl, an associate at Booz, Allen &amp; Hamilton, the management consulting concern, in New York, was married yesterday to Mark Paul Turchan, an associate at McKinsey &amp; Company, management consultants, in Toronto.
Judge Robert S. Tignor of the Superior Court of the District of Columbia performed the ceremony at the 701 Restaurant in Washington.
Ms.
Pearl, who is 32, is keeping her name.
She graduated cum laude from Harvard University, from which she also received an M.B.A.
She is a daughter of Ruth S. Pearl and Laurence D. Pearl, both of Washington.
Her father is the director of policy for the Office of Fair Housing at the Department of Housing and Urban Development in Washington.
Her mother restores antique furniture in Washington.


The Executive Computer; No Pie in the Sky: I.B.M.'s New 'Green' Machine
BIG BLUE is about to go green.
The I.B.M.
Personal Computer Company is preparing to introduce a compact computer that addresses key issues of environmental interest -- energy conservation and electromagnetic radiation.
The typical desktop computer uses 250 to 300 watts of power.
But I.B.M.'s offering belongs to a new generation of computers, popularly called "green PC's," that will cut energy usage to less than 60 watts.
Many of these new computers, as well as printers and monitors, are expected to be introduced next month as part of the Environmental Protection Agency's Energy Star program for encouraging conservation in the PC industry.


Archeologists Discover 3,200-Year-Old Tomb


Karen Voelkner, James Hempstead
Karen Voelkner, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Thomas L. Voelkner of Wayne, N.J., was married there yesterday to James Douglas Hempstead, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
George H. Hempstead 3d of Colts Neck, N.J.
Msgr.
Carl Wolsin performed the ceremony at Our Lady of Consolation Church.


Ms. Goldsmith, Mr. Adams
Jennifer Lynn Goldsmith, the daughter of Mark and Arlene Goldsmith of New York, was married yesterday to Benjamin Crowninshield Adams, a son of Mrs.
John Quincy Adams of Dover, Mass., and the late Mr.
Adams.
Cantor Jim Levinson performed the ceremony at Wheatleigh, an inn in Lenox, Mass.
The Rev.
Nancy McGrath, an Episcopal minister, took part in the ceremony.
Mrs.
Adams, 25, is a student in the premedical program at Columbia University, where her husband is a candidate for an M.B.A.
She graduated cum laude from Bowdoin College.
Her father is the founder and president of Inventory Management Systems, a consulting company in New York.
Her mother is the executive director of New Alternatives for Children, a nonprofit social-services agency in New York.


Sonnier Is Lone Ex-Champ Left In Travis Invitational Semis
Randy Sonnier, a 45-year-old airline pilot who plays out of Deerwood Golf Club in Houston, is the only former winner of the Travis Invitational to survive the first two days of the 83d edition of what is reputed to be the oldest match-play tournament in the United States.
Sonnier, who won this amateur tournament in 1987 and 1988, weathered this morning's round of 16 with a victory on the 19th hole over Bill Hadden of the New Haven Country Club, then registered a 6-and-5 triumph over Richard Serian of Wolfert's Roost Country Club in Albany in this afternoon's quarterfinals.


A Vigorous 'Fiddler' Reproduced at Gateway
"FIDDLER ON THE ROOF" has been one of America's classic musicals since its Broadway premiere in 1964.
Its songs, by Jerry Bock and Sheldon Harnick, may be about Russian Jews forced to leave their homes, but the music is now part of the American mosaic.
It is a rare wedding reception today in which the bride or bridegroom's parents do not shed a tear or two over "Sunrise, Sunset."
The music from "Fiddler" is always delightful, but never so much as when it is receiving a glorious production of the full show, including the book by Joseph Stein, as it now is at the Gateway Playhouse in Bellport.
Unfortunately, the musical, which opens the Gateway season, ends its run tonight.
But if the quality of the production is any clue as to what is in store, it will be entertaining summer in Bellport.


Susan Lucci Proves Winning Isn't Everything
Susan Lucci is a good sport.
It's lunch break on the set of ABC's "All My Children," a time when Ms.
Lucci -- or "La Looch," as her director playfully calls her -- usually curls up in her dressing room, orders Chinese takeout and contemplates how to chew up the scenery in her role of Erica Kane, the deliciously bitchy scheme queen of daytime television.


LONG ISLAND JOURNAL
Step Up in Taxi World
IF understatement defines class, Ted Gordon is the classiest guy in the Southampton.
Mr.
Gordon has started a taxicab service using only Mercedes-Benzes.
Because they are Mercedes, Mr.
Gordon says, he does not want to defile them by putting the word "taxi" on them.
"You couldn't put a sign on a car like this," he said, flicking off a piece of road dust on the hood of a shiny silver 300SD.
Thus the fleet of six -- soon to be 10 -- luxury sedans that make up the Mercedes Taxi Company of Southampton have no outside advertising.


How the Dakota Got Its Name
To the Editor:
Kenneth T. Jackson's review of Elizabeth Hawes's book on New York City apartment houses, "New York, New York" (April 25), repeats as fact one of the stories she uses: "Known as the Dakota because it was so far from the center of things that one wag said it might as well be in the Dakota Territory. . . ."


A Civil Rights Struggle Ahead
The Senate is headed for a confirmation fight over Lani Guinier, President Clinton's nominee to be Assistant Attorney General for Civil Rights.
Conservative Republicans see a chance to shoot down a Democratic nominee using her own academic writing for gunpowder.
The battle will be demagogic, witness the early use of canards like "racism in reverse" by politicians who never gave civil rights high priority.
Nothing less than the health of the Voting Rights Act, a crowning achievement of American justice, is at stake.
The core question is whether Ms.
Guinier, a veteran litigator, has the philosophy and political sense to be the custodian of that act.
These matters are in doubt and must be tested in hearings still weeks away.


South Korean Students Proclaim "Anti-American Day"


AN ARMY OF THE FAITHFUL
His political and religious beliefs aside, Jim Adkisson may not be a "dumb hick," but any man who wears suspenders and a belt personifies pessimism.
WALSTON DUNN Hilton Head Island, S.C.


The Stein Report: a Matter of Timing
Trying to revive his lagging mayoral campaign, City Council President Andrew J. Stein assembled reporters one morning last week to criticize what he called the abuse of thousands of elderly New Yorkers in adult homes in New York City.
Mr.
Stein said his staff had been investigating the 60 or so adult homes in the city for a year and had found pervasive negligence and decrepit conditions.
"The adult home industry is a disgrace," said Mr.
Stein, who first gained public attention as a State Assemblyman more than 20 years ago when he exposed corruption and inadequate care in nursing homes.


Town Asks, 'Why?' After a Little-League Killing
It was a close baseball game, and after the last inning the boys shook hands and congratulated one another on having played well.
But there was still a score to be settled, and before the players could leave the field, the season's first Little League match here, on May 15, ended with a teen-ager's becoming the first homicide victim in the international organization's 54-year history.


His Mother Done It
THE MAN WHO WASN'T MAIGRET A Portrait of Georges Simenon.
By Patrick Marnham.
Illustrated. 346 pp.
New York: Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux. $25.


Nina B. Joseph, Nadeem A. Bezar
Nina Beth Joseph, a daughter of Drs.
Rosaline and Robert Joseph of Philadelphia, was married there yesterday to Nadeem A. Bezar, a son of Drs.
Qamar Sultana and Shafi Bezar of Scarsdale, N.Y.
Judge Legrome Davis of the Court of Common Pleas for Philadelphia County officiated at the College of Physicians.
Mrs.
Bezar, 29, is the executive assistant to the president of the Stolker Company, a real estate company in Philadelphia.
She graduated from Barnard College and received a law degree from Widener University.
Her parents work in Philadelphia, where her father is a psychiatrist at Friends Hospital.
Her mother is a professor of medicine and the director of hematology and oncology at the Medical College of Pennsylvania.


Kim A. Healey, John McCreight
Kim Amet Healey, a vice president in New York at the First Boston Corporation, the investment bank, was married yesterday to John A. McCreight, who owns a management-consulting company in New York that bears his name.
The Rev.
John R. Gilchrist performed the ceremony at St.
Stephen's Episcopal Church in Ridgefield, Conn.


Toe Tapping From Jazz to Israeli Dances
JAZZ tunes, spirituals, gospel music, Israeli dances and Yiddish folk songs should make a 4 P.M. program today at Grace Episcopal Church in Norwalk quite a toe-tapping affair.
"This musical tapestry will highlight the spiritual commonality found in the music of African-American gospel and Hebrew cantorial pieces" said one soloist and cantor, Debbie Katchko-Zimmerman of Congregational Beth El.
Gospel performers will include the tenor Leroy Ellis and the Serendipity Singers under Gigi Van Dyke, with the flutist Elizabeth Harris of Norwalk and the guitarist Chance Brown of Wilton.
For more details, call 866-5454.


Odd Couple


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball American League  DETROIT TIGERS -- Optioned Mark Grater, pitcher, to Toledo of the International League.
Called up Kurt Knudsen, pitcher, from Toledo.
National League


By Windjammer Around Penobscot Bay
THE windjammers, a fleet of sailing schooners that offer cruises under canvas, made no haphazard choice in settling into Penobscot Bay, a wedge of the Atlantic in the central Maine coast.
With sunrise over Mount Desert and sunset behind the Camden Hills, the bay, defined by highlands that run down into the sea, enfolds hundreds of approachable islands; its clear air and fair winds make it arguably the premier seascape and sailing ground of the Northeast.
For 16 weeks of nonfreezing weather that the coast of Maine enjoys each year, the windjammers, ranging in length from 64 to 132 feet, as well as other day-trip vessels, add a picturesque filip to the seaward views as they pass, sometimes in stately procession.
Anyone who has toured the area, from Camden and Rockland on the west to Bar Harbor on the east, has seen the windjammers slide by like Lohengrin's swan, long name banners rippling from fat mastheads above old-fashioned four-sided sails.
At their berths in Camden and nearby towns, their spars put a 19th-century gloss on messy waterfronts.


A Continent's Rich Rhythms Resound Anew
When it began in 1977, the DanceAfrica festival was nothing more than five troupes performing on a single weekend.
By contrast, its "sweet 16" birthday celebration will run more than a week, beginning this afternoon with a cavalcade of 52 motorcycles bearing the flags of African nations, which will travel from Harlem to the Brooklyn Academy of Music.
Starting Friday, 21 American companies will perform there in programs of African, Afro-American and Afro-Caribbean dances and music.
During the opening ceremonies, Chuck Davis, the festival's exuberant founder and master of ceremonies, will pour a libation over a piece of African earth; he will also serve a cake believed to be the largest ever baked in the shape of the African continent.
Later in the week, there will be master classes, a symposium and one of the festival's most popular features, an African bazaar offering food, crafts and other items.


Currency
Last
Prior
Year
Week
Week
Ago
Japanese Yen
110.40
110.80
129.21
per Dollar
German Mark
1.6265
1.6020
1.6165
per Dollar
Canadian Dollar
1.2643
1.2743
1.1960
per U.S. Dollar
British Pound
1.5430
1.5390
1.8177
U.S. Dollar per British Pound
Gold
$377.25
$367.30
$337.75
Republic National Bank
Currency: Friday NY Close


DIPLOMATS ARRIVE IN HAITI FOR TALKS
In a push to finalize an agreement on deploying an international police force in Haiti, envoys of the Clinton Administration and the United Nations arrived here today for talks with the country's military leaders.
For two weeks, diplomats have described the planned deployment of about 500 foreign police officers in Haiti as a crucial final element to reaching a negotiated settlement to this country's political crisis, which began with a violent coup against the elected President, the Rev.
Jean-Bertrand Aristide, in September 1991.


Centenary for Venice Biennale
The Venice Biennale, which opens June 13 and closes Oct. 10, is celebrating its centenary.
Not for a long time has the show actually meant all that much in terms of the course of contemporary art -- about 30 years, one might reckon, since Robert Rauschenberg became the first American to win the grand prize.
With increasing numbers of traveling exhibitions and jet-setting artists, giant international survey exhibitions like the Biennale have come to seem more and more anachronistic.
Still, the Biennale remains the most beloved of these mastodons of the art world.
Whatever disappointment the show might cause, Venice softens the blow; the exhibition is set, irresistibly, in a series of pavilions spread through the city's public gardens, as well as in the nearby Arsenale, which is used to house a selection of works by not-ready-for-prime-time artists that is often the liveliest part of the Biennale.
There's always something to see.


Hillary Mayer, David Jacobson
Hillary Lee Mayer, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Donald Mayer of Albany, was married there last evening to David Lee Jacobson, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Marvin Jacobson of Cranston, R.I.
Rabbi Scott Schpeen officiated at Temple Beth Emeth.


Complaint on Car Sale Results in Death
Oscar Teitelbaum died, the police say, while trying to get back the $250 he paid for a 1978 Volvo, which he claimed was a lemon.
Mr.
Teitelbaum, 48, was shot several times in the chest on Friday by a mechanic who brokered the deal when he returned to an outdoor repair shop in Fort Greene demanding a refund, said Police Officer Scott Bloch, a department spokesman.
Mr.
Teitelbaum was pronounced dead at Brooklyn Hospital.
He confronted the mechanic, Robert Campos, 68, at 3:45 P.M. on Friday at the shop, at 37 Cumberland Street, Officer Bloch said.
He said Mr.
Teitelbaum told Mr.
Campos that the car, which had been owned by a friend of the mechanic, had developed mechanical problems after he bought it earlier in the week.
Mr.
Campos, of 185 Hall Street, was arrested at the shop by officers who responded to calls about a shooting.
He was charged with murder, criminal possession of a weapon and criminal use of a firearm, Officer Bloch said.


IN PRAISE OF PUBLIC PLACES
FORT PECK DAM Public works don't have to be as oppressively dull as they sound.
Take dams.
These monoliths that stud our rivers are strictly utilitarian, yet the best of them still manage to pack a visual wallop.
Last year, 730,000 people trekked out to Nevada to see Hoover Dam.
Margaret Bourke-White's 1936 photo of Fort Peck Dam in Montana (above) adorned the first cover of Life magazine, capturing in its ragged symmetry the pure drama of Art Deco design.
F.D.R. was so impressed with the potential magnificence and employment opportunities of dams that he made building them the key to his recovery plan out west.
By its completion in 1938, Fort Peck Dam had put more than 10,000 men to work and opened up navigable waterways all the way to Kansas City.
Now that's infrastructure.
Infrastructure is not a word that comes trippingly off the tongue, and yet many invoke it as part of the solution to what ails us.
In recent history, infrastructure has been associated with low-quality, low-cost design.
Which is a shame, really.
Because the courthouses, train stations, highways and bridges that we encounter each day have the potential to uplift us with their grandeur.


EVIDENCE MOUNTS OF RIGGED BIDDING IN MILK INDUSTRY
Federal and state investigators have found evidence in at least 20 states that executives at the nation's largest national and regional dairy companies have conspired -- sometimes for decades -- to rig bids on milk products sold to schools and military bases.
So far, 48 people and 43 companies -- including industry giants like Borden, Pet and Dean Foods -- have been convicted or have pleaded guilty to Federal criminal charges of price-fixing and bid-rigging.
At least $91.4 million in criminal fines and civil damages has been levied, and two dozen people have been sentenced to prison.


State Information
To the Editor: I too ask states for travel information, usually using the 800 telephone number.
I was disappointed that the Practical Traveler evaluation left out New Jersey and Virginia, two of my favorites.
New Jersey has a separate road map and seems to cover every town.
Virginia divides the state into sections and lists attractions for each, with excellent photos.
They are the best and most complete of the 20 I got this year.
HERBERT S. KASPER  Staten Island


Spy Trader
Like a character out of a Kafka tale, Wolfgang Vogel spends his days sifting through files, looking for evidence to defend himself against charges he finds difficult to comprehend.
The twist is that for years Vogel was a lawyer whose clients were often people like Kafka's Joseph K., arrested for reasons not made clear to them.
Today, at 67, Vogel sits in the second-floor study of his lakeside house and pores over his files like a worried law clerk.
Shrunken and sad, his scant gray hair cut short, like a criminal's, he stares now and then at a lake dotted with sailboats and ringed with villas like his, homes of East Germany's formerly privileged.


Crackdown on Drunken and Other Unsafe Boaters
BOATERS face stricter penalties for safety violations this season based on a law enacted over the winter.
There are 33,831 boats registered in Nassau County and 64,486 in Suffolk, which has the highest number of registered craft in the state.
A new law requires law-enforcement officials to request that operators suspected of B.W.I., or boating while intoxicated, submit to a Breathalyzer test or lose their operating rights for six months and face $200 fines.
Until now a drunken boater could refuse to submit to a test with impunity, and a person suspected of drunken boating could be required to submit to a test only after a court order.


Off to a Good Start: Tending New Arrivals
PLANTING is now in full swing.
Just about everything can go into the ground.
The goal is to have the plants settle and form new roots promptly so they will be well established by the time summer's heat and drought appear.
Many new plants will be arriving from mail-order sources, too.
And the most important thing to do when they arrive is unpack them with care.
It is essential that the plants are set upright; they can be left in their shipping carton.
The live plants have been packed in an airless box for some time and to keep their leaves turgid and roots alive, the plants must have air promptly.
Sometimes the new plants will be wrapped in plastic, sometimes in wet newspaper, sometimes in sphagnum moss, or some are even shipped in their pots.


NOTES
Zona, the SoHo emporium known for its handcrafted home furnishings and gifts, with branches in Aspen, Colo.; Tokyo, and Florence, opened in East Hampton, L.I., last weekend.
The new store is situated at 2 Newtown Lane, on the corner of Main Street.
Just a few miles west, in Bridgehampton, Banana Republic bowed on Friday with a new 7,100-square-foot store.
The company's creative director of advertising, Sam Shahid, has a house in town.


Kimberly Kelly, David Villano
Kimberly Ann Kelly, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
David M. Kelly of Chatham, N.J., was married yesterday to David Thomas Villano, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Thomas A. Villano of Kinnelon, N.J.
The Rev.
Vincent Treglio performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at St.
Francis by the Sea on Hilton Head Island, South Carolina.
Mrs.
Villano, 28, is a portfolio assistant at Trainer, Wortham &amp; Company, an investment-advisory concern in New York.
She graduated from the College of St.
Elizabeth.
Her father is the president and chief executive of the National Securities Clearing Corporation, a securities clearinghouse in New York.


State Information
To the Editor: In reading the column about state tourist information, I was a little dismayed by Betsy Wade's methodology and conclusions in judging the efficiency of tourist information offices in the United States and Canada.


Residential Resales
Closings in the week ended May 8  MANHATTAN  Chelsea  $345,000
436 West 23d Street  2-bedroom, 2-bath, 1,2050-sq.-ft. co-op in prewar building; dining area, fireplace, private garden; maintenance $298, 35% tax-deductible (Brokers: Olshan Realty-Corcoran Group)  Greenwich Village  $1.25 million
140-144 Perry Street  30,000-sq.-ft. one-family, 4-story town house; elevator, 6 baths, 12- to 18-ft. ceilings, 3 exposures, 62- by 97-ft. lot; taxes $36,000 (Brokers: Sutton West Realty-Ambrose Mar-Elia)  Greenwich Village  $395,000
126 Waverly Place  (Washington Court)  2-bedroom, 2-bath, 1,330-sq.-ft. postwar condo; 24-hr. doorman, den, fireplace, 2 terraces, cathedral ceilings; common charge $779, taxes $4,800 (Broker: Karen Hartnett I.B.C.)  TriBeCa  $485,000
355 Greenwich Street  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 2,000-sq.-ft. loft condo; eat-in kitchen, walk-up, 3 exposures, Hudson River view; common charge $448, taxes $3,300 (Broker: Corcoran Group)  Upper West Side  $247,500
309 West 86th Street  2-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 1,150-sq.-ft. prewar co-op; renovated kitchen, fireplace, 2 exposures; maintenance $779, 40% tax-deductible (Broker: West Side Properties-Vandenberg Inc.)  BRONX  Gun Hill Road Area  $120,000
923A East 215th Street  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, one-family detached frame house; dining room, finished basement, 1-car garage, 25- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $1,100 (Broker: Marland Real Estate)  Riverdale  $297,500
6129 Delafield Avenue  2-family detached brick house; 3 bedrooms, 1 1/2 baths, dining room in primary duplex; 2 bedrooms, 1 bath in simplex; eat-in kitchen in each; 2-car garage, 30- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $2,480 (Broker: Charles G. Brophy &amp; Associates)  BROOKLYN  Cobble Hill  $511,400
195 Baltic Street  2-family attached brick town house; 4 bedrooms, 2 baths, dining room, spiral staircase, 2 fireplaces in primary triplex; 2 bedrooms, 1 bath in simplex, 20- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $3,700 (Broker: Harborview Realty)  Park Slope  $600,000
544 Second Street  2-family brick building; 5 bedrooms, 2 baths, dining room, 4 marble mantels in primary triplex; 1 bedroom, 1 bath, den in simplex; 20- by 95-ft. lot; taxes $2,082 (Broker: F.J. Kazeroid Real Estate)  Park Slope  $168,000
458 Third Street  3-bedroom, 1-bath, 1,250-sq.-ft. co-op in a limestone building; dining room, new kitchen and bath, 2 exposures; maintenance $508, 50% tax-deductible (Broker: Warren Lewis Real Estate)  QUEENS  Elmhurst  $250,000
94-58 Alstyne Avenue  2-family detached brick colonial; 3 bedrooms, 2 baths in primary unit; 2 bedrooms, 1 bath in other; eat-in kitchen in each, finished basement, 1-car garage, 22- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $2,200 (Broker: Veterans Realty)  South Ozone Park  $140,000
133-26 118th Street  2-family detached colonial; 2 bedrooms, 1 bath, dining area in each unit; finished basement, 1-car garage, 27- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $1,360 (Broker: Kremer Real Estate)  STATEN ISLAND  Dongan Hills  $210,000
2-family detached colonial; dining room in primary unit; 2 bedrooms, 1 bath in each; 1-car garage, 40- by 113-ft. lot; taxes $2,000 (Broker: Kingsley Real Estate)  St.
George  $80,000
36 Bay Street Landing  4-bedroom, 2-bath, 1,597-sq.-ft. duplex co-op in a converted prewar warehouse; 24-hr. doorman, dining area, 22-ft. cathedral ceilings; spiral staircase, health club; maintenance $576, 65% tax-deductible (Broker: Gateway Arms Realty Corp.)


World Markets; Is the Party Over in Natural Gas?
THE year-old party in natural gas stocks has carried share prices for independent production companies up an average 54 percent in the United States since the end of April 1992.
And pipeline company stocks have done almost as well.
Is it about time to sell, or are better days still coming in the gas patch?
For many analysts and investors, the futures market has been a tempting, bullish indicator that has led gas stocks on their upward march, with the price gains closely matching the surge in the commodity price.


AN ARMY OF THE FAITHFUL
In his article, Robert Sullivan quoted from an unauthorized, early draft of a Christian Coalition manual, circulated by a single Pennsylvania member.
This individual never received permission from the national organization to write or distribute his material.
I assure you he was acting independently, and his instruction to members that "you should never mention the name Christian Coalition in Republican circles" was never condoned or supported by Christian Coalition officers.
MIKE RUSSELL Communications Director, Christian Coalition Chesapeake, Va.


IN SHORT: FICTION
MIDNIGHT LEMONADE By Ann Goethe. Delacorte, $21.95.


Children Explore New Vistas Through the Fresh Air Fund
Tall trees, lush lawns and long stretches of beach with plenty of clear blue water to romp in.
It sounds like a travel brochure, but these are the drawings of Fresh Air Fund children showing where they spent their summer vacations.
The children, who are from Public School 90 in Richmond Hill, Queens,drew their pictures last week at a pizza party arranged by the One Stop Richmond Hill Block Association, one of 60 agencies that register children for visits with Fresh Air Fund host families in the suburbs.


Overlooked? Not Likely
WHERE, oh where, was Lady Fairfax?
The cocktail party for the Princess Margarita of Romania Foundation at Lady Fairfax's just renovated palatial apartment on the top three floors of the Hotel Pierre was ripping along on Wednesday night.
But the hostess, whose late husband's family made its most recent fortune in the publishing business in Australia, was not to be found.


Richards W. Hannah, Family Court Judge, 88
Richards W. Hannah, a Family Court judge who also held several senior positions in New York State government, died on Friday at St.
Vincent's Hospital and Medical Center in Manhattan.
He was 88 years old and lived in Brooklyn.
The cause of death was pneumonia and kidney failure, said his daughter, Dr.
Mary Elizabeth Hannah.


New &amp; Noteworthy
THE GIRLS IN THE BALCONY: Women, Men and The New York Times, by Nan Robertson. (Fawcett Columbine, $10.) Nan Robertson traces the history of women employees at The New York Times, culminating in the landmark suit filed against the newspaper in 1974 for sex discrimination.
Last year our reviewer, Arlie Russell Hochschild, found this a "warm, salty, wisecracking book," in which "the story unfolds dramatically."
TURTLE MOON, by Alice Hoffman. (Berkley, $5.99.) In a small Florida town, three wounded people converge: Keith Rosen, a boy hovering on the edge of both adolescence and delinquency; Lucy, his divorced mother, and Julian Cash, a lonely policeman with a guilty past.
Their lives intersect when Keith disappears with the baby of a murdered young woman.
"Perhaps this good book can be the occasion for a reader's coming to terms with the expression of sentiment," Frederick Busch said here last year.
"This novel vibrates with feeling -- which, in the service of celebrating and exploring humanness, is so desirable, and so often missing, in a lot of recent fiction."


The Peace Talks: No Sign of Life, but They're Not Dead
MANY Israelis and Palestinians cannot shake a nagging feeling that the air is seeping out of the balloon known as the Middle East peace negotiations.
Now back up for a moment.
That does not mean the talks are dying.
If the recent past is a guide, at least one of the Arab parties will hem and haw for a while, most likely the Palestinians, but in the end everyone will show up for yet another round in Washington some time in June.
Who knows?
Some sort of agreement is not impossible, such as a declaration of principles stating what the Palestinians and Israelis hope eventually to achieve.
Among the charms of this corner of the Middle East is its tendency to sharp mood swings; that which looks hopeless today can suddenly seem quite manageable tomorrow.
Certainly, each side is well aware of where solutions lie, and has good reasons to find them.


Prosecutors Allege That Gotti Sought Drug Money
John Gotti, the Mafia boss serving a life sentence in prison, and Paul Castellano, the mob kingpin who was killed in 1985 reputedly at Mr.
Gotti's order, secretly sought to profit from heroin despite their repeated condemnations of drug dealing, Federal prosecutors have told a Federal judge in Brooklyn.
The disclosure implicating the two mobsters in drug trafficking is based on what the prosecutors said would be the forthcoming testimony of Salvatore (Sammy Bull) Gravano in a drug trial of Pasquale Conte, a reputed mob captain who is in jail awaiting trial in Federal District Court in Brooklyn on drug charges.


Local Law 10
To the Editor:
While accurate, your Streepscapes article on April 25 about Local Law 10, entitled, "Scalping Predates The Legislation," fails to indicate that it has created a further incentive to remove architectural features from building facades.
Since it is less costly, in most instances, to remove a cornice or a balcony rather than restore it, landlords are more apt to strip the facade when a Local Law 10 report indicates that repairs are needed.


U.S. and Europe Have Different Balkan Aims
To the Editor:
"While Europe Stalls . . . " (editorial, May 12) states that it is a "mystery" why the governments of Western Europe are unwilling to take any action to assist the United States in the Bosnian crisis.
I do not believe there is any mystery; the governments of Western Europe simply do not share a common interest with the Unites States in resolving this crisis.
The crisis in Bosnia and Herzegovina is a result of the disintegration of Yugoslavia.
Without a central Yugoslav government to mediate disputes among Serbs, Croats and Muslims, civil war became virtually inevitable.
This was particularly true in Bosnia, where more than half the population is composed of Serbs and Croats, but Muslims control the government.


Does Bond Buying Really Show Confidence?
To the Editor:
Like President Clinton, Floyd Norris is incorrect on two counts when he reads the willingness to buy long-term bonds as "no better indication of confidence of a society in its industrial and financial system" (Market Watch, May 9).
Two headlines in The New York Times that day -- "Confidence in Clinton Is Slipping Among Many Business Leaders" and "Three Decades of Dwindling Hope for Prosperity -- Monthly Surveys Mask a Deep Gloom" -- challenge his assessment.


Venezuelan President Ousted to Face Trial


Passionate Analysis
To the Editor:
I'm sure it will seem ungrateful to quibble with Andy Grundberg's wonderful review (April 25) of my book, "Picturing Time: The Work of Etienne-Jules Marey (1830-1904)," the kind of review that most writers only dream of.
But I would like to mitigate the impression he has given to your readers about Francois Dagognet's "Etienne-Jules Marey: A Passion for the Trace."


Politicians And the Working Class
Re: "On the Road With Cary Edwards" (April 25):
Your profile of a day in the campaign of the Republican gubernatorial candidate Cary Edwards epitomizes the jejune diet political reporting has been serving up in this state.
These "human interest" pieces flatter the candidates and provide diversion for the country club set but cannot be taken seriously as a component of a reasoned decision-making process that will select our next governor.


Become a Landlord
Build a bat house this week.
Not only can you help save a species in your own backyard, but think of all those cucumber beetles they'll eat.
"The Bat House Builder's Handbook" by Dr.
Merlin D. Tuttle and Donna L. Hensley, just published by Bat Conservation International in Austin, Tex., offers detailed plans. (Dr. Tuttle, the group's founder and executive director, has checked every single dimension and every word of the instructions by banging the houses together in his own shop.) Materials for the largest will cost about $40.


Comeback of '75 Alive at Coliseum
The sign held by fans in Section 334 at Nassau Coliseum tonight read, "We Came Back in 1975." The one hanging in Section 208 proclaimed, "We Remember 1975."
These were just two of the reminders to the Islanders that it was in 1975 when they came back after losing the first three games to capture the playoff series against the Penguins.


Salads Returning as the First Course
IT used to be the custom to start dinner with a tossed salad -- iceberg lettuce, cherry tomatoes and a couple of slices of onion topped with blue cheese dressing -- served the same way from coast to coast.
All that changed, of course.
Salads shifted position.
They were served European style, after the main course, and usually consisted of tossed greens in a vinaigrette, often accompanied by French bread and cheese.
Now salads have come back to the beginning of the meal.
It is not unusual when you go to a restaurant to have a wide choice of interesting and complex salads offered as an appetizer.
At home, people are also serving vegetable salads as a first course instead of meat or fish.


Salads Returning as the First Course
IT used to be the custom to start dinner with a tossed salad -- iceberg lettuce, cherry tomatoes and a couple of slices of onion topped with blue cheese dressing -- served the same way from coast to coast.
All that changed, of course.
Salads shifted position.
They were served European style, after the main course, and usually consisted of tossed greens in a vinaigrette, often accompanied by French bread and cheese.
Now salads have come back to the beginning of the meal.
It is not unusual when you go to a restaurant to have a wide choice of interesting and complex salads offered as an appetizer.
At home, people are also serving vegetable salads as a first course instead of meat or fish.


Getaways on the Eastern Shore
THE Eastern Shore of Maryland is known for succulent shellfish, peaceful hamlets and somnolent breezes off Chesapeake Bay.
And this historic area, with its Colonial English roots (there's an Oxford and a Cambridge) and shipbuilding lore (there are two maritime museums), is also home to a growing collection of inns and bed and breakfast houses.
I recently visited the Eastern Shore in search of comfort, quiet and a dash of charm, and stayed in two very different places.
You can arrive by car or boat at the Inn at Perry Cabin, a glamorous -- and glamorously priced -- hostelry on a cove in St.
Michaels, a village dating from 1677. (The inn has its own dock.)


Accord Will Allow Refugees' Return to Bangladesh
India and Bangladesh have agreed on the repatriation of more than 50,000 refugees of the Chakma tribe of Bangladesh who fled military pressure and went to northeastern India more than five years ago.
Salman Khurshid, India's Minister of State for External Affairs, said that the return of the Chakmas could begin in mid-June from the remote state of Tripura, where the refugees have lived in three camps since 1988.


Bosnia -- Their War, Not Ours
For months, the Clinton Administration has wobbled between pity for the civilian victims of a merciless war and fear of plunging the nation into a conflict it neither understands nor can resolve.
Under relentless pressure by influential legislators and journalists -- many of whom insisted that we had no national interest in Vietnam or Kuwait -- to "do something," the President prodded the European allies to join in military action against the Bosnian Serbs.
But European refusal has apparently now led to second thoughts about the wisdom of such a policy.


Carolyn Nicander and Stephen Mohr
Carolyn Wise Nicander, a daughter of Robert C. Nicander of Berwyn, Pa., and the late Betty W. Nicander, was married yesterday in Wayne, Pa., to Stephen Frederick Mohr, the son of Frederick B. and Marian M. Mohr of Alexandria, Va.
The Rev.
Dr.
Gary Reddish performed the ceremony at the Wayne Presbyterian Church.
Mrs.
Mohr and her husband are assistant counsels for the Bristol-Myers Squibb Company in New York.
She graduated magna cum laude from the University of Richmond, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa, and received a law degree from the University of Virginia.
Her father, who is retired, was a senior counsel for ARCO in Philadelphia.


State Sells Its License Plates With a New Gusto
LOUIS S. GOLDBERG leaned forward on his chair with the zeal of the salesman moving in for the kill.
"Is this a success?" he said, with the implication that anyone who asks such a question must be kidding, or deranged.
"The calls are coming in, 250 a day. We've sold 15,000 of them so far. Now we're coming out with the new series. Rotary is signed up for that and if Rotary wants them, Kiwanis will want them. I'm working on that now."


Part-Time Work Reaps Indy Job for John Andretti
Over the last week here at the Indianapolis Motor Speedway, John Andretti might have felt like a parking-lot attendant.
He was jumping in and out of other people's cars, driving them a lot faster than the regular occupants were, but really going nowhere.
Today, however, this member of one of American racing's most famous clans avoided being a spectator at next Sunday's Indianapolis 500 thanks to an adopted family member: his godfather, A. J. Foyt.


Brodsky Broadsides O'Rourke on Ethics
WHEN Assemblyman Richard L. Brodsky made his formal entry into the race for County Executive last weekend before 150 supporters in Yonkers, he used the word "corrupt" 13 times in a 10-minute speech, when referring to Andrew P. O'Rourke, the man he is seeking to replace.
Mr.
Brodsky, a Greenburgh Democrat who failed in a similar challenge against the incumbent Republican four years ago, was alluding to accusations that have been made against Mr.
O'Rourke over the last two months that he placed government contracts with companies employing family members and friends or that he sought to use his influence to get jobs or provide other advantages for them.


Wilson Goes on the D.L.
The San Francisco Giants placed starting pitcher TREVOR WILSON on the 15-day disabled list yesterday with tendinitis in his throwing shoulder.


David Marchiony and Sarah Gillman
Barbara Halpern of Rye, N.Y., and Dr.
Arthur E. Gillman of Larchmont, N.Y., have announced the engagement of their daughter Sarah Ann Gillman to David Lawrence Marchiony, a son of Lawrence Marchiony Jr. of Montclair, N.J., and the late Eva B. Marchiony.
A September wedding is planned.
Ms.
Gillman, 28, graduated from Yale University.
She is a candidate for a joint degree in business administration and educational administration at Columbia University.
She will joint KPMG Peat Marwick, the accounting firm, in New York as a management consultant in education and nonprofit practices in June.


Growing Up


Coming Upstate, A Visual Feast
FOR four weeks this summer, upstate New York will be transformed into a photographer's wonderland.
From July 11 to Aug. 7, 35-millimeter photography, holography, motion pictures, video, animation, laser imaging, virtual reality and other visual technologies will hold center stage in the Rochester area at Montage 93 -- the International Festival of the Image.
The work of 300 international visual artists will be on display in 16 separate exhibits at cooperating universities, cultural institutions and galleries.
Even the city's buses will be converted into moving galleries of computer-generated imagery.


John A. Ogden and Judith E. Kalb
Mr. and Mrs.
Marvin Kalb of Cambridge, Mass., and Chevy Chase, Md., have announced the engagement of their daughter Judith Ellen Kalb to John Alexander Ogden, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
John T. Ogden of Winnipeg, Manitoba, Canada.
An October wedding is planned.
Ms.
Kalb graduated summa cum laude from Princeton University, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa.
She and her fiance are doctoral candidates in Slavic languages and literatures at Stanford University, from which they received master's degrees in Russian.


POSTINGS: $2 Million Brooklyn Center; To 3 R's Add D, for Dancin'
"Those move easiest," wrote the 18th-century English poet Alexander Pope, "who have learn'd to dance."
Well, the 700 students at Poly Prep Country Day School will be movin' easy in the school's new $2 million Center for Physical Education and Dance.
The center, under construction on the school's 25-acre campus at 92d Street and Seventh Avenue in Bay Ridge, Brooklyn, is to open next February.


Pretending to Be the Rich and Famous
WE all know that I'm a car guy, right?
Right.
And because of that, some of my friends have been chuckling.
Because I finally have a car that I am loath to drive.
Mind you, I love the car. But I am terrified of its sticker.


One Concession at a Time; Snip, Snip, Snip, Clinton's Budget Takes Shape
THE Clinton budget plan resembles a large, unruly hedge.
Every day, it seems, one branch or another gets clipped.
None of the trims has changed the basic shape of the hedge.
But the inability of the gardener to bring it under control once and for all raises doubts about whether he knows what he is doing.
To get his tax measures through the House Ways and Means Committee, President Clinton agreed to drop his proposal for an investment tax credit, to raise the corporate tax rate less than he wanted and to offer concessions to farmers, small businesses, oil producers, public utilities and the aluminum industry.


For Sale, Cheap: Russia's Once-Mighty Industrial Base
THE UNITED STATES has already offered to purchase the nuclear material in the warheads of its former archenemy, Russia.
Why not offer to buy up half its manufacturing base too?
In principle, it's available for about $719 million.
But hurry -- prices are dropping fast!
Right now, the nominal market value of the part of Russia's industries up for privatization is about that of Chiquita Brands International, or just a bit more than Americans spend each year on jogging outfits, or on food distributed in Federal school lunch and breakfast programs.


New Hampshire Says, 'Hey, Great Haircut!'
Maybe President Clinton thought that if he returned to the state where he branded himself the Comeback Kid 15 months ago he could again be rescued -- this time from the public relations furors over his ouster of the White House travel staff and his pricey haircut.
If so, it was only wishful thinking, as Mr.
Clinton and his entourage discovered at every turn.


More Than Pop And All That Jazz
To the Editor:
After reading Edward Rothstein's essay I realized that his reasoning was off-key.
He did what most white writers do, that is, lump all blacks together as having one or two ways of expressing cultural tastes and ethnic backgrounds.
This is not true.


The Ghosts of Graveyards
New York City's surface has been scraped and smoothed over many times in three and a half centures.
The Dutch covered Indian traces and the British covered the Dutch traces.
Farms leveled the forest, and tenements leveled thefarms.
Burial places have been no more sacred than any other real estate in the city.
Here are some of the sites that were once thought to be final resting places, but have since been shown as less than final.
Many records are unclear, so it is not always known whether remains were removed before developments covered the sites.
Dates are given where known.


Citizens' Group's Role In Glen Ridge
The article "Glen Ridge: A Stronghold of Nonpartisan Elections" (May 9) described Glen Ridge Citizens for Representative Government as opponents of the Civic Conference Committee.


Margot Waldman, Timothy Lemmon
Margot Lee Waldman, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Ronald B. Waldman of New York, was married yesterday evening to Timothy John Lemmon, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Hugh R. Lemmon of Northampton, England.
Rabbi Ronald B. Sobel performed the ceremony at the Lotus Club in New York.
Mrs.
Lemmon, 30, graduated cum laude from the University of Pennsylvania, from which she also received a master's degree in international studies and an M.B.A.
She plans to join Philip Morris in New York as a brand assistant in August.
Her father is a vice president at Smith Barney, Harris Upham &amp; Company in New York.
Her mother, Lee M. Waldman, is a real estate broker at Stribling &amp; Associates in New York.


Ellen Cummings, Randy C. Clark
Ellen Leslie Cummings, an advertising account executive at Harper's Bazaar magazine, was married yesterday to Randy Charles Clark, an assistant vice president in the commodities department of Paine Webber Inc.
Both work in New York.
Canon Clifton Daniel 3d performed the ceremony at St.
Michael's Episcopal Church in Bristol, R.I.


Exuding Confidence, Serbian Nationalists Act as if War for Bosnia Is Won
Bordering the "war road" that winds along the shoulder of Trebevic Mountain overlooking Sarajevo, Serbian nationalist gunners were outside their log cabins in the sunlight this week, playing poker on tables fashioned from ammunition boxes, tossing back shots of slivovitz from thimble-sized glasses, or strolling beneath the fragrant plum and cherry blossoms.
Few bothered to carry rifles.
Not quite 14 months after they began fighting, the Serbian fighters were behaving as though for them, at least, the war for Bosnia was all but over.


Stud Muffin's Buzz-Kill
A muffin is an affectionate name for a young woman -- "Not now, muffin" -- usually taken as a put-down by the daughters of what a previous generation called cookies.
In a vengeance expressed in campus slang, we now have stud muffin, which means "attractive young man." (The stud is rooted in the term for a male horse selected for breeding.) A stud muffin who works out, I am informed by Charles D. Poe of Houston, can transform himself into a diesel.
Welcome to this year's world of fresh campus slang, drawing on responses to an invitation in this space that went, "If your prof is crunchy, don't feel schwag; send your local lexicon to Safire's Buzz-kill." Part of the teaser was a definition of hookup as "a person with whom one is romantically involved," and wizard as "exceptionally sick."


The Cold War Freezer Keeps Historians Out
HISTORIANS of the cold war say they know little of how the long struggle began.
They know little of how it ended.
And they know little of what happened in between.
Their ignorance, they say, stems from the system of keeping Government documents secret, itself a creature of the cold war.
Behind double-locked steel doors with classified combinations, among countless cartons of documents stamped top secret, are answers to fundamental questions about the $10 trillion arms race, the United States intelligence community and paramilitary operations carried out from Afghanistan to Zaire.
Scholars, reporters and ordinary citizens hammer at the vaults in vain.


Focus: Wilmington, Del.; Producer of 'Nunsense' Snags Nuns' Plan
AS a small band of cloistered nuns prepares to move their Monastery of the Visitation to a new site in rural southwestern Massachusetts, the irreverent world of real estate development has revealed itself to them.
The nuns, the Sisters of the Visitation of the Holy Mary, are now under contract with a local developer to sell their century-old block-long granite convent in the western section of Delaware's largest city.


INSIDE
2 Health Plans on Table
President Clinton appears to be seeking a middle ground on two health-care proposals, so that he does not have to choose between his wife and his economic advisers.
Page 20.
Division Among Gay Voices
After months of urging Congress and the Clinton Administration to lift the ban on homosexuals in the military, gay men and lesbians are disagreeing over tactics.
Page 18.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, the front-page index of the Real Estate section today carries incorrect page numbers in copies distributed outside of Manhattan and the southern Bronx.
The correct page numbers follow: Your Home, Perspectives, Focus (page 7); If You're Thinking of Living in Babylon, Streetscapes, Q &amp; A (page 9); Data Update (page 10); In the Region (page 11); Residential Resales (page 12); Commercial Property and Northeast Notebook (page 17).


Corrections
A picture caption on page 15 of the Travel section today, with an article about houses in Massachusetts, refers incorrectly to a high chest in the Col.
Josiah Quincy House.
It is a japanned high chest, not a Japanese high chest.


Solving A Housing Problem Far Away
THOUGH separated by more than 6,000 miles, a small New Jersey company and officials of the hurricane-battered Hawaiian island of Kauai have joined forces to provide shelter for scores of island residents made homeless by Hurricane Iniki last year.
The company, Mark Correctional Systems Inc., based in Maywood, manufactures steel modular jail cells and infectious-disease isolation units used by prisons and hospitals.
The units are self-contained, fully furnished modules that can be bolted together.


AN ARMY OF THE FAITHFUL
Not "dumb hicks," you say on your cover.
But the picture says they are.
The camera placement makes the family look gigantic under the low ceiling.
Where have I seen this effect before?
In Diane Arbus's cruel and grotesque photographs.
JAMES WILSON San Francisco


A Very Private Actor Leads At Least Two Lives Onstage
As overnight sensations go, Brent Carver is a fairly blase specimen.
Playing an imprisoned gay window dresser who keeps his powder dry and spirit unbroken with elaborate movie fantasies in the John Kander-Fred Ebb musical, "Kiss of the Spider Woman," Mr.
Carver has received the kind of reviews only a mother could write.
Most overnight Broadway sensations need to be gagged.
But the 41-year-old Canadian has created a mystique about himself as an extraordinarily private individual.
One British journalist, who interviewed Mr.
Carver when he was in the London production of "Spider Woman," was moved to comment that the actor "is still adjusting to finding himself on Planet Earth."


Balance-Beam Politics: Giuliani's Second Try
Time warp alert: Rudolph W. Giuliani, the Republican-Liberal candidate for Mayor, was standing (looking like a G-man in a tidy dark suit), beneath a subway trestle late one night last week while several police officers swung their nightsticks, shuffled their shiny shoes and shouted over the roar of a passing train: "Heyya. Rudy. Anything for you! Yeah." and "Rudy! Hey! I gotta get your autograph for my kid!"
Mr.
Giuliani, his wire-framed glasses glinting in the yellow pool of a street light, nodded warmly but continued an intense out-of-earshot discussion with a pallid assistant district attorney wearing a scruffy suit and (no kidding) a dark fedora.
A Thoroughly Modern Campaign
New York.
New York.
Visuals from the 1930's notwithstanding, the scene beneath the train tracks was part of a thoroughly modern moment in a thoroughly modern mayoral campaign.


AN ARMY OF THE FAITHFUL
Do I buy all the beliefs of the so-called Christian Coalition ("An Army of the Faithful," by Robert Sullivan, April 25)?
Nope.
But frankly, there are an awful lot of us nonreligious folks out here who applaud some of their positions, and their courage in expressing them.
And I most certainly support their right to organize, participate in the democratic process and elect candidates they choose to school boards, and to every local, state and national office in the land.
That's what we do here in America.
ROSEMARY MCCLANE Wayne, N.J.


Rotten Fascia Boards Often Have to Be Replaced
FASCIAS are the trim boards at the top of the outside walls of a house.
Sloping fascias at the ends of a house or beneath a gable are called rake fascias, and horizontal fascias that cover the ends of rafters are called eaves fascias.
Eaves fascias are vulnerable to decay, especially if the roof and soffits, the boxed areas beneath roof overhangs, are poorly constructed.
Repairing rotten eaves fascias generally consists of replacing the damaged boards.
The job is not too difficult for a moderately skilled amateur, but a helper is needed for handling larger pieces.


The Restoration of Gretzky, the (Cup-Winning?) King
Wayne Gretzky has not tasted champagne from the Stanley Cup in five springs.
So much has happened and then again, so little.
He has had wavy hair, Hamlet hair and a goatee that elicited faxes from Canada.
He has moved to a mansion on Mulholland Drive, filled the bedrooms with children and taught his oldest son, 2, to skate rings around grown men.
He has owned horses and football players, and every jersey he puts on -- or even breathes on -- becomes instant memorabilia.
If he could only win more playoff games.


Correction
Because of an editing error, a review of John Frohnmayer's "Leaving Town Alive: Confessions of an Arts Warrior" on May 2 misstated the year for a Federal court decision concerning the National Endowment for the Arts, and confused it with a second such decision.
The decision invalidating the so-called Helms Amendment of 1989 was issued in 1991, not last year.
The decision appealed by the Clinton Administration was issued last year; it overthrew a 1990 amendment requiring that projects receiving grants from the endowment comply with "general standards of decency."


NAME-DROPPER
If Susan Ferraro wishes to take her husband's name, fine.
If she insists that her husband's name is now her "own" name, fine.
This is indeed her choice.
But to imply that this is somehow a feminist choice because it stems from "a reason instead of a custom" is specious at best.
DORIS S. WITT Charlottesville, Va.


A la Carte; A Restaurateur Hits the Jackpot, Literally
RESTAURATEURS save and scheme to purchase places of their own.
They go into partnerships and mortgage their homes.
They even marry into families that own restaurants.
But after all the bizarre, unorthodox stories about acquiring ownership have been told, a recent one qualifies as a stunner.
Harry Sanotra moved here from Calcutta in 1987.
He had graduated from a hotel school there and worked for the Taj Hotel chain and Gaylords in Bombay before connecting with the Bombay Palace in Washington and New York and Casa Rico in Fairfax, Va.


Corrections
The Art column on May 9 about a Yale University Art Gallery exhibition, "A Private View: American Painting From the Manoogian Collection," misidentified a curator.
She is Helen A. Cooper.


Conversations/Joseph Fleming; Defending the Right to Views That Some Consider Racist
WHEN Dr.
Leonard Jeffries approached Joseph Fleming last year about representing him in a lawsuit against the City University of New York, Mr.
Fleming couldn't say yes quickly enough.
The 42-year-old Manhattan lawyer had met the incendiary Dr.
Jeffries a few years earlier, through another education case.
He knew that Dr.
Jeffries had been called a racist and an anti-Semite because of a speech that he delivered in Albany in the summer of 1991.
And now the professor was contending that the university system had ousted him as chairman of the black studies department at the City College of New York as punishment for that speech, which drew a cascade of criticism from as high as the Governor's office.


EVIDENCE MOUNTS OF RIGGED BIDDING IN MILK INDUSTRY
Federal and state investigators have found evidence in at least 20 states that executives at the nation's largest national and regional dairy companies have conspired -- sometimes for decades -- to rig bids on milk products sold to schools and military bases.
So far, 48 people and 43 companies -- including industry giants like Borden, Pet and Dean Foods -- have been convicted or have pleaded guilty to Federal criminal charges of price-fixing and bid-rigging.
At least $91.4 million in criminal fines and civil damages has been levied, and two dozen people have been sentenced to prison.


A Race to Satisfy TV Appetites in Asia
SCENES from the satellite-television revolution in Asia:
*
In Hanoi, officials of the Vietnamese Communist Party and foreign guests in some of the city's larger hotels watch the BBC's hourly news, beamed live by satellite from London.
*
In Hong Kong, stock traders end their day in the office by flipping on Cable News Network to catch the opening share prices half a world away in Europe, while at home their children sit glued to a Madonna video festival on MTV.


Public &amp; Private; Happily Ever
When I was young my mother sometimes hinted that a good career option would be to marry the Prince of Wales.
How a second generation Italian immigrant thought she was going to manage an introduction for her mouthy, scabby-kneed Catholic daughter to the heir to the House of Windsor is anyone's guess.
But I have discovered since that she was not alone, and that other mothers, Lucilles and Anitas and Bridgets, talked of a white wedding in Westminster Abbey despite the obvious requirements of realpolitik and the Church of England.


Four New Inns For Visitors To Portugal
A medieval castle and a hilltop inn are among the four new pousadas, or Government-run inns, scheduled to open in Portugal this year.
It is in Alvito, south of Evora.


Mining Myth


Helen I. Sanders, Julian C. M. Gray
Helen Ingersoll Sanders, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Cameron Sanders of Washington, was married there yesterday to Julian Charles Michael Gray, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Simon Gray of Lymington, Hampshire, England.
The Rev.
Luther Tucker, the bride's maternal grandfather, performed the ceremony at St.
Alban's Episcopal Church.
Mrs.
Gray graduated from Yale University and received a master's degree in paleolithic archaeology from Cambridge University.
She is a doctoral candidate in anthropology at the University of Pennsylvania.
Her father is a retired foreign service officer.
Her mother, Elizabeth T. Sanders, is a teacher at St.
Alban's Day Care Center in Washington.


IN SHORT: FICTION
TONY AND SUSAN By Austin Wright.
Baskerville Publishers, 7540 L.B.J.
Freeway, Suite 125, Dallas, Tex. 75251-1008, $20.


Scenes From a Chilly Marriage
THE BEST INTENTIONS By Ingmar Bergman.
Translated by Joan Tate. 298 pp.
New York: Arcade Publishing. $22.95.


Lois Larkey and Richard Reiser
Lois Larkey was married yesterday to Richard Reiser.
Judge John W. Bissell of Federal District Court in Newark, officiated at the Mountain Ridge Country Club in West Caldwell, N.J.
Mrs.
Reiser, 49, graduated from Connecticut College.
She was until recently a teacher of social studies and constitutional law in the South Orange and Maplewood, N.J., school systems.
She is the daughter of Jean M. Larkey of Hallandale, Fla., and the late Barney Larkey of East Orange, N.J.


Jennifer Griffith And Brian Black
Jennifer Ann Griffith, an associate at the Houston law firm of Brown, Campbell, Harrison &amp; Wright, was married yesterday to Brian Dean Black, a senior environmental scientist with the gas and pipeline division of Tenneco Inc. in Houston, the diversified energy and manufacturing company.
The Rev.
George Willis performed the ceremony at St.
George's-by-the-River Episcopal Church in Rumson, N.J.
Mrs.
Black, 30, graduated from Tufts University and received a law degree from New York Law School.
She is a daughter Charles E. Griffith of Rumson and the late Susan W. Griffith.
Her father is a regional vice president at the Summit Bank in Chatham, N.J.
Her maternal grandfather, Roger C. Wilkins of Delray Beach, Fla., is a retired chairman of the Travelers Corporation, the insurance company.
Her stepmother, Nancy J. Griffith, teaches the first grade at the Lloyd Road School in Aberdeen, N.J.


Walter W. Karakawa, Microbiologist, 61
Walter W. Karakawa, a microbiologist at Pennsylvania State University who conducted research into a bacterium that causes infections in hospital patients, died on Tuesday in Rockville, Md.
He was 61 and lived in Pennsylvania Furnace, Pa.
He died of a heart attack, said his wife, Judy Kane Karakawa.


Lisa Fegley, E. C. Petti Jr.
Lisa Erin Fegley, a production manager for the Donna Karan Company in New York, was married yesterday to Edward Charles Petti Jr., a budget analyst for the Mayor's Office of Management and Budget in New York.
Emanuel Margolis, a justice of the peace in Westport, Conn., officiated at the home of Louis Petti, the bridegroom's uncle, in Westport.
Mrs.
Petti, 30, graduated from Iona College.
She is a daughter of Richard Fegley of Chicago and Carol Fletcher of New Rochelle, N.Y.
Her father is a photographer for Playboy magazine in Chicago.
Her mother is a nurse at Montefiore Medical Center in the Bronx.


Author He, Author She, Novelty They
NAMES: Colin and Kathryn Harrison.
IDENTITY: Second-time novelists.
Both 32 years old.
Parents of two.
He is also a senior editor at Harper's magazine.


A Poll Lends Credence to the View of New York as a City of Two Souls
To many people in Brooklyn, Queens, Staten Island and the Bronx, New York is truly two cities.
One is theirs, a low-rise expanse of middle-class and blue-collar communities that emphasize traditional family living and values.
The second is New York's most celebrated borough, a secular, high-rise place filled with people obsessed by culture and art, defined by wealth and fashion and circumscribed by an elitist sense of self-importance.


PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: May 23, 1993
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Fiction
1
44
JURASSIC PARK, by Michael Crichton(Ballantine, $5.99.) A biotechnician clones dinosaurs for use in a theme park.
2
14
THE PELICAN BRIEF, by John Grisham. (Island/Dell, $6.99.) A woman law student probes the murder of two Supreme Court justices.
3
3
SHADOWFIRES, by Dean Koontz. (Berkley, $6.99.) A woman is stalked by her supposedly deceased husband.
4
69
THE FIRM, by John Grisham. (Island/Dell, $5.99.) A young lawyer learns that his firm is engaged in secret, possibly illegal activities.
5
4
JEWELS, by Danielle Steel. (Dell, $6.99.) The life of a woman who becomes rich by dealing in precious stones.
6
4
WAITING TO EXHALE, by Terry McMillan. (Pocket, $5.99.) The friendships and romances of four black women in Phoenix.
7
5
"I" IS FOR INNOCENT, by Sue Grafton. (Fawcett, $5.99.) Kinsey Millhone investigates a man once charged with murdering his rich wife.
8
58
A TIME TO KILL, by John Grisham. (Island/Dell, $5.99.) Racial tensions surface during the trial of a man charged with murder in rural Mississippi.
9
5
THE WITCHING HOUR, by Anne Rice. (Ballantine, $6.99.) A woman descended from witches brings a drowned man back to life.
10
4
SWEET LIAR, by Jude Deveraux. (Pocket, $5.99.) In New York, a Kentucky woman copes with a mystery dating back to the Roaring Twenties.
11
2
FATHERLAND, by Robert Harris. (Harper Paperbacks, $6.50.) A thriller set in the Third Reich 20 years after Hitler wins World War II.
12
1
DARKEST HOUR, by V. C. Andrews. (Pocket, $5.99.) The concluding volume in a series about the Cutlers, a Virginia plantation-owning family.
13
4
FRENCH SILK, by Sandra Brown. (Warner, $5.99.) The ordeal of a New Orleans woman suspected of killing a television evangelist.
14
10
ON THE PULSE OF MORNING, by Maya Angelou. (Random House, $5.) The poem read at President Clinton's inauguration.
15
21
RISING SUN, by Michael Crichton. (Ballantine, $5.99.) A woman's death leads to an investigation involving the American-Japanese rivalry.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
NonFiction
1
4
THE SILENT PASSAGE, by Gail Sheehy. (Pocket, $5.50.) The psychological and social significance of menopause for today's women.
2
3
NOT FOR SALE AT ANY PRICE, by Ross Perot. (Hyperion, $5.95.) The Texas billionaire discusses the economic and political problems Americans face today.
3
84
A YEAR IN PROVENCE, by Peter Mayle. (Vintage, $10.) A sojourn in the south of France, as described by a British writer.
4 *
1
TRUMAN, by David McCullough. (Touchstone/ S&amp;S, $15.) A biography of the 33d President.
5
498
THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $10.95.) Psychological and spiritual inspiration by a psychiatrist. (LP)
6
14
I KNOW WHY THE CAGED BIRD SINGS, by Maya Angelou. (Bantam, $4.99.) The poet's account of her childhood and adolescence.
7 *
105
YOU JUST DON'T UNDERSTAND, by Deborah Tannen. (Ballantine, $10.) The different languages men and women speak and how the sexes can understand each other better.
8
2
WHERE THE BLUEBIRD SINGS TO THE LEMONADE SPRINGS, by Wallace Stegner. (Penguin, $11.) Essays celebrating the American West and criticizing the illusions it has fostered.
9
14
WOMEN ON TOP, by Nancy Friday. (Pocket, $5.99.) The changes in social life during the past two decades that have affected the sexual fantasies of women.
10
19
REVOLUTION FROM WITHIN, by Gloria Steinem. (Little, Brown, $11.95.) The reflections of a leading feminist on the struggle to achieve self-esteem.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Advice, How-To and Miscellaneous
1
7
LIFE'S LITTLE INSTRUCTION BOOK: Volume Two, by H. Jackson Brown Jr. (Rutledge Hill, $5.95.) More tips for achieving a self-fulfilling life.
2
3
TEACHING YOUR CHILDREN VALUES, by Linda Eyre and Richard Eyre. (Fireside/S&amp;S, $11.) Advice for parents of children from age 2 to the teen-age years.
3
93
LIFE'S LITTLE INSTRUCTION BOOK, by H. Jackson Brown Jr. (Rutledge Hill, $5.95.) Some 500 tips for achieving a self-fulfilling life.
4
118
THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE, by Stephen R. Covey. (Fireside/S&amp;S, $9.95.) Principles to practice in the pursuit of success.
5
135
THE T-FACTOR FAT GRAM COUNTER, by Jamie Pope-Cordle and Martin Katahn. (Norton, $2.99.) How to reduce fat in one's diet.
These listings are based on computer-processed sales figures from 3,000 bookstores and from representative wholesalers with more than 38,000 other retail outlets, including variety stores and supermarkets.
The figures are statistically adjusted to represent sales in all such outlets across the United States. *An asterisk before a book's title indicates that its sales, weighted to reflect the book-selling industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
LP indicates that a book is available in large print.


The Nicest Investor Research That Money Can Buy
IT is a feather in the cap of any Wall Street research analyst when his bullish pronouncement on a stock results in a sprightly little rally, and William J. Ritger added another feather to his collection in the last month.
His report on April 26 on Agristar Inc., an agricultural biotechnology company, enticed perhaps hundreds of investors to pick up the stock, which quickly doubled in price to about 78 cents a share, Mr.
Ritger boasted in an interview.
It has since given back some of the gain, closing on Friday at 62.5 cents.


Wall Street; Labor Unions Flex Pension Muscle
MOVE over, Dale Hanson.
Make way, Bob Monks.
Labor unions are testing their own brand of shareholder activism.
Sharing control of about $250 billion in pension money, labor unions are not about to let the big public pension funds run away with the game.
Their first aim is to police foreign investments to keep them from subsidizing the loss of American jobs.


A Sex Object By the Name Of Jackson
Post-post-feminism, thy name is Janet Jackson.
Forget about the blunt self-assertion she flaunted on "Control" in 1986.
Table the social issues she took up on "Rhythm Nation 1814" in 1989.
For most of Jackson's fifth album, "Janet." (Virgin 87825, cassette and CD), she just wants to have fun in bed.
"Come get the body that loves you," she coos; "Wrap yourself around me/ Love to feel you throbbin'," she moans.
"Janet.," which is supposed to be read as "Janet Period," is the first album released under Jackson's three-album deal with Virgin Records reported to be worth $32 million to $50 million.
It is also obviously intended to yield a year's worth of hit singles geared for radio formats from rock to quiet storm.
Among its 14 songs (interspersed with 13 snippets of sound effects and dialogue), there are ballads, rockers, dance tunes; there are smooth songs, chunky songs, airy songs, earthy songs, most with hooks that sink in quickly.
The same strategy sold eight million copies each for


Rotten Fascia Boards Often Have to Be Replaced
FASCIAS are the trim boards at the top of the outside walls of a house.
Sloping fascias at the ends of a house or beneath a gable are called rake fascias, and horizontal fascias that cover the ends of rafters are called eaves fascias.
Eaves fascias are vulnerable to decay, especially if the roof and soffits, the boxed areas beneath roof overhangs, are poorly constructed.
Repairing rotten eaves fascias generally consists of replacing the damaged boards.
The job is not too difficult for a moderately skilled amateur, but a helper is needed for handling larger pieces.


Rationing Care in Advance
To the Editor:
To encourage patients to ration their use of health care ("Rationing Care? Let the Patient Do It," April 25), Robert A. Levine advocates discretionary insurance policies that would "incorporate a person's advance directives about health care, much as living wills do."
Encouraging patients to impose their own limits on health care is not new.
What is new and troublesome is the direct use of advance directives for this purpose.
There is no empirical evidence that using advance directives for purposes of rationing care will work.
But there is every reason to think that putting advance directives to work in this way will have a chilling effect on people's willingness to execute advance directives.


Wait Till Next Year, Casino Advocates Say
The campaign to legalize casino gambling in Connecticut's largest cities ended with a whimper on Friday, scuttled without even a vote by Gov.
Lowell P. Weicker Jr.'s hard-line opposition and hard-ball tactics.
But people on both sides of the issue say that Mr.
Weicker's victory planted the seeds for what could be an even wilder debate on casinos in 1994, an election year.
Officials at Mirage Resorts, which spent more than $1 million in advertising and lobbying this year, said they will be back to argue their case in the next legislative session, that begins in February.
Mr.
Weicker, a third-party independent, will be back too, in the last year of his four-year term.
He has not said whether he will run again, but nearly all 151 members of the Democrat-controlled General Assembly will be up for re-election.


Waiting for the Appointment: Who Will Be the Arts Chief ?
PEOPLE in the arts know that President Clinton has had his hands full lately with Bosnia, gays in the military and the tax bill, but last week the National Council on the Arts could contain its frustration no longer about the Administration's foot-dragging on the chief appointment for the National Endowment for the Arts.
The council members, all of whom were appointed during the last two Administrations and who advise the arts endowment chairman, unanimously adopted a resolution informing the Administration how "disturbed" it was that a chairman had not yet been named.
The chairman oversees the allocation of $175 million to artists and art institutions.


MAY 16-22: Europe's Hopes and Doubts; Denmark and Britain Revive Faltering Treaty On European Unity
The unfinished quilt of European unity got some loose stitching last week that revived both hope that it will finally be completed and doubts about the quality of the final product.
Heeding warnings of economic isolation and promises of a tax cut, voters in Denmark did a quiet about-face and endorsed the Treaty on European Union, which they had rejected almost a year earlier.


Assessing A Father's Ways
To the Editor:
Speaking the truth in Hollywood does not always make you popular, particularly when it comes to talking to the press.
More often than not you read that a studio executive or someone close to a production "spoke on the condition of anonymity." Because I speak to the press on the record, I expect to be quoted accurately in return.
When James Greenberg contacted me about his article on Kit Culkin and his child-star son Macauley Culkin  [ "A 'Stage Father' Flexes His New Muscles," April 25 ] , I told him I wasn't interested in "Culkin-bashing." He assured me that that wasn't the intent of his article.
Not!
My quotes were conveniently lopped off halfway through to meet the needs of Mr.
Greenberg's article.
Some clarifications follow:
In the article I am quoted as saying, "Mack has not changed, but Kit has -- absolutely." I had gone on to say that as a father and manager Kit has done whatever he feels is necessary to protect his child.
In regard to the notion that "Mr. Culkin's methods may prove damaging to his son's career," I went on to say that he and his wife, Pat, must be doing something right because Mack and his siblings are the same great kids I met six years ago.
While preparing to direct the play "Sam, I Am," I indeed "recall being at the screaming end of Mr. Culkin's phone calls," but both the playwright and I were as disappointed as all the other artists involved when we canceled the production.
Minor points, you say?
Yes.
The shortened quote under the photograph of Mack may make for a splashy caption, but is no more accurate than the headlines we see in grocery-store tabloids.
I thought The New York Times was above this type of journalism.
When the truth is twisted to engage more readers, what's the point in speaking the truth to begin with?
BILLY HOPKINS New York


POSTINGS: Free Photo Exhibition; Endangered East Side Beauties
The only treasures on the Upper East Side are its mansions and luxury apartment houses, right?
And everything worth saving in that neighborhood has already been saved, right?
Wrong, says the Friends of the Upper East Side Historic Districts -- wrong both times.
Such statements, says Friends, an independent, nonprofit group, threaten preservation of the area's architectural beauty.
And to debunk those statements it is presenting an exhibition, "The 11 Most Endangered Places and the Other Upper East Side: a Diverse Architectural Heritage," at 1044 Madison Avenue, between 79th and 80th Streets.


Karin Waterman, T. R. Beecher 3d
Karin Anita Waterman, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Edward F. Waterman of Ridgefield, Conn., was married there yesterday to Thomas Raymond Beecher 3d, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Beecher Jr. of Buffalo.
The Rev.
Kenneth Boller performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at St.
Mary's Church.


Lori B. Arlen, Gary Johnstone
Lori B. Arlen, the daughter of Fran Rayner of Lancaster, Pa., and Marc Arlen of Shrewsbury, Pa., was married yesterday to Gary R. Johnstone, a son of Gilda Johnstone of Reno and the late Alec R. Johnstone.
Msgr.
William McLaughlin and Dr.
Walter Youngblade, the bride's uncle, officiated at the joint Roman Catholic-Jewish ceremony at Corona Del Mar beach in Newport Beach, Calif.
Mrs.
Johnstone is an investment analyst for the Pacific Mutual Life Insurance Company in Newport Beach.
She graduated from the University of Southern California and received an M.B.A. from San Diego State University.
Her father is an antiques dealer in Sinking Spring, Pa.
Her mother is a print-quality analyst for The New York Times Magazine.


Reaching Back for Images Of a Family Scarred by Life
Destiny plays a salient role in "Children of Fate: Life and Death in a Sicilian Family," not only in its characters' lives but in the story of the production itself.
The documentary, by Andrew Young and his wife, Susan Todd, traces four generations of the poverty-stricken Capra family through a central character, Angela.
It represents a mythic journey for Mr.
Young, whose father, Robert Young, had made "Cortile Cascino," a documentary about the same family, more than 30 years before.
"Children of Fate," which opens on Wednesday at the Film Forum, interweaves contemporary footage, where we meet Angela's four grown children, with scenes from the earlier film.
In doing so, the new movie, which won the prize for best documentary at the Sundance festival, gives audiences their first glimpse of the earlier documentary.


A New Poll Describes Vacation Preferences
DOROTHY MATARAS has recurrent dreams about China, her fantasy vacation spot.
"It fascinates me," said Mrs.
Mataras, 52, of Liverpool, N.Y., near Syracuse.
"Anytime there's a movie about China, it's like deja vu. If I had a past life, it must have been there, because when I sit down and think about it, why would I want to go there?"


Arabella Lewis, Daniel Newburg
Arabella Victoria Rose Lewis, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Gareth R. Lewis of Newton Valence, Hampshire, England, was married yesterday to Daniel French Newburg, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Andre W. G. Newburg of London and New York.
The Rev.
James Anderson performed the Church of England ceremony at St.
Mary's Church in Selbourne, Hampshire, England.
Mrs.
Newburg, 25, is a clothing designer in New York.
She graduated from Kingston University in London.
Her father is a director of Hambros Insurance Services in London.


Correction
A picture caption with the Evening Hours column last Sunday, about a dinner-dance on May 10 at the American Museum of Natural History, misstated the fund-raising role of the Bristol-Myers Squibb Company in building the museum's Hall of Human Biology and Evolution.
The company was among the substantial donors, not the sole one.
The caption also referred incorrectly to the evening's honors for the family associated with Bristol-Myers Squibb.
Richard L. Gelb, the company's chairman, was honored along with his wife, Phyllis, for contributions to the museum over the years, not just for the company's $500,000 donation toward the new hall.


Notes From the Blood Bath
THE BALKAN EXPRESS Fragments From the Other Side of War.
By Slavenka Drakulic. 146 pp.
New York: W. W. Norton &amp; Company. $19.95.


Data Bank/May 23, 1993
Data Bank/May 23, 1993
Housing Starts
April
March
Feb.
Thousands of units, annual rate
1,213
1,137
1,180
Merchandise Imports
March
Feb.
Jan.
In billions
$49.2
$44.8
$44.3
Merchandise Exports
In billions
$39.0
$36.9
$37.1
Weekly Jobless Claims
May 14
May 7
April 30
In units, weekly total
344
337
342
Steel Production
Thousands of net tons, weekly total
1,818
1,805
1,824
Auto Production
May 21
May 14
May 7
In units, weekly total
137,582
135,081
134,469
Truck Production
In units, weekly total
103,758
107,620
107,493
Cash Wheat Price
No. 1 K.C., per bushel
$3.70
$3.56
$3.44


Getaways on the Eastern Shore
THE Eastern Shore of Maryland is known for succulent shellfish, peaceful hamlets and somnolent breezes off Chesapeake Bay.
And this historic area, with its Colonial English roots (there's an Oxford and a Cambridge) and shipbuilding lore (there are two maritime museums), is also home to a growing collection of inns and bed and breakfast houses.
I recently visited the Eastern Shore in search of comfort, quiet and a dash of charm, and stayed in two very different places.
You can arrive by car or boat at the Inn at Perry Cabin, a glamorous -- and glamorously priced -- hostelry on a cove in St.
Michaels, a village dating from 1677. (The inn has its own dock.)


Mutual Funds; S.E.C. Crusade: Results Are Mixed
A YEAR after the Securities and Exchange Commission issued a report urging changes in the way mutual funds are run, the results are mixed.
Some proposals require congressional action, but first the S.E.C. must prepare a legislative package -- and this process is stalled as the agency awaits new leadership.


A Play of Portraits and a Portrait
Jon Robin Baitz, best known for "The Substance of Fire," is finishing up his newest play, "Boulevard Comedy," which is set in a major museum.
"It's about a museum director who sells his soul," said Bill Evans, the press agent for Mr.
Baitz's "Three Hotels," currently in performance at the Circle Rep Theater.
"It's a retelling of the Faust legend."


Salads Returning as the First Course
IT used to be the custom to start dinner with a tossed salad -- iceberg lettuce, cherry tomatoes and a couple of slices of onion topped with blue cheese dressing -- served the same way from coast to coast.
All that changed, of course.
Salads shifted position.
They were served European style, after the main course, and usually consisted of tossed greens in a vinaigrette, often accompanied by French bread and cheese.
Now salads have come back to the beginning of the meal.
It is not unusual when you go to a restaurant to have a wide choice of interesting and complex salads offered as an appetizer.
At home, people are also serving vegetable salads as a first course instead of meat or fish.


For Basking in Stares, Not in the Sun
IT takes a certain insouciance to wear a hat, especially some of the mad creations found this spring at Henri Bendel.
There are oversize top hats in bright red straw, lampshade-like shapes sculptured out of iridescent silk, what look like upside-down felt flowerpots, and big brimmed straws seemingly weighted down with the contents of an English country garden.
"A hat is definitely an attention grabber," said Jane Dolgoff, who was trying on a few fantasies during a recent weekday lunch hour.
"If you're going to wear one, you'd better make sure you don't have anything stuck between your teeth."


State Information
To the Editor: The listing of state and province tourist information sources (Practical Traveler, "Getting Information, or Not, From a Tourist Office," April 11) has been most helpful in planning our upcoming trip to the Southeast.
However, we've come across a glitch.


China Reports Attack to U.N. as Vote Begins
China summoned the Security Council into emergency session today after a Chinese Army engineering detachment was shelled in an attack that the United Nations attributed to the Khmer Rouge and in which two Chinese peacekeepers were killed and seven were wounded.
Although the Council condemned this and all other attacks aimed at disrupting Cambodia's first free elections, China refused to allow the Council to blame the Khmer Rouge by name.
As a result, the Council merely "takes note of the preliminary report by the Secretariat indicating that the shelling was carried out by the N.A.D.K.," or the National Army of Democratic Kampuchea, the official name of the Khmer Rouge.


Knicks, Too, Can't Wait for Series
Rolando Blackman of the Knicks underlined today how big Sunday's opening game of the Eastern Conference series against the Chicago Bulls is by singling out the tabloid he read this morning before practice.
"You open up the page and there's a picture of Michael Jordan and Patrick Ewing face to face," Blackman said.
"The first five or six pages are about the basketball game, and then you have Clinton talking about the health-care program and you understand the magnitude of what is going on in this country.


Airport Takes Steps To Pacify Quaker Group
IN the aftermath of an episode nearly two months ago in which the management of the Westchester County Airport, apparently following a safety directive from the Federal Aviation Administration, clear-cut 10 acres of forest that had previously protected the Society of Friends Meetinghouse in Purchase from the sights and sounds of runway traffic, a meeting was held May 15 at the house to discuss possible landscaping solutions and inform Quakers and residents about future airport plans.
"There is no other issue that is more sensitive than the proposed modernization of this airport," said County Legislator Joseph M. Delfino, a Republican from White Plains.
"We're going to have monthly meetings with the Transportation Department so that people can know in advance what will happen at the airport. People need to remember that no one is out to hurt anyone. It's not our intent to disrupt people's lives with the modernization of the airport."


A Champion's First Foal
Genuine Risk, who made racing history in 1980 when she became the second filly to win the Kentucky Derby, made medical history May 15 when she gave birth to her first foal after 13 years of misfortunes and miscarriages.
Her pregnancy had prompted hundreds of telephone calls and letters from around the world during the last few weeks, many of them concerned because the pregnancy had extended 25 days longer than expected.
The mare, now 16, delivered a chestnut colt, which later underwent surgery to remove an intestinal blockage.
In human terms, Genuine Risk is going through upper middle age, still a fertile time for many horses.


BENEFITS
Blue Man at Lincoln Center
MONDAY -- The Blue Man Group, performance artists, will headline a junior benefit that raises money for Lincoln Center.
The event, on the 10th floor of the Samuel B. and David Rose Building, 165 West 65th Street, begins with an 8 P.M. cocktail buffet, followed by dancing.
Jugglers, illusionists, comics, soothsayers and tattoo artists will be present throughout the evening.
Festive dress.
Tickets, $100, from (212) 875-5444.


The Great Leap on the Runway
As Valentino took his bows on the runway for the first time in China, Bao Haiqing towered beside him, her tall, willowy figure suggesting a fresh, supple vine wrapped in a swirl of glistening black Italian cloth.
For Valentino, the bows brought him closer to realizing a dream of one day bringing haute couture to China.
For Ms.
Bao, an 18-year-old model with sassy, sleek hair and a dazzling smile, the Valentino stilettos she wore brought her one step closer to the international fashion world that every Chinese model now dreams of.


TV Without Film or Tape
THE pace may be quickening, but the adoption of new technology for capturing video journalists' work is a time-honored tradition.
In the mid-1970's, for instance, the cinematographer James Wong Howe became captivated with videotape, then a relatively new technology.
Because each reel of one-inch videotape held only four minutes of material -- he had his assistant, Scott Billups, follow him with a cart holding a 120-pound video recorder and spare reels during filming.


No Headline
HE paints and draws downstairs, she writes upstairs, and in a living room filled with artworks, they meet to pay the bills.
Jerry Pinkney, the award-winning illustrator, and his wife, Gloria Jean Pinkney, a newly published author, have raised four children in their former carriage house here, where they now welcome the visits of their five -- soon to be six -- grandchildren.
For years, before writing "Back Home" -- a children's book illustrated by Mr.
Pinkney and published last fall by Dial Books -- Mrs.
Pinkney worked as her husband's agent and assistant while also designing jewelry and women's hats.
Still in their early 50's, the couple has watched the children's book industry become big business.
They have also seen the demand grow for artists like them, who find their inspiration in the black experience.


Laurie Martin, Nicholas Ward
Laurie Ann Martin, the daughter of Mrs.
John J. Martin of Suffield, Conn., and the late Mr.
Martin, was married there yesterday to Dr.
Nicholas Shaeffer Ward, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
James S. Ward of Short Hills, N.J.
The Rev.
Richard Hanna Huleatt performed the ceremony at the First Church of Christ, Congregational.
Mrs.
Ward, 28, is a C.P.A. and the manager of accounting and finance at New York 1 News, the 24-hour Time Warner cable news channel in New York.
She graduated from Colgate University, as did her husband, and she received an M.B.A. degree from New York University.
Her father was a senior vice president of the Aetna Life and Casualty Company in Hartford.


Colombian Salsa Recaptures The Gusto of the Dance Floor
When Gabriel Garcia Marquez collected his Nobel Prize in 1982, he threw a celebration bash the likes of which Stockholm had never seen.
A thousand of the novelist's pals polished off 100 cases of fine Cuban rum (courtesy of Fidel Castro), while dancing till dawn to an even more intoxicating import -- music by a selection of Colombian bands that Mr.
Garcia Marquez himself had flown in for the occasion.
Until that momentous night, the irrepressible rhythms of Colombia -- porro, cumbia, mapale, vallenato and gaita -- had rarely, if ever, been heard outside of Latin America.
Next Sunday's concert at Madison Square Garden, "Pa' Colombia con Polito" ("To Colombia With Polito"), which will have as its host the New York radio personality Polito Vega, promises to be another landmark in the history of Colombian music.
The debut of important Colombian artists like Grupo Niche, Orquestra Guayacan and Lisandro Meza in New York's largest and most visible concert venue is testimony to the impact that Colombian musicians are making in a Latin music business once dominated by Nuyorican and Puerto Rican salsa.


Vienna Drive
To the Editor: A few weeks before we left for Austria Hans Fantel's article "A Back Road Drive to Vienna" (March 14) appeared and we changed our plans to follow his recommendations.
We were not disappointed.
The only difference we found was the much greater representation of VW's and other inexpensive cars in the parking lot at Schloss Fuschl.
Unfortunately, there was a heavy downside to our trip because of the prevalence of smoking.
First, not only do most restaurants not have nonsmoking sections, they will often move smokers to an adjacent table even in a near-empty establishment.
Second, as Austrian Airlines allows smoking in the rear of its planes, unless you request, forcefully, seating as far away as possible, you may find yourselves a row or two away from the smoking section.
I say "forcefully" because if you do it politely it may well be ignored.
My wife, who is allergic to tobacco smoke, began coughing after takeoff and was moved forward and received oxygen.


A Record Store Without Records? A Creepy Prospect
A laserdisk recorder, a videotape recorder, an interactive computer catalogue, a credit card reader and a plug.
By some indications, that's what the home-entertainment emporium of the future will be.
I.B.M. and the Blockbuster Entertainment chain recently agreed to collaborate on developing a new distribution system that would trade browser bins for a computerized display.
The system is scheduled to arrive next year in the form of cash-machine-like kiosks in Blockbuster stores.
In the booth, consumers would choose music and video games (and eventually movies) stored in a central databank, to be copied on request.
In effect, the system would let entertainment companies zap their wares digitally instead of trucking them.
The companies would no longer be, as the Byrds sang, "waiting there to sell plasticware"; they would shift to selling information.
Given the entertainment conglomerates' investments in pressing plants and distribution networks, that might not be an easy transition.


MAY 16-22: Getting Chummier; America Recognizes Angola's Existence
For years Angola was one of those places where a line was drawn against Soviet "adventurism." But after the collapse of Communism, the withdrawal of Cuban troops propping up the regime and the Government's strides in democracy and a free-market economy, there seemed little reason to remain belligerent.
Last week the Clinton Administration decided to recognize the Angolan Government of Jose Eduardo dos Santos.
The Administration, especially the White House, had been leaning this way for some time.
Mr. dos Santos had held, and won, free and fair multiparty elections last September.
Mr. dos Santos's antagonist, Jonas Savimbi, head of the National Union for the Total Independence of Angola, having petulantly denounced the balloting, then renewed his guerrilla war.
And while Mr. dos Santos accepted a United States-brokered peace plan early this month, Mr.
Savimbi has not.
Angola has over the years retained close trading ties with the United States, despite aid provided to Mr.
Savimbi by the Bush and Reagan Administrations.
The country's $2.3 billion in exports to the United States -- mostly oil -- is exceeded only by Nigeria in the sub-Saharan region.


Sports of The Times; A Bill for Boxing That Is Long Overdue
While boxing's eyes were on last night's Riddick Bowe-Jesse Ferguson heavyweight title fight, its ears were listening for a Congressional roll call.
Legislation soon will be introduced in Congress to form a Professional Boxing Corporation that would govern the not-so-sweet science throughout the nation.
Under the bill, a national boxing czar would be nominated by President Clinton and confirmed by the Senate.


Erika S. Berman, R. L. Rosenzweig
Dr.
Erika S. Berman, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Martin H. Berman of Woodmere, L.I., was married last evening to Dr.
Robert L. Rosenzweig, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Carlton Rosenzweig of White Plains.
Rabbi Joel Zion officiated at Temple Israel in Lawrence, L.I.
Dr.
Berman, 25, graduated with distinction from the University of Michigan at Ann Arbor.
She and her husband both received their M.D. degrees from the Mount Sinai School of Medicine.
She will begin her residency in pediatrics at the Columbia-Presbyterian Medical Center in New York in July.
Her father is a first vice president at Prudential Securities in Melville, L.I.


Man Sought In the Death Of Little Boy
Police officers investigating the death of a little boy who was strangled and beaten and whose body was found in a trash compactor in Brooklyn were searching yesterday for a man who lived in Jersey City with the child and the boy's adoptive mother, law-enforcement officials said.
The dead child was identified by the police yesterday as Kayesean Blackledge, 5 years old, who had lived with his adoptive mother at 2 Kensington Avenue in Jersey City.
An investigator said the mother had been hospitalized with stab wounds since Thursday, when the child's body was found in a Brooklyn housing project.


Playing Shylock
To the Editor:
I found Louis Simpson's review of "Shylock" (April 4) fascinating.


Serbian Smugness
To Serbs, concluding that NATO's might won't threaten the hold they already have on much of Bosnia, the war is all but over.
Page 12.


Robin Bernstein, Jonathan Cohen
Robin Ann Bernstein, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Marvin Bernstein of Scarsdale, N.Y., was married last evening to Jonathan Gary Cohen, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
David E. Cohen of Roslyn, L.I.
Rabbi Peter Rubinstein performed the ceremony at Tappan Hill in Tarrytown, N.Y.
Mrs.
Cohen, 27, is an assistant operations manager at Bloomingdale's in New York.
She graduated from the University of Massachusetts.
Her father is the president of O. Mueller Inc., an office-supplies company in New York.


A Bistro Overlooking the Saugatuck
THE building on the hillside across the road from the Saugatuck River in Westport that now houses Tonic Bistro has been home to several restaurants in years past.
While the white exterior looks much the same, the interior has been given a new paint job and face lift.
Institutional yellow bordering on chartreuse walls contrast with dark green tablecloths and black banquettes and chair seats.
More cheerful is the airy, glassed-in and covered patio in the rear, with terra cotta walls, red marble-top tables and hanging plants, facing a tiny terrace punctuated by potted pansies.
The main dining room has a bistro look, as the restaurant's name would suggest, with modest prices.
Our dining experiences indicate there is much to be modest about.
We found Tonic Bistro to have two major problems: freshness and preparation.
Considering that the proprietor has previous restaurant experience, as owner of Man Ray restaurant in Manhattan, both problems surprised us.


A Library's Friends Come to Its Aid
ARTHUR MILLER plans to read from his autobiography.
Skitch Henderson will play the piano.
Karen Valentine and George Grizzard are preparing to do a "Who's On First" routine.
And Dustin Hoffman?
"He can do anything he wants," said Susan Purdy, chairman of a music and theater revue that will bring together some of the best-known Broadway, Hollywood and other celebrities, many of whom have homes in the Litchfield Hills, to benefit a local library.


Familiar Rhetoric Of Gun Control
I thank you for another anti-gun article ("The Battle Over Gun Control Moves to Hartford," April 11) replete with the raisin-brained rhetoric that we all know and love.
I must admit, however, there has at least been some subtle changes made to the standard fare.
One of my all time "assault rifle" favorites, "no legitimate sporting purpose," has become "no legitimate civilian purpose." I suppose that means that target shooting has become a legitimate sporting purpose, but only if you are in the military.
Mr.
Jepsen fortunately has managed to retain the intent of the original and has even added to it.
My only question is, if you are a "nobody" who shoots competitively or for recreaton, does that mean that you are not a citizen or that the gun is not an "assault weapon"?


Business Diary
At Empire Blue Cross, the Board Makes Its Move
The troubles at Empire Blue Cross and Blue Shield were mounting so fast that heads would surely have to roll.
Last week one did.
The board, whose inquiry turned up troubling management and morale problems, forced the resignation of Albert A. Cardone as chairman and chief executive of the nation's largest nonprofit health insurer.
And "nonprofit" puts it mildly: Empire has lost $250 million in the last two years, and its reserves are perilously low.
Two other headaches: the Government, citing poor service, has threatened to cancel Empire's contract to process Medicare claims, and A.T.&amp; T. has accused the insurer of inflating hospital bills.
To top it off, Mr.
Cardone did not even tell the board of these problems; stunned directors got the word in news reports and meetings with regulators.
Finally, the board's patience ran out.
Danes Vote With Their Brains
"Last time, we voted with our hearts," said a young Dane.
"This time, we voted with our brains." Last time was June, when Denmark rejected European unity, but last week Danish voters thought better of it and ratified the treaty.
To be sure, the treaty has been watered down -- a single currency is no longer required.
And not all Danes had their hearts in it: a melee broke out in Copenhagen, as the police wounded at least 10 protesters.
The House of Commons also voted to ratify the treaty, moving Britain closer to being the final nation to back unity.
China, Instant Powerhouse
Some momentous changes, like the drift of continents, take eons.
But in the flick of a statistician's wrist last week, China's economy quadrupled in size -- as someone simply pulled out a new tape measure.
Most studies have gauged a nation's output in dollars, but the I.M.F. looked instead at what the local currency will buy.
Suddenly China vaulted from being the world's No. 10 economy to No. 3, just behind Japan -- and well behind you-know-who.
"China is a great power already," one economist said.
"Many people haven't quite grasped" that.
But Chinese peasants aren't driving BMW's yet: per-capita income is $1,450; for Americans, who can't possibly afford higher taxes, it is $22,204.
An Appetite for Imports
The United States showed a huge appetite for foreign products in March, as imports -- many from Japan and China -- hit a record.
That led to the widest trade deficit in nearly four years.
Trade with China is a delicate issue, as President Clinton must soon decide whether to renew China's favorable trade status.
But what does the trade gap say about the American economy?
Pick your expert.
An economist called it "a shocking number." But a trade analyst saw a sign of confidence.
More Video Choices?
Help!
It's really happening.
The people who bring you Progress have been threatening for some time to invade your home with more electronic information and entertainment choices (just what we need: the average American, starved for choices, already watches television 23 hours a day).
But it wasn't till last week that two technologies -- cable and telephone -- started to converge in a big way when U S West, the Bell regional, agreed to invest $2.5 billion for 25.5 percent of Time Warner Entertainment, the nation's No. 2 cable operator.
So be sure to duck.
There's a superhighway for entertainment and information heading down your street.
Picking Up the Phone Crumbs
While the big guns in telephones and cable television are dreaming their futuristic dreams, Leonard Tow has more earthbound ideas -- and is doing just fine at it, thanks.
Mr.
Tow heads Citizens Utilities, a little-known Connecticut-based company that's making tidy profits on small phone, power and water companies in small markets nationwide.
So tidy, in fact, that he's glad to scoop up some of the giants' crumbs.
Last week, for $1.1 billion, it scooped up -- from GTE -- more than 200 local phone networks in 10 states, all insulated from big-city competition.
So let the Time Warners and U S Wests do their worst; Mr.
Tow is happy to "stick to the knitting." And it's lucrative knitting, by the way: Mr.
Tow's pay at Citizens has been put at more than $20 million. . . .
Give or Take $100 Million
What a difference a couple of zeros can make.
When A.T.&amp; T. agreed to license Spectrum Information Technologies' patents for sending data over cellular phones, Spectrum said it foresaw "hundreds of millions" of dollars in royalties.
To investors -- desperate to snatch anything that sounds like tomorrow's hot technology -- that was a buy signal, loud and clear.
And buy they did, sending the stock from $4 to nearly $12 in just over a week.
To insiders, that rise was a sell signal, and sell they did.
Then, amid growing doubts about Spectrum's forecast, A.T.&amp; T. said its royalties to Spectrum might reach "a few million dollars." Gulp.
Spectrum skidded back to $6, in the heaviest trading in Nasdaq history.
The Humbling of Honda
Honda just hasn't been the same since Ford's Taurus rammed the Accord out of its spot as the top-selling car in the United States.
It could be that Detroit has learned how to make good cars again, and buyers have caught on.
But other forces are conspiring against Honda these days.
The strong yen means it had to raise prices here, making its cars costly alternatives to Detroit's offerings, and a slow Japanese economy has cut into sales at home.
So here's the bad news, as Honda reported last week: profits off 41 percent, North American sales off 17 percent, Japanese sales off 8 percent.
Allstate?
Well, Almost All
Allstate's imminent stock sale is big, all right -- the nation's biggest initial public offering ever.
But it's also long on controversy.
Investors should like it -- the price, about $25 a share, looks good.
But a lot of other people are not too happy -- hordes of Florida homeowners whose policies Allstate will cancel.
Allstate saw $2.5 billion washed away by Hurricane Andrew, nearly half its capital, and it can ill afford an encore, so it plans to drop 300,000 customers to cut potential losses to $1 billion.
It makes perfect sense -- except, of course, to Floridians, hundreds of whom took out their rage at a public meeting last week.
Rethinking Medical Malpractice
Lawyers probably like medical malpractice policy just as it is.
After all, 60 cents of every dollar is eaten up by lawyers or courts.
But doctors, who pay $5 billion or so for malpractice insurance, don't like it -- and neither do patients, who often wait years for their 40 cents' worth of justice.
Now the President's health team wants to sweep this system aside, freeing doctors from liability and having patients sue H.M.O.'s or insurers.
The Clinton team foresees faster payments and lower litigation costs.
But no cheers rose up: doctors foresaw intrusive supervision, and consumer groups saw no sizable benefits.
Needed, Again: Technology Czar
Bill Clinton stumbled last week on his way to being the Technology President.
He had a top techie lined up to be Deputy Commerce Secretary -- John A. Rollwagen, former head of Cray Research -- and hopes for him were high.
But Mr.
Rollwagen was mired in an S.E.C. insider-trading inquiry, and he withdrew his name.
Not that he said that was the cause -- his main reason was "culture shock" on seeing Washington at work.
"I knew it was different," he said, "but I didn't realize how different." He's got something there.
Wait!
Don't Tax My State!
With President Clinton facing so much Republican flak in Congress, he can't afford to let any Democrats slip out of the tent.
But last week a couple of big ones did, as some senators came up with their own budget plan.
They professed a broad-brush complaint: too many tax increases.
But their key goal is to scrap the fuel tax, which would batter oil states like Oklahoma or Louisiana.
And the two Democrats jumping ship are David L. Boren and J. Bennett Johnston -- from, you guessed it, Oklahoma and Louisiana.
A Stock Record Is Dead; Round Up the Usual Reasons
When stocks soar to a record, there must be reasons.
No one really knows, of course; anyone who did would get rich awfully quick.
It could be anything.
Perhaps 72.4 percent of traders had a good night's sleep, compared with 41.3 the previous night.
Perhaps astrology is the key.
In any case, when the Dow broke through 3,500 on Wednesday, the Thursday-morning quarterbacks had to explain it, and they cited falling interest rates and gold prices after an inflation scare.
But rates had been even lower weeks earlier, so why hadn't stocks been higher?
Enough suspense.
Here's the answer: Stocks rose because stocks rose.


An In-Depth Look at Some Writing on the Wall
There's almost nothing to the wall drawings of Sol LeWitt some gossamer lines of pencil or thin washes of India ink meticulously applied to expanses of white paint on plaster, and that's about it.
Nonetheless, these ephemeral creations can fill a room, as well as the eye and mind, with their seductive, subversive presence.
This fact is amply demonstrated by the incandescent retrospective of LeWitt's wall drawings at the Addison Gallery of American Art at Phillips Academy in Andover, Mass. (through June 13).
At the entrance to this 62-year-old neo-classical building, large isometric cubes in rich colors float on opposing walls; inside the six-sided foyer, two square walls pulse with banded geometries.
But the real treat awaits upstairs, where seven beautifully proportioned rooms have been emptied of art objects to make way for 40 big wall drawings that trace LeWitt's often remarkable artistic journey from the late 1960's, when he was a pillar of the Conceptual Art movement, to the present.


Emily Bickford, George Lansbury
Emily Allen Bickford, a daughter of Nathaniel J. and Jewelle Bickford of New York, was married yesterday to George Winthrop Lansbury, a son of Edgar and Rose Lansbury of New York.
The Rev.
Mark Anshutz performed the ceremony at St.
James Episcopal Church in New York.
Mrs.
Lansbury, 28, graduated from Skidmore College, as did her fiance.
She is a candidate for a master's degree in education at Bank Street College.
Her father is a partner in the New York law firm of Lane &amp; Mittendorf.
Her mother is the president of Bickford &amp; Partners, an investment banking firm in New York.


Ms. Granquist, Mr. Eichenlaub
Andrea Briggs Granquist, a program analyst for the Federal Retirement Thrift Investment Board, which administers the Federal Government's 401(k) plan, was married yesterday to Christopher Eichenlaub, a research analyst at the United States Bureau of Prisons.
Both work in Washington.
The Rev.
Fredric Muir performed the Unitarian ceremony at the Great Hall at St.
John's College in Annapolis, Md.
Mrs.
Granquist Eichenlaub, 28, graduated from Gettysburg College, as did her husband.
She is a daughter of Marilyn Granquist of Silver Spring, Md., and Wayne G. Granquist of Weston, Vt.


Off to a Good Start: Tending New Arrivals
PLANTING is now in full swing.
Just about everything can go into the ground.
The goal is to have the plants settle and form new roots promptly so they will be well established by the time summer's heat and drought appear.
Many new plants will be arriving from mail-order sources, too.
And the most important thing to do when they arrive is unpack them with care.
It is essential that the plants are set upright; they can be left in their shipping carton.
The live plants have been packed in an airless box for some time and to keep their leaves turgid and roots alive, the plants must have air promptly.
Sometimes the new plants will be wrapped in plastic, sometimes in wet newspaper, sometimes in sphagnum moss, or some are even shipped in their pots.


Bookshelf
Additional titles of interest:
THE TWENTY-FIVE MIXTEC CATS.
By Matthew Gollub.
Illustrated by Leovigildo Martinez.
Tambourine. $14. (Ages 5 to 9) In the southern Mexican province of Oaxaca, a good healer bought 25 kittens.
Once grown, they served the villagers well by saving the butcher from a curse.
Witty and complex illustrations by an artist from Oaxaca.


Morbid Curiosity Versus the Law
To the Editor:
Vicki Goldberg's essay "Death Is Resurrected as an Art Form"  [ May 2 ]  accurately analyzes the history of morgue photography.
Morgue or graveyard photography has re-emerged as a lucrative art form that satisfies modern-day society's morbid curiosity about death and violence.
As forensic pathologists who regularly use morgue photographs to document disease and trauma, we take offense at the use of post-mortem photographs for entertainment.


Sally Peters, Richard Holzinger
Sally Elizabeth Peters, a daughter of Doris Peters and Roy A. Peters, both of St.
Clair Shores, Mich., was married yesterday to Richard George Holzinger, the son of Lucia Holzinger of Houston and the late Richard James Holzinger.
The Rev.
Dr.
Herbert B. Anderson officiated at the Brick Presbyterian Church in New York.
Mrs.
Holzinger, 31, graduated from Connecticut College.
Until recently, she was a senior editor at Pocket Books in New York.
She is a stepdaughter of Marcy Peters.


Rotten Fascia Boards Often Have to Be Replaced
FASCIAS are the trim boards at the top of the outside walls of a house.
Sloping fascias at the ends of a house or beneath a gable are called rake fascias, and horizontal fascias that cover the ends of rafters are called eaves fascias.
Eaves fascias are vulnerable to decay, especially if the roof and soffits, the boxed areas beneath roof overhangs, are poorly constructed.
Repairing rotten eaves fascias generally consists of replacing the damaged boards.
The job is not too difficult for a moderately skilled amateur, but a helper is needed for handling larger pieces.


The Tribulations of Managing a Co-op
WITHOUT pain, there is no gain.
That's what cooperative and condominium owners are learning as they become increasingly involved with the management of their properties.
"It's difficult, all right," said Jon N. Willcox, one of the organizers of the Council of Westchester Cooperatives and Condominiums, a newly formed group formed to help condominium and co-op owners manage their properties in difficult times.


Steakhouse in Old Style, in Many Ways
STEAKHOUSES are making a comeback.
Despite assertions that we are all eating lightly and resisting red meat, the shrines to beef are booming.
Witness the recently opened Manhattan Steak House in Cedarhurst.
Diners expecting a big brassy spot complete with gruff waiters will be pleased by the intimate storefront.
It soothes with carpeted floors, white tablecloths, creamy walls, subdued landscapes and old-fashioned fixtures with amber lights.
Furthermore, the efficient waiters are paragons of amiability.


Valerie Kolligian, Harvey Thayer Jr.
Valerie Joyce Kolligian, the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Michael Kolligian Jr. of Winchester, Mass., was married yesterday to Harvey Hill Thayer Jr., a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Thayer of Dover, Mass.
The Rev.
Mampre Kouzouian performed the ceremony at Holy Trinity Armenian Apostolic Church in Cambridge, Mass.
Mrs.
Thayer, 29, is an assistant vice president of corporate banking at the Bank of Boston Corporation, where her husband is a vice president of corporate banking.
She graduated cum laude from Bowdoin College.


Diphtheria Up in Russia, Ukraine
Travelers to the Russian cities of Moscow and St.
Petersburg and to Kiev, Ukraine, should have current immunization against diphtheria, according to the United States Public Health Service Immunization Practices Advisory Committee, which advises on the use of vaccines.
In 1992, over 774 cases were reported in Moscow, with 24 deaths; in 1991, there were 435 and in 1990, 399.
In Kiev, the 1992 case report was 335.
The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention said that a drop in child immunizations was believed to underlie the surge.


Court Upholds Boy Scouts on 'Duty to God' Oath
A Federal appeals court in Chicago has ruled that the Boy Scouts do not have to accept boys who refuse to take the oath that includes "duty to God."
The court rejected an argument that the Boy Scouts are subject to the civil rights laws because they offer public accommodation.


Peekskill Health Center Reaches Out to Migrants
ON the sort of balmy spring day that summons up thoughts of summer, the hills around the Orange County countryside are lush with greenery.
From a promontory that overlooks a local farm, tiny onion shoots are just beginning to poke through the ground.
Yet this initial pastoral impression is jarred by a closer look at the workers who kneel near the plants, painstakingly weeding under the noon sun.
So much for an idyllic image of the rural life.
Just an hour from the Westchester side of the Tappan Zee Bridge, there are migrant farm workers who are largely responsible for providing the produce that is beginning to appear at local farm stands and in supermarkets.
For those who think that the problems of migrant farm workers are confined to such states as California, Florida and Texas, a visit to this Orange County community -- Florida, N.Y. -- can be disturbing.
A closer look at the landscape reveals barracks-style buildings near the fields where the workers are housed, or ramshackle wooden houses where other migrant workers are making temporary homes for the season.


Complaining
To the Editor: Travelers who follow the rules for lodging a complaint in the Practical Traveler, "The Fine Art of Complaining" (March 21), should be aware they still may not necessarily receive satisfaction.
On Jan. 23 we sailed Royal Caribbean's Sovereign of the Seas to the Eastern Carribbean.
Our last night, I requested a well-done piece of the prime rib.
The horseradish apparently disguised the rancid flavor until I'd eaten three of four mouthfuls.
My wife, who tasted the meat at my request, confirmed that it was not just off but rank.


Cary Regan, Michael Keigher
Caroline Hanley Regan, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
William J. Regan Jr. of Buffalo, was married there yesterday to Michael Prescott Keigher, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard P. Keigher of London.
The Rev.
Ward Ewing performed the ceremony at the Trinity Episcopal Church.


It'll Take a Lot of Nanoseconds to Read This
To the Editor:
About "Wrestling Over the Key to the Codes" (Technology, May 9): As an engineer in the information business, I find the common usage of "nanosecond" to mean "really, really fast" annoying.


Getaways on the Eastern Shore
THE Eastern Shore of Maryland is known for succulent shellfish, peaceful hamlets and somnolent breezes off Chesapeake Bay.
And this historic area, with its Colonial English roots (there's an Oxford and a Cambridge) and shipbuilding lore (there are two maritime museums), is also home to a growing collection of inns and bed and breakfast houses.
I recently visited the Eastern Shore in search of comfort, quiet and a dash of charm, and stayed in two very different places.
You can arrive by car or boat at the Inn at Perry Cabin, a glamorous -- and glamorously priced -- hostelry on a cove in St.
Michaels, a village dating from 1677. (The inn has its own dock.)


Statues, With Limitations
It was a gracious moment on Ellis Island last week when Mary Robinson, the first woman elected President of Ireland, unveiled a statue of another Irish pathbreaker.
Her name was Annie Moore, the colleen who became the first immigrant to pass through the great registry room when it opened in 1892.
Young Annie later traveled to Texas, settled in Waco, and died in 1923.
Now she has been rendered in bronze, in the bloom of her youth, a suitable memorial to an auspicious occasion.
Yet President Robinson, facing 1,400 Irish-Americans, most of them male, did not pass up an occasion to make a useful point.
She noted that Annie Moore might be especially welcome in New York, since there were so few statues of women.
"What about the Statue of Liberty?" a nettled male murmured to his wife, who replied, "You've almost exhausted the list."


Portfolios Come of Age as a Classroom Tool
WHEN parents have a conference with Marilyn Glotzer, principal of the Bedford Road Elementary School in Pleasantville, to discuss their children's progress, some of them may be in for a surprise.
Instead of taking out test scores and report cards -- those reassuringly familiar educational tools that today's parents remember from their own school days -- Mrs.
Glotzer is much more likely to consult a folder that represents students' work from grade to grade.
Such portfolios can contain anything from a creative-writing story, social studies project, mathematical graph or piece of artwork to a videotape, series of photographs or even a spelling test.


SURFACING
APHRODISIACS -- "Like Water for Chocolate": The characters of this art-house film spend much time sublimating their passion for each other with their passion for food.
Not so the film's fans, who find it a compelling mood enhancer.
ECOLOGY -- Plastic T-shirts and Ecomat: More proof that the green wave shows no signs of ebbing.
The Signs and Symbols mail-order company is offering T-shirts made from a cottonlike fiber that is derived from the chemical breakdown of plastic soda bottles.
The Ecomat laundry in Manhattan uses energy-efficient machines and all-natural detergents.
SPORTS -- The most annoying psych-out: With all due respect for the Atlanta Braves' chop, the most obnoxious method of distracting one's opponents may be the loud, grating "bzzzzzzzz" that blares from the Charlotte (N.C.) Hornets' public-address system.
Unfortunately for the Hornets, facing Patrick Ewing was an even greater psych-out.


Ms. Mathis, Mr. Ben-Yehuda
Melissa Mary Mathis, the daughter of Stephen P. Mathis Jr. of Incline Village, Nev., and Edith C. Mathis of Holden, Mass., was married yesterday to Raphael Ben-Yehuda, the son of Yehuda Ben-Yehuda of New York, and Christina O. Parsons of Northfield, Mass.
Charles Smith, the town justice for Shandaken, N.Y., officiated at the Shandaken weekend home of the bridegroom's father.


Clinton Jabs Democratic Critics Of His Budget and Tax Package
Striking back at Democratic Senators who have challenged his budget and tax package, President Clinton today accused them of protecting wealthy special interests and buckling under to "the big oil lobby."
Mr.
Clinton's unusually sharp remarks against members of his own party, made in his weekly radio address, were directed at the centrist Democrats who have bolted from party ranks to try to revise the President's budget and tax package.


Off to a Good Start: Tending New Arrivals
PLANTING is now in full swing.
Just about everything can go into the ground.
The goal is to have the plants settle and form new roots promptly so they will be well established by the time summer's heat and drought appear.
Many new plants will be arriving from mail-order sources, too.
And the most important thing to do when they arrive is unpack them with care.
It is essential that the plants are set upright; they can be left in their shipping carton.
The live plants have been packed in an airless box for some time and to keep their leaves turgid and roots alive, the plants must have air promptly.
Sometimes the new plants will be wrapped in plastic, sometimes in wet newspaper, sometimes in sphagnum moss, or some are even shipped in their pots.


On Sunday; Up on the Roof, Harlem Gains Acres of Beauty
THURSDAY, at 145th Street in Harlem, the state will open a beautiful new $129 million, 28-acre, half-mile-long riverfront park on the roof of a sewage treatment plant that gives off stinky smells.
This, of course, could happen only in New York City and takes a while to absorb even when you're on top of it.
Eduardo Polanco walked into the new Riverbank State Park the other day to apply for a summer job.
"It's so beautiful," he said, "the trees, flowers, everything so green." He didn't know he was standing on a sewage plant roof.
"Yeah? Really?"


Sexual-Harassment Complaints Against Judge Reviewed
The state commission that disciplines judges for misconduct is investigating allegations that a Staten Island Family Court judge sexually harassed female court officers, court-appointed lawyers, clerks and other associates for years, the head of the court officers' union said yesterday.
Dennis W. Quirk, president of the New York State Court Officers Association, said that 10 members of his union were among 30 to 50 women who he understood had been subpoenaed by the State Commission on Judicial Conduct in an inquiry into charges against Judge Carmen J. Cognetta Jr., one of Staten Island's two Family Court jurists.


Red Ribbons Are Turning Black and Blue
A backlash is brewing against the red ribbons worn to promote awareness of AIDS.
Since they were created two years ago by Visual AIDS, a nonprofit organization of artists and other members of the art world, the accessories have been worn by everyone from everyday people to celebrities at awards shows.
Ribbon sales have also raised funds for research and for care of people who have AIDS.
Over the last few months, however, a number of critics, some of whom have H.I.V., the virus that causes AIDS, have emerged.
February: In the Feb. 15 issue of The New Yorker, David Seidner, the photographer, wrote in the Talk of the Town column about having AIDS and what he thinks about the ribbon.
The ribbon's main function, he wrote, "seems to be to alleviate guilt through trickle-down awareness, to make people feel comfortable without having to do anything."


Carrie Bickford, Richard Lougee
Carrie Lynn Bickford, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard O. Bickford of Gilmanton Iron Works, N.H., was married yesterday to Richard William Lougee, a son of Mary E. Lougee of West Lebanon, N.H., and the late Col.
Laurence W. Lougee.
Rev.
Jeffrey Collins performed the ceremony at the Park Street Baptist Church in Pittsfield, Mass.
Mrs.
Lougee is a contract administrator at Thomas K. Dyer Inc., an engineering firm in Lexington, Mass.
She graduated cum laude from New Hampshire College.


As a Jew
"JEW? . . . JEW?"
The week of my son Nathaniel's bar mitzvah in New York, I felt like Woody Allen in "Annie Hall" when he imagines that even the most innocuous question ("D'you eat?") is an ethnic reproval aimed expressly at him.


A Tandy Spinoff Born Into Turbulence
THE Tandy Corporation, having decided to bet its future on Radio Shack, Computer City and other electronics retailers, will soon part ways with the huge manufacturing division that makes its personal computers, videotapes and hundreds of other consumer products and parts.
But the division, which is scheduled to be spun off by the beginning of July, is going public in its grunge suit instead of its best tuxedo.
To be sure, the unit, called TE Electronics Inc., will have more than a few shiny buttons to display when it emerges.
It has size, with 1992 sales of $1.5 billion (compared with $3.8 billion for the rest of Tandy), and a strong balance sheet with little long-term debt.
Its products include entries in the growing markets for multimedia and mobile computing, including a pen-based notebook computer that dominates its market.
Sales at its furniture company, O'Sullivan Industries, have risen at a 15 percent pace for four years, and TE's Memorex brand will soon be on new products like clock radios in addition to audio and videocassettes.
But the timing of the public offering of TE, under which Tandy shareholders will receive approximately one share of new TE stock for every five Tandy shares they own, is woeful.
For one thing, TE will not immediately have profits.
Bruising price wars in personal computers took a toll last year as sales of the Tandy brand stalled.
William C. Bousquette, TE's chairman and chief executive, said he was unsure when the first profits would appear.
Tandy reported in April that TE lost $9 million in the last six months of the year.
During the price battles, two big TE customers, Digital Equipment and Panasonic, canceled contracts under which TE had assembled personal computers under their labels.
That led TE to a deeper loss in the first quarter of this year, $16.2 million on sales of $326.5 million.
In the period a year earlier, TE would have lost $4.9 million on sales of $372 million if it had been independent.
Mr.
Bousquette said that the loss should narrow in the second quarter, but he knows TE will not prosper unless he can revive the computer-making operations, which contributed 45 percent of TE's sales last year.
Moreover, TE's purchase agreements from Tandy will make it fully vulnerable to the economy and competitors by 1996.
Tandy agreed to match the equivalent of at least 80 percent of its 1992 purchases of TE products each year through 1995, but only if warranted by its own sales.
The value of goods Tandy bought from TE last year amounted to $470 million, which means Tandy is committed to buying $376 million through 1995, a total equal to about 25 percent of TE's 1992 sales.
Tandy also will no longer be TE's friendly banker, which means TE's debt and interest expense seem certain to rise.
Tandy advanced $186 million in cash as working capital to TE's struggling operations from mid-1989 through last December.
As required by the separation pact, TE is bargaining with lenders "for a substantial amount" of revolving bank credit, according to Government documents filed earlier this year.
While independence looks risky for TE, the deal probably helped Tandy, analysts said, by enabling it to shed operations that had depressed earnings.
Yet Tandy's stock price has slipped since the company's chairman and chief executive, John V. Roach, disclosed the plan in January.
The shares closed Friday at $28.875 on the New York Stock Exchange, down from $30.875 on the trading day before the deal was announced.
THE TE unit got its start in the 1960's as a supplier of telephone cords, jacks and hundreds of electronics accessories to Radio Shack, and has made personal computers since that market first stirred in 1977.
But Tandy never made a dent in the hugely profitable business of corporate accounts for desktop computers.
Still, it posted steady sales gains while reaping fat profits in the 1980's by selling computers into homes and small businesses through the expanding Radio Shack chain.
That distribution network gave Tandy a profitable spot in a corner of the business where I.B.M., Compaq and Apple were less active and their machines higher priced.
Tandy also had control over both distribution and low-cost manufacturing, a rare combination in computers.
It added up to yearly operating profit margins of more than 50 percent at Radio Shack.
But that business model was far from perfect.
Radio Shack competitors refused to sell Tandy computers and other models that TE made under the Grid and Victor brands.
Radio Shack franchise owners raised legal threats that prevented Tandy from moving into lucrative telemarketing.
Tandy was floundering as the 1980's ended.
Next, the spread of discount retailers like CompUSA, Circuit City and Tandy's own Computer City put brands like Compaq, I.B.M., Apple, Dell and AST Research within reach of Radio Shack customers.
Meanwhile, Radio Shack was running out of expansion sites.
Its store count is 6,614, down from more than 7,000 in 1990.
Then came the blow from the price war that Compaq started in June.
The war -- by crimping, or eliminating, profit margins industrywide -- has quickened the shakeout, with TE pushed to the sidelines.
Tandy ranked seventh in personal-computer sales last year in the United States, with 3.7 percent of the market.
Mr.
Bousquette is courting a variety of computer marketers to try to find orders for TE's computer factories.
Idle assembly capacity is the big reason why TE's gross profit fell to 15.8 percent of sales for the last six months of 1992, from 22 percent in the 1991 period.
Mr.
Bousquette landed one deal earlier this year, when AST Research asked TE to build a version of the Grid Convertible, the new pen-based notebook computer that TE's Grid Systems unit introduced in November, under an AST label.
The deal should generate more than the $90 million in sales for the last half of 1992 that TE lost when Digital pulled its orders, Mr.
Bousquette, said.
"We've really got to develop a critical mass for our computer business," Mr.
Bousquette, 56, said.
His career has included stops at Ford, Rockwell and Emerson Electric before joining Tandy as senior vice president and chief financial officer in 1990.
"We need a higher level of volume," he said.
"Our plan is to do that through partnering. People now view us as a full-fledged manufacturer."
BUT in trying to lure orders as a contract manufacturer, TE faces big-name competitors like I.B.M., Digital, Texas Instruments and A.T.&amp; T.'s NCR unit.
All these companies are searching for new orders to counter plunging demand for their mainframes and minicomputers.
Digital, for one, canceled its business with TE after three years because declining minicomputer orders had opened up factory space that is now being used to build personal computers that TE had been making.
In a recent Government filing, TE said its business plans offered "a realistic opportunity" to regain profitable operations in computer manufacturing.
But it added that there was no assurance that it would succeed and that it might be forced to take several steps, including selling or closing various computer operations, to make TE profitable overall.
Mr.
Bousquette may have no other choice than to enter the fray in contract manufacturing, but some analysts said TE has a better shot at generating consistent profits by producing hit products of its own.
TE'S Sensation multimedia machine, which combines a computer with a 386 microprocessor and a CD-ROM that operates video encyclopedias and dozens of other new video programs, has sold well at Radio Shacks since fall.
The success of the multimedia machine, priced below $2,000, "forced Dell and Compaq to market similar models," said Tim Bajarin, a consultant at Creative Strategies Inc., market researchers in Santa Clara, Calif.
The Grid Convertible, at $2,500, is now the most popular notebook computer that can interpret handwritten messages.
Over all, TE's product mix "needs to be refined, but it is pretty much on track," Mr.
Bajarin said.
"TE still has a poor image in the corporate community, and I don't see anything changing that. But they can still have a good position in the small-office, home-office market, which is starting to get some wings."
But he and other analysts warned that while TE is a capable innovator and manufacturer of low-cost, high-volume electronics products, it often loses ground in fast-growing markets when companies with savvier product design and promotions rush in.
Portia Isaacson, an analyst in mobile computing and president of Dream IT, a research firm in Colorado Springs, Colo., said that could happen again to TE with its pen-based Grid Convertible, which has grabbed about 80 percent of that market.
"Every leading notebook manufacturer will come into the market with this type of product, a notebook computer with a keyboard and a pen," Ms.
Isaacson said.
"Billions of dollars are being invested in this." A Unit With a Head Start
THE Grid Systems Corporation was a specialized maker of durable desktop and notebook computers in 1987 when the Tandy Corporation bought it, grasping for a foothold in the lucrative corporate market for personal computers.
Tandy's chief executive, John V. Roach, reassigned Tandy's corporate sales group to Grid and expanded Grid's marketing network to more than 50 offices around the country and in Europe.
But by last summer the strategy had failed.
Sales stalled at $230 million, Grid was losing money and there was talk in the industry that Tandy was looking for a buyer for the unit.
The company scaled back Grid's operations in Europe, taking a $20 million charge against earnings in the last half of 1992, and earlier this year moved its headquarters from Fremont, Calif., to Westlake, Tex., near TE's headquarters in Fort Worth.
In April, D. Bruce Walter, Grid's president and a senior executive at the company since 1982, resigned.
He was replaced temporarily by a Tandy manufacturing executive, Howard D. Elias, who has kept his post as TE's head of sales and marketing.
Before Mr.
Elias took charge, Grid's new parent, TE Electronics Inc., narrowed the unit's focus mainly to mobile computing products including palm pads and a pen-based notebook computer, the Grid Convertible, which quickly received top ratings and four of five sales in its small but growing market.
Portia Isaacson, an analyst in mobile computing and president of Dream IT, a research firm in Colorado Springs, said demand is certain to rise as more notebook and hand-held computers capable of reading written messages reach the market.
The most eager buyers are companies with large sales forces that use the computers to get orders quickly to manufacturing sites.
"Gillette and Kellogg have a thousand machines out there doing simple field-sales notations," she said.
"Companies are not only happy with the applications, they are chomping at the bit to get really good hardware."
"Grid has a head start, there is no doubt about it," Ms.
Isaacson added.
"They could be selling 1,000 a month now. If they get the kinks out of the product, they could do 100,000 units a month."


Film Noir
Something filmy, see-through and black is this summer's No. 1 sensation.
It will be seen on the street, the beach, the ballroom and maybe even the board room.


Coins of the Realm (Hers and Other Folks')
WHILE the sun may have finally set on the British Empire, it certainly won't set on the countries that have issued commemorative coins honoring the 40th year of Elizabeth II's reign.
They've gotten together to design and mint silver crowns that are struck by the British Royal Mint.
The United Kingdom and 17 other countries have each come up with a different coin.
The one from Belize depicts the Queen in profile on the obverse and shows her reviewing the troops from horseback on the reverse.
But others combine a British motif with a distincly un-British design.
Bhutan's coin, for example, has a Coldstream Guard on the obverse and the seal of the Kingdom of Bhutan on the reverse.


Manager's Profile; Michael DiCarlo
Fund: John Hancock Special Equities; $168 million in assets.
Manager since 1988. (Sponsor: John Hancock Mutual Funds, Boston; 5 percent upfront sales charge.)
Born: March 6, 1956; Boston


South Asia, the World's Once and Future Powder Keg
EVEN as the world pays more attention to the dramas being played out in the former Soviet empire, the Balkans and the Middle East, the South Asian subcontinent has been moving steadily deeper into a crisis of ethnic and religious conflicts that in some cases threaten to spill across international borders.
From Afghanistan to Bangladesh and from northern India to Sri Lanka, a multitude of linguistic, ethnic and religious groups have coexisted for centuries, but rarely in amity.
And for the four decades since the countries of South Asia won independence from Britain, political instability and vast economic dislocation have been endemic.
Three times in less than 50 years, India and Pakistan have gone to war.


West Point Band Makes A Return Engagement
A YEAR ago, almost to the day, the West Point Band came to Rye High School to begin a series of free concerts sponsored by the Pulvermann Foundation.
Starting slowly, with plans for one or two events a year, the foundation intends to add more presentations until they become a major community asset.
The foundation also hopes that its family concerts will influence younger listeners.
Last year's concert was such a wild success -- with almost as many people turned away as could fit into the auditorium -- that the West Pointers are coming back this afternoon at 3 o'clock.
The choice of the United States Military Academy Band is especially apt as Memorial Day approaches: as the senior musical unit of the American Army, the Concert Band has appeared at many historic events (including the return home of the Iran hostages), given joint concerts with the American Symphony and the New York Philharmonic, been conducted by such legendary maestros as Arturo Toscanini and Leopold Stokowski.
It should be noted, by the way, that the players are not Academy cadets but top-notch professional musicians who joined the Army expressly to serve as West Point bandsmen and women.


BEST SELLERS: May 23, 1993
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Fiction
1
1
41
THE BRIDGES OF MADISON COUNTY, by Robert James Waller. (Warner, $14.95.) A photographer and a lonely farmer's wife in Iowa.
2
2
10
THE CLIENT, by John Grisham. (Doubleday, $23.50.) A deadly secret presents serious problems for an 11-year-old boy. (LP)
3
3
3
I'LL BE SEEING YOU, by Mary Higgins Clark. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $23.) A television news reporter has mystifying experiences.
4
5
3
GAI-JIN, by James Clavell. (Delacorte, $27.50.) Cordial relationships and terrorism between the Japanese and foreigners in Yokohama in 1862.
5
8
6
LIKE WATER FOR CHOCOLATE, by Laura Esquivel. (Doubleday, $17.50.) Frustration, love, hope -- and recipes -- sampled by a woman coming of age on a Mexican ranch.
6
4
5
THE LAST COMMAND, by Timothy Zahn. (Spectra/Bantam, $21.95.) The final volume of a "Star Wars" trilogy.
7
7
6
"J" IS FOR JUDGMENT, by Sue Grafton. (Holt, $21.95.) Kinsey Millhone investigates the case of a man who apparently committed suicide.
8
6
4
A SEASON IN PURGATORY, by Dominick Dunne. (Crown, $22.) The political and social machinations of a wealthy Irish Catholic family.
9
9
3
ANGEL, by Barbara Taylor Bradford. (Random House, $23.) The reunion of four people, all successful in glamorous jobs, is transformed by the appearance of two celebrated men.
10
12
127
OH, THE PLACES YOU'LL GO! by Dr. Seuss. (Random House, $12.95.) Verse and pictures.
11
10
4
PERFECT, by Judith McNaught. (Pocket, $22.) A model young woman is abducted by a onetime award-winning film maker.
12
11
3
WHISPERS, by Belva Plain. (Delacorte, $22.95.) The realities that lie below the surface of an outwardly happy family.
13 *
13
4
CHARMS FOR THE EASY LIFE, by Kaye Gibbons. (Putnam, $19.95.) The fortunes of three indomitable North Carolina women.
14
14
8
AMERICAN STAR, by Jackie Collins. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $23.) The romance of two teen-agers, one who grows up to be a movie star, the other a model.
15
15
4
WHERE THERE'S SMOKE, by Sandra Brown. (Warner, $19.95.) A physician moves to a Texas town and tries to live down her bad reputation.
16 *
3
FOR LOVE, by Sue Miller. (HarperCollins, $23.) An affair is renewed and the past reconsidered by people returning to their Massachusetts hometown.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Nonfiction
1
1
41
WOMEN WHO RUN WITH THE WOLVES, by Clarissa Pinkola Estes. (Ballantine, $20.) A Jungian analyst reinterprets myths and folk tales to enable women to understand their psyches.
2
2
36
THE WAY THINGS OUGHT TO BE, by Rush H. Limbaugh 3d. (Pocket, $22.) Anecdotes and opinions offered by the talk show host.
3
3
14
HEALING AND THE MIND, by Bill Moyers. (Doubleday, $25.) Conversations about the relationship of sickness to thoughts and emotions.
4
5
5
THINKING OUT LOUD, by Anna Quindlen. (Random House, $22.) Essays on current topics by the New York Times columnist.
5
7
23
CARE OF THE SOUL, by Thomas Moore. (HarperCollins, $22.50.) Spirituality and daily life.
6
11
2
THE REAL ANITA HILL, by David Brock. (Free Press, $24.95.) A journalist's account of the relationship between the law professor and Clarence Thomas, whom she testified against during his Senate confirmation hearings.
7
15
2
CULTURE OF COMPLAINT, by Robert Hughes. (New York Public Library/Oxford University, $19.95.) Essays critical of current cultural and political trends in America.
8
13
2
EMBRACED BY THE LIGHT, by Betty J. Eadie with Curtis Taylor. (Gold Leaf Press, $14.95.) The experiences of a woman who came close to death but survived.
9 *
1
TURMOIL AND TRIUMPH, by George P. Shultz. (Stewart/Scribners, $30.) The memoirs of Ronald Reagan's Secretary of State.
10
9
6
A WORLD WAITING TO BE BORN, by M. Scott Peck. (Bantam, $22.95.) A call for people to make civility part of their lives.
11
6
3
CONDUCT UNBECOMING, by Randy Shilts. (St. Martin's, $27.95.) The roles that gay men and lesbians have played in our armed forces.
12 *
10
4
REMEMBERING DENNY, by Calvin Trillin. (Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux, $19.) A memoir of a bright young man of the 1950's who committed suicide two years ago.
13
4
27
BANKRUPTCY 1995, by Harry E. Figgie Jr. with Gerald J. Swanson. (Little, Brown, $19.95.) The collapse of America under Government debt.
14 *
10
ASSEMBLING CALIFORNIA, by John McPhee. (Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux, $21.) Investigations into the geological history of California.
15
12
35
THE TE OF PIGLET, by Benjamin Hoff. (Dutton, $16.) Aspects of Taoist philosophy explained through the actions of an A. A. Milne character.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous
1
1
4
A WOMAN'S WORTH, by Marianne Williamson. (Random House, $17.) Advice about beauty, age, relationships, sex, children and careers.
2
2
10
BEATING THE STREET, by Peter Lynch with John Rothchild. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $23.) Advice about investing in stocks and mutual funds.
3
3
45
HARVEY PENICK'S LITTLE RED BOOK, by Harvey Penick with Bud Shrake. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $19.) Tips on playing golf.
4
4
6
MEN ARE FROM MARS, WOMEN ARE FROM VENUS, by John Gray. (HarperCollins, $20.) Ways to improve communication between the sexes.
5
7
YOUR MONEY OR YOUR LIFE, by Joe Dominguez and Vicki Robin. (Viking, $20.) How to adapt your financial situation to a more frugal, satisfying style of living.
These listings are based on computer-processed sales figures from 3,050 bookstores and from representative wholesalers with more than 28,000 other retail outlets, including variety stores and supermarkets.
The figures are statistically adjusted to represent sales in all such outlets across the United States.
Rankings reflect sales for the week ending May 8. *An asterisk before a book's title indicates that its sales, weighted to reflect the book-selling industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
LP indicates that a book is available in large print.
And Bear in Mind
(Editors' choices of other recent books of particular interest)
LIFE'S DOMINION: An Argument About Abortion, Euthanasia, and Individual Freedom, by Ronald Dworkin. (Knopf, $23.) Mr.
Dworkin contends that the relevant choices cannot depend on anyone's "right to live" (or to die), but must proceed from the idea that life is sacred, and that therefore the state must not interfere.
S&amp;L HELL: The People and the Politics Behind the $1 Trillion Savings and Loan Scandal, by Kathleen Day. (Norton, $24.95.) Ms.
Day, who covered the affair for The Washington Post, analyzes the fiasco she says could cost $13 billion a year in interest forever.
REBEL POWERS, by Richard Bausch. (Seymour Lawrence/ Houghton Mifflin, $21.95.) The narrator of this novel, a thoughtful man trying to proceed honestly, examines his family, imperiled by the clash of old verities and threatening new ideas.
LOVING DAUGHTERS, by Olga Masters. (Norton, $21.95.) First published in Australia in 1984, this subtly passionate novel concerns a humanly imperfect rural family on whom the outside intrudes in the form of a handsome, single English clergyman.
RACE MATTERS, by Cornel West. (Beacon, $15.) What will turn our racial climate more benign?
Mr.
West, an optimist but a wise one, thinks good will, hard work and intelligence may yet help.
CURRICULUM VITAE: Autobiography, by Muriel Spark. (Houghton Mifflin, $22.95.) The straight facts of a life sufficiently courageous but quite unlike, thank goodness, the eccentric, elegant, mystifying, desperate world of her novels.
ON KISSING, TICKLING, AND BEING BORED: Psychoanalytic Essays on the Unexamined Life, by Adam Phillips. (Harvard University, $19.95.) A child psychotherapist writes poetically about the dangers of vigilance and the pleasures of carelessness.


DAVID GEFFEN, STILL HUNGRY
Do you really expect your readers to buy the poor-little-rich-boy slant of your article on David Geffen?
I would gladly exchange my single, middle-class, heterosexual life for Geffen's lonely, "sultanlike," homosexual one.
That way, I could at least call Jeff Katzenberg to send over the latest movie release on tape to watch at home.
FREDERICK HAMERMAN Washington


Jennifer Stoops, Edward Burns
Jennifer Lynn Stoops, a daughter of William and Louise Stoops of New Canaan, Conn., was married there yesterday to Edward Erik Burns, a son of Edward E. Burns Jr. of Darien, Conn., and Elizabeth Brunner Meryman of New York.
The Rev.
Lidabell Pollard performed the ceremony at the Congregational Church.
Mrs.
Burns, 26, is a marketing executive for The Financial Times in New York.
She graduated from Lake Forest College, as did her husband.
Her father is the senior vice president for the eastern region of Emkay Inc., an automobile-leasing corporation in New Canaan.


Diplomacy's Goal In Bosnia Seems Not Bold Action But Avoiding It
THE parade of Foreign Minis ters passes through Washing ton Andrei Kozyrev of Russia, Alain Juppe of France, Douglas Hurd of Britain -- but less is happening inside the offices of the high and mighty than it seems.
Once again, there is no agreement on what to do about poor, bleeding Bosnia.
The Europeans emerge, full of their age-old complaints about American naivete.
The Americans accuse the Europeans of timidity and disunity.
One will not act without the other.
"In the last analysis, it is a European problem." "When you come down to it, only the Americans can lead." After you, Alphonse; no, after you, Gaston.


A Strike Agitates Mushroom Country
A strike by 140 Mexican workers seeking to be recognized as a union by one of the region's many mushroom growers has failed.
But it has made other people here in this affluent region freshly aware of the laborers and their tedious work and how the growers treat them.
Mushroom growers in the region, which bills itself as the "mushroom capital of the world," have faced intense public questioning and criticism about their treatment of the laborers.
They work year round for 10 or more hours a day, 6 and 7 days a week.


Filibuster Rises to Breathtaking New Heights of Irresponsibility
To the Editor:
The Senate's defeat of President Clinton's jobs bill, and its impending burial of campaign finance reform, have been depicted as tactical victories for its Republican minority.
What has escaped attention is the transformation of the Senate procedures that fueled these "victories."
Traditionally, the filibuster has been the instrument of regional interests, small states and ideological minorities bent on blocking adverse legislation or securing concessions from the Senate majority.
The ability to sustain such a filibuster, as in the case of the motor voter bill, described in "A Useless Filibuster" (editorial, May 11), depends on bargaining and negotiation among visible actors.


Bou Is Bi
LOVE ENTER By Paul Kafka. 326 pp. Boston: Houghton Mifflin Company.


A Few Alps, a Little Sibelius and 'Cliffhanger'
Once upon a time in Finland, a country not known for its thriving movie industry, two young men dreamed of turning into Hollywood film makers.
Each week they pored over that Hollywood film maker's instruction manual, Weekly Variety (which arrived by ship months after publication), and eventually divined that action films starring Chuck Norris were the keys to success.
The aspiring film makers -- 23-year-old Renny Harlin and 22-year-old Marcus Selin -- cooked up an adventure story, had it translated into English and sent the script to someone in America who represented Chuck Norris.
A few weeks later, Mr.
Norris wrote back, saying he'd be happy to star in their movie.
That was in 1983.
The result, "Born American," a cold-war thriller about vacationing Americans who stray across the Finnish-Russian border, was released in 1986 and featured not Mr.
Norris but his son Mike.
The producer was Mr.
Selin, and the director was Mr.
Harlin, both of whom had relocated to Hollywood.


Baseball Shirts Go Far Afield
Baseball's pin-striped shirt is moving off the field to a larger audience, but these new fans aren't exactly playing ball.
The weekend leisure set is turning the shirts into a fashion statement, while zipping through streets and parks on rollerblades and bikes or while walking in fund-raisers or on SoHo shopping sojourns.
The century-old design can easily be found in Major League Baseball boutiques, like the Yankee Clubhouse Shop on East 59th Street.
Some shirts bear designer logos, like DKNY, across the front in the manner of a uniform.
Even the names of rap groups, like Public Enemy, are emblazoned, in lettering that resembles the real thing.
The shirts are most often worn with the tails out and occasionally show up unbuttoned over a tank top.
One new leaguer even tied the tails of her shirt to bare her midriff.
But no matter how you wear it, the shirt still comes out looking like the all-American symbol it is.


Leaving Cuomo's Administration
Last week, three high-ranking officials in Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo's administration announced their resignations, bringing six the number of Mr.
Cuomo's top aides who have quit or said they planned to quit since February.
The departures have fueled speculation that Mr.
Cuomo is preparing to run for a fourth term and has told his staff that they should resign now or stay on until after November 1994.
Mr.
Cuomo's aides deny exerting such pressure, but they acknoweldge that he is making campaign preparations, even if he has not decided whether to run.
These are the resignations and the dates on which they were announced:


Great Men and Tiny Bubbles
FOR GOD, COUNTRY AND COCA-COLA The Unauthorized History of the Great American Soft Drink and the Company That Makes It.
By Mark Pendergrast.
Illustrated. 556 pp.
New York: Charles Scribner's Sons. $27.50.


The Strikeout Queen
California's MICHELE GRANGER whipped her wicked riseball past a bewildered but swinging Long Beach State outfielder Friday for the National Collegiate Athletic Association record for single-season strikeouts.


NAME-DROPPER
In "Name-Dropper" (Hers, May 2), Susan Ferraro states that it is irrelevant whether or not a woman keeps her name when she gets married, since the name inevitably came from her father.
To me, that's not the point.
My birth name bears no resemblance to the name my great-grandfather used when he entered this country, so I can't pretend that keeping it is enabling me to carry on my family's history.
However, it is the name by which people knew me for 24 years before I married, and it is part of my identity.
Try to imagine a man writing an essay about how changing his name helped him leave his parents behind and establish his individuality; it seems so absurd that one wonders why it's acceptable for a woman to do so.
JULIE E. HARRIS Jersey City


'Waving the Market' and Other Games
ADAM SMITH'S invisible hand is an elegant concept, but in the real world of markets the hands at work are often all too visible.
Bears and bulls spread rumors.
Price changes create their own momentum as traders decide it is foolish to fight the tape.
Short-term gyrations can be wildly irrational, more easily explained by the games traders play than by economic factors.
All that was evident in Wall Street's wild week, which saw the Dow Jones industrial average close over 3,500 for a couple of days before dropping 30 points on Friday.
Some suggested the rise amounted to a market forecast that economic growth was going to pick up soon, but economically sensitive issues lagged.
The market leaders were stocks that had been weak and were heavily shorted.


What Hath Beethoven Wrought!
Unfortunately, the word "Masterpiece" has fallen victim to inflation and devaluation.
It has been invoked so wastefully that it has become meaningless: anything is called a masterpiece as long as it creates some impact.
The word has also been vigorously dissected for ideological reasons: masterpieces, the argument goes, possess status, not inherent value.
The status is given by market forces and political priorities; the aura of grandeur is the result of a cultural con job.
The two approaches have the same effect: everything is seen as mere entertainment.
There is nothing like spending a few days with Beethoven's piano sonatas to clear the mind of such notions.
Recently, Carnegie Hall presented the pianist Alfred Brendel, one of the foremost interpreters of Beethoven, in a three-day workshop; he was assisted by the musicologist William Kinderman, whose own musical and intellectual facility was breathtaking.
In their discussions of these 32 compositions, the long-abused word "masterpiece" was gradually restored to life.


Once Past Improving the Economy, Clinton's Mandate Is Unclear, Poll Takers Say
Rival poll takers in last fall's election agree that Bill Clinton was elected because of the faltering economy, but they find no similar consensus about what mandate the American people expect him to fulfill in office.
Stan Greenberg, Mr.
Clinton's poll taker, told the American Association for Public Opinion Research here on Friday that the President's main difficulty with the public now was that "he's not breaking gridlock," the expectation when he was elected.
"The most important thing is for him to have successes," Mr.
Greenberg said.


Gertrude Jobe, Stephen Deckoff
Gertrude Mercedes Jobe, a senior account director at the New York public relations firm of Carins &amp; Associates, was married yesterday to Stephen Henry Deckoff, an associate director at the Bear Stearns Companies.
Justice Harold Baer Jr. officiated in his chambers in State Supreme Court in Manhattan.
Mrs.
Deckoff, 32, graduated from Skidmore College.
She is the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Edward B. Jobe of Princeton, N.J.
Her father is the chairman and chief executive of the American Reinsurance Corporation in Princeton.


A Vote, but No Winners, Many in Electorate Say
WHAT does it say about a city where, if the mayoral election were held today, "none of the above" might win?
In a New York Times/WCBS-TV News poll last week, only 47 percent of the respondents, or fewer than half, said they were generally satisfied with the candidates now running.
Another 43 percent said they would like someone else to enter the race.
And 11 percent said they just didn't know.


Medical Research Is Also Health Care
To the Editor:
It was heartening to read "A Five Dollar Cancer Cure" (Op-Ed, May 12) by Senator Tom Harkin.
He is right that research is the key to an effective and less costly health care system.
For too long, the Clinton Administration has underestimated the importance of medical research in the debate on health care reform.
Top scientists, including the Nobel laureate James Watson, have stated that within the decade, 80 percent of stroke can be eliminated; effective treatments can be found for such previously hopeless conditions as brain and spinal cord injuries; genetic therapies will be developed for disorders such as Tay-Sachs disease and Huntington's chorea, and treatments will be found to reverse neurological loss in Parkinson's and multiple sclerosis.
The National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke has requested $300 million more for fiscal year 1994 to achieve these and other advances quickly.


Carla Straniero, Robert Barone
Carla Nicole Straniero, an associate at the New York law firm of Satterlee Stephens Burke &amp; Burke, was married yesterday to Dr.
Robert Gerard Barone, an ophthalmologist in Garden City, L.I.
The Rev.
Paul L. Cioffi performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at the Church of St.
Ignatius Loyola in New York.
Mrs.
Barone and her husband, both 30, graduated from Georgetown University, she cum laude.
She received a law degree from Fordham University.
She is the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Charles A. Straniero of Tenafly, N.J.


EMILY DY SEE, STEPHEN MICHAEL GRAW
Emily Dy See, an editor, and Stephen Michael Graw, a doctoral candidate in development sociology at Cornell University, were married yesterday in Ithaca, N.Y.
Geshe Tenzin Rabgye officiated at the Tibetan Buddhist ceremony at Robert H. Treman State Park.
Mrs.
Graw, 33, worked until recently at The Manila Chronicle, an English-language daily newspaper there, where she served as an editor on the national, foreign and environmental desks.
She graduated from Maryknoll College in Manila.
She is a daughter of Lorenzo Co See and Pacita Cheng Dy of Manila, where her father is a cigarette distributor.


Decriminalization Would Just Boost Drug Use
To the Editor:
"Dethrone the Drug Czar" (Op-Ed, May 9), in which Whitman Knapp calls for decriminalizing drugs, proved poignant for me.
I read it soon after coming off an emergency room shift where I saw two cocaine-induced abortions and got to resuscitate a 15-year-old who suffered a massive cerebral hemorrhage due to cocaine use.
"Resuscitate" may be too strong a word.
What I actually did was hook up a brain-dead boy to life support, drill a hole in his head and try to comfort his hysterical mom while I negotiated him into our last remaining intensive care unit bed.
Judge Knapp doesn't seem to understand that the consumption of illegal drugs, not the commerce surrounding them, causes most of the drug-related misery and death.
This tragedy is visited not only upon the drug users, but also upon those who get in the way of their fists, knives, guns and cars.
Justice Department studies have shown that a majority of violent crimes are committed by people already intoxicated -- not by those seeking drugs.


Republicans Endorse Giuliani and Alter


Dance in Review
Cindy Marvell Bessie Schonberg Theater


House Union at Journal Revived by Salary Study
Reporters at The Wall Street Journal, who usually report about other people's money, have lately been doing some reporting about their own.
Their conclusion is that they are drastically underpaid, compared with competitors at other major publications.
That has stirred up something of an employee rebellion at the company.
The in-house union, which represents some 2,000 employees at The Journal and its parent, Dow Jones &amp; Company, recently presented its own salary study.


One Doctor's Choice Brings Fulfillment in Primary Care
Nine years ago, when Dr.
Mary Glynn Furlong told medical school interviewers that she wanted to go into primary care, many responded with disbelief: "They said, 'Why? It's a dead field,' " she recalled in a recent telephone interview.
But Dr.
Furlong held tight to her goal, choosing a medical school and residency that she felt would respect her ambitions, and today she is a general doctor with Community Health Plan, a large group practice in New Hyde Park, L.I., treating sprains and headaches and diabetes and heart disease.


Come-From-Behind Horse Goes to Head of Class for Belmont
Virginia Rapids, who didn't run in the Kentucky Derby or the Preakness or in any of the springtime classics of racing, sent a powerful signal yesterday to the 3-year-olds who did: He won the Peter Pan Stakes with a major move from last place to first and ran himself into front-line contention for the Belmont Stakes on June 5.
Since they started running the Peter Pan in 1940, only seven horses have swept both races.
But A.P.
Indy did it last year, and he thereby catapulted himself into a strong second half and eventually into the title of Horse of the Year.
And he didn't run in the Derby or Preakness either.
All This and Flair
The Class of '93 has been belittled as not terribly distinguished or, for that matter, terribly fast.
Sea Hero won the Derby, then Prairie Bayou won the Preakness.
So, nobody will sweep the Triple Crown for the 15th year in a row.
But major purses and major championships remain to be won in landmark races like the Belmont, the Travers and the Breeder's Cup.
And except for Prairie Bayou, nobody has asserted a strong claim to any of the year's honors.


Review/Country; Music and Some Mystique In a Willie Nelson Concert
Willie Nelson recently celebrated what he described from the stage of Radio City Music Hall on Saturday evening as "the big six-oh." Like everything else he said and sang, his acknowledgment that he had hit 60 was tossed off in a clipped, flinty voice that sounded at once grave and dismissive.
Earlier in the show, he had performed one of his finest early songs, the wistful and fatalistic "Funny, How Time Slips Away," with the same mixture of fervency and offhandedness.
That mixture goes to the heart of Mr.
Nelson's mystique.
He exudes a knowledge that has been so thoroughly assimilated that to philosophize in anything but an understated tone would be hysterical.
From the mid-1970's through the mid-80's, Mr.
Nelson was close to being the king of country music, although his sound has always stood starkly apart from the Nashville mainstream.
For nearly two decades, he and his band, the Family, have had a relation to the country-music mainstream that is similar to the Grateful Dead's to corporate rock.
They are a band of musical gypsies who do what they do, oblivious of pop fashion.


Debra Oaks, Marc Leaf
Debra Ann Oaks, the daughter of Robert and Judith Oaks of Waterloo, Iowa, was married yesterday to Marc Andrew Leaf, a son of Martin and Louise Leaf of Hastings-on-Hudson, N.Y.
Rabbi Edward Schecter performed the ceremony at the home of Mona Sarkin, the bridegroom's grandmother, in White Plains.
Ms.
Oaks is keeping her name.
She is an assistant vice president at FX Concepts, a foreign-currency trading and advisory concern in New York.


Mayor's Inconsistency on Two Parades Must Puzzle Catholics; At Central Synagogue
To the Editor:
As one of the principals in organizing and carrying out the salute to Israel program Sunday, May 9, at Central Synagogue of New York, I am astounded by the reports on television and in the newspapers.
It is as if the reporters were at one event and we were at another.
The salute to Israel program was sponsored by several organizations, including the Association of Reform Zionists of America, the New York Federation of Reform Synagogues, the Greater New York Federation of Temple Youth and Congregation Beth Simchat Torah.
Seven hundred people representing the Reform Jewish community, champions of the rights of gays and lesbians, concerned sensitive members of the clergy, leaders of the Conservative and Reconstructionist streams of Judaism and of Jewish secular organization, along with decent elected officials, were there to be counted on for support.


Review/Music; Heroics and Innocence: Philharmonic Romanticism
In the week just past, the New York Philharmonic managed to begin the Romantic movement all by itself.
On Tuesday at Avery Fisher Hall, "Der Freischutz" had the last of its opera-in-concert performances.
Thursday the orchestra returned with the Beethoven Ninth Symphony.
The concert will be repeated tomorrow night.
Very different pieces these, even though Weber's opera (finished in 1821) precedes the final version of the Ninth by only a year.
"Der Freischutz" remains locked in its own time, in a world long past.
But so eloquent is its spirit and imagination that it continues to refresh the receptive listener.
The Beethoven, on the other hand, travels with more ease, attaching itself to every succeeding Zeitgeist.
The symphony's half-mad extravagance, its bulldozing power and breathtaking ambition, its appeals to ecstasy: all offer a nigh-on indestructible common denominator for vast ranges of listeners.
No matter what new world the Ninth may be cast into, it finds a home.


Economic Calendar
Listed below are the scheduled release dates for major economic indicators this week.
Monday  None  Tuesday  Consumer Confidence . . .
May  Wednesday  Durable Goods . . .
April  Thursday  Weekly Jobless Claims  Friday  G.D.P. . . . 1st Qtr.


Dividend Meetings


INSIDE
Attack on Kurds Is Feared
President Saddam Hussein is preparing to attack Kurdish strongholds in northern Iraq in an attempt to reclaim that territory, Western diplomats in the area say.
Page A6.
Client-Broker Trust Violated
Rule-breaking by Prudential Securities brokers in Dallas cost clients millions, and Prudential executives looked the other way, documents and interviews suggest.
Page D1.
A Humbled Aga Khan
Even the Aga Khan, one of the world's richest men, has not been able to escape the severity of Europe's recession.
Page D1.
Insight From Marshall Files
Former Justice Thurgood Marshall's papers show that Roe v.
Wade, which established a right to abortion, was nearly overturned in 1989.
Page A10.
Mieczyslaw Horszowski Dies
The classical pianist, who grew from a child prodigy to an elder statesman of the keyboard in a career that spanned 90 years, was 100.
Page D9.
Knicks Get Edge on Bulls
The New York Knicks beat the Chicago Bulls, 98-90, in the Eastern Conference basketball championship series opener.
SportsMonday, C1.


Lisa Lieberman and Mitchell Korbey
Lisa Beth Lieberman, the daughter of David and Marcia Lieberman of Lawrenceville, N.J., was married yesterday to Mitchell Azar Korbey, a son of Kate Korbey of Chelmsford, Mass. and Mitchell A. Korbey Jr. of Marblehead, Mass.
Rabbi Dov Peretz Elkins officiated at the Princeton (N.J.) Jewish Center.
Ms.
Lieberman, 27, is keeping her name.
She is an administrative manager at the Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center in New York.
She graduated magna cum laude from Tufts University and received both an M.B.A. and a master's degree in public health from Columbia University.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; News vs. Intelligence: Business Week Aims to Make the Distinction in its New Campaign
MARKETERS of name-brand products are not the only ones seeking to build business by convincing the consumer that they are "adding value" to what they sell.
Business Week magazine, in a campaign that begins today, will assert to potential advertisers and readers that it goes "beyond news," all the way to providing "intelligence."


Bronx Parishioners Protest the Removal of Their Priest


Abroad at Home; The End of An Era
"It's the end of an era," a veteran diplomat said "the era of American leadership and power in Europe." He was commenting on President Clinton's acceptance of the European plan to set up "safe havens" for Muslims in Bosnia.
Just two weeks ago, on his European tour, Secretary of State Warren Christopher rejected the safe haven idea.
It would confine 1.2 million Muslims to the equivalent of ghettos, he said, and effectively ratify Serbian conquests elsewhere in Bosnia.


RESULTS PLUS
TENNIS Sampras and Chang Lead U.S. to Victory The United States, led by Pete Sampras and Michael Chang, won a fourth title at the World Team Cup yesterday, beating Germany by 3-0 in Dusseldorf, Germany.
Sampras, ranked No. 1 in the world, defeated Michael Stich, 6-4, 6-2, and Chang clinched the title by downing Carl-Uwe Steeb, 6-3, 7-6 (7-5), in the clay-court event.
In the meaningless doubles match, Richey Reneberg and Patrick McEnroe defeated Stich and Patrik Kuhnen, 6-4, 6-3.
The United States team received $450,000 from the $1.75 million team event, which was a warm-up for the French Open.
Despite being cheered by a crowd of 7,800, Steeb wasn't able to hang onto a 5-2 lead in the second-set tie breaker, as the ninth-ranked Chang reeled off five straight points.
Stich and Sampras, both serve-and-volley-specialists, played on even terms before the American capitalized on the only service-break opportunity to win the first set.
Sampras wore down the 10th-ranked Stich in the second set, breaking him twice for a 4-0 lead.
"That was my best match of the week," Sampras said, who lost only to Sergi Bruguera in the weeklong, round-robin event.(AP)


Rehabilitating Empire Blue Cross
The board of Empire Blue Cross and Blue Shield, asleep as the company's financial fortunes plummeted, has finally taken a corrective step by firing Albert Cardone, its chief executive.
Mr.
Cardone's imperious demeanor and lavish corporate life style annoyed Albany legislators and enraged customers hit with double-digit premium hikes.
Following a spate of embarrassing revelations, the board admitted that Mr.
Cardone had to go to allow Empire to repair its reputation.
Dismissing Mr.
Cardone won't by itself solve Empire's glaring problems: huge losses, poor customer service, and actual and threatened lawsuits with large corporate clients.
Empire needs an overhaul, not a mere shuffling of the names atop the corporate tote board.


Orville E. Beal, 84; Served as President Of Prudential in 60's
Orville E. Beal, who was president of the Prudential Insurance Company in Newark from 1962 until his retirement in 1969, died on Saturday at St.
Barnabas Hospital in Livingston, N.J.
He was 84 and lived in Florham Park, N.J.
The cause was heart failure, said his son, Bruce O. Beal.
Mr.
Beal had fallen at his home on Wednesday, he said.


In Suns-Sonics Series, Lakers May Get Assist
A 50-inch television set that is more rectangular than Charles Barkley is the centerpiece of the Phoenix Suns clubhouse.
It has a satellite feed, capacity for 500 channels, speakers that rattle the room and is intermittently tuned in to the Knicks.
Players pass the basketball more than they pass the remote control, and early last week, guard Negele Knight was flipping channels furiously with two thumbs.
Suddenly, upon seeing the "Knick City Dancers" on MTV, he slammed on its brakes.


Shooting Leaves Boy and 2 Others Hurt
Three people, including a 6-year-old boy, were shot yesterday afternoon in an exchange of gunfire between two men outside a Brooklyn housing project, the housing police said.
The wounds were not considered life threatening.
The boy, whose identity was withheld by the police, was walking with an aunt shortly after 2 P.M., outside 414 Baltic Street, a Gowanus Houses building, when two men began firing at each other, said a housing police spokeswoman, Amanita Duga-Carroll.
He was struck in the right arm.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Television; Pay-Per-View Scales Back Ambitions for 'Event' Shows
In a year when "event television" came to be a kind of rallying cry for the weary troops of the networks, the final episode of "Cheers" proved to be the most potent ammunition of all.
The audience of almost 100 million was as big as the audience for most Super Bowls.
And NBC, facing the toughest economic position of the networks, surely squeezed every possible penny from the opportunity.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball American League  DETROIT TIGERS -- Optioned Mark Grater, pitcher, to Toledo of the International League.
Recalled Kurt Knudsen, pitcher, from Toledo.
SEATTLE MARINERS -- Activated Dave Fleming, pitcher, from the 15-day disabled list.
Optioned John Cummings, pitcher, to Jacksonville of the Southern League.
National League  FLORIDA MARLINS -- Signed Kevin Elster, infielder, to a minor-league contract and assigned him to Edmonton of the Pacific Coast League.
PHILADELPHIA PHILLIES -- Optioned Mike Williams, pitcher, to Scranton-Wilkes Barre of the International League.
Purchased the contract of Tim Mauser, pitcher, from Scranton-Wilkes Barre.
Designated Cliff Brantley, pitcher, for assignment.
PITTSBURGH PIRATES -- Optioned Dennis Moeller, pitcher, to Buffalo of the American Association.
Purchased the contract of Mark Petkovsek, pitcher, from Buffalo.
SAN DIEGO PADRES -- Activated Craig Shipley, infielder, from the 15-day disabled list.
Optioned Darrel Sherman, outfielder, to Las Vegas of the Pacific Coast League.
SAN FRANCISCO GIANTS -- Placed Trevor Wilson, pitcher, on the 15-day disabled list.
Sent Dave Martinez, outfielder, to Phoenix of the Pacific Coast League on a rehabilitation assignment.
Tennis  UNITED STATES TENNIS ASSOCIATION -- Named Rodney Harmon and Carol Watson national coaches.


People
*
John P. Loughlin was named to the new position of vice president and publishing director at Traditional Home magazine and Meredith Publishing Services, Des Moines.
He was previously a senior vice president and group publisher at the Women's Magazines Group of The New York Times Company. *
Tom Carroll was named president at Rumrill-Hoyt Directory Management Services, Rochester, succeeding Robert Heberger, who left to become a director of directory services at Sigma Marketing Group Inc., Rochester.
Mr.
Carroll was previously a vice president and management director at FCB/Leber Katz Partners, New York.


A New School Investigation
Gov.
Mario Cuomo often complains that he doesn't know what New Yorkers get in return for all the money they spend on public schools.
Now he's appointed a special investigative commission to follow the dollars.
The state probably ought to take a closer look at how public schools operate.
But this commission must be careful not merely to duplicate the work of other commissions that have yet to see the fruits of their labors implemented.


Child Suffers Head Injuries
A 14-month-old girl was found Saturday night with a serious head injury in her uncle's Brooklyn apartment after the man became irrational and violent and had to be subdued by the authorities, the police said yesterday.
The uncle, identified as Eddie Logan, 38, of 60 Irving Place in the Fort Greene section, was taken to Kings County Medical Center for psychiatric observation.
No charges had been filed.


For Stein's Father, an Aura of Power
Andrew J. Stein's election as mayor would give the anachronism "city fathers" singular currency.
If he runs and wins, there might be room enough for just one city father in New York: his own, Jerry Finkelstein.
"I believe he will win, strangely enough," the 77-year-old Mr.
Finkelstein said the other day, fingering a cigar he had just plucked from a humidor the size of a small deep freeze in the cozy den of his Park Avenue triplex.
"If he does what he's been doing the last three weeks, he still has a chance. He's fighting hard now like he should have been. It's the old Andy back again."


Leader of Bosnia Denounces New Allied Plan to Limit Fighting
Angry and feeling betrayed by an American, Russian and European strategy aimed at curbing the fighting in this war-ravaged country, Bosnia's Muslim President today rejected the plan as "absolutely unacceptable."
The plan, announced in Washington on Saturday, effectively rules out international military intervention for the time being against the Bosnian Serbs, who control 70 percent of the country.


As Clinton's Problems Grow, So Do Hope and Unity of the Republican Party
Bill Clinton's problems in the early months of his Presidency have done wonders for the morale and unity of the Republican Party, which emerged from the 1992 campaign not only defeated but also divided and perplexed about its future.
With the President's approval rating below 50 percent in some polls, Republicans are starting to sound cocky.


Review/Dance; 2 Ballerinas' Approaches To Dualities Of a Swan
"Swan Lake," with a dual role that symbolizes good and evil, is a ballerina's dream, and both Susan Jaffe and Nina Ananiashvili, a guest from the Bolshoi Ballet, made a vision come true in two separate and superb performances with American Ballet Theater over the weekend.
Jeremy Collins, the brilliantly characterized prince to each swan queen and her malevolent double, contributed to the excitement that accompanied the return of the ballet's four-act version to the repertory after four years.
Amid the ritual bouquet-throwing at the curtain calls (Mr. Collins acted like a gallant flower boy, gathering up the posies thrown by fans at each ballerina's feet), the term "19th-century war horse" was also tossed out and overheard.
Yet as far as this blessedly straightforward production by David Blair is concerned, the term resonates positively.
Even a horse, or charger, used in war, is experienced; a classic like "Swan Lake" demands the authority that only the best of ballerinas can radiate.


Genichiro Inokuma, Abstract Painter, 90
Genichiro Inokuma, a Japanese painter who lived in New York from 1955 to 1975, died last Monday at St.
Luke's International Hospital in Tokyo, the Kyodo News Service reported.
He was 90.
Mr.
Inokuma became known in the United States for abstract paintings he did while living in New York.
Earlier in his career, he made a name in Japan for figurative works.


At Elite Russian School, O Is for Openness
When she went to school, Nina Vasilyevna recalled, nobody questioned the teacher.
"Now," she said, "my third graders not only ask me about Moses and Stalin, they ask me about love. They even criticize my makeup."
Next door down, Olga Arkadyevna's history classroom was decorated with reproductions of Russian icons.
In the next classroom, Robert Friel of Stoneham, Mass., was discussing "stream of consciousness" and Robert Frost with his 11th-grade English class.


Abbe Uchitel, Scott Maron
Abbe Lynn Uchitel, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Mikel R. Uchitel of Springfield, N.J., was married yesterday to Scott Michael Maron, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Arthur Maron of West Orange, N.J.
Rabbi Stanley Asekoff performed the ceremony at the Livingston (N.J.) Country Club.
Mrs.
Maron, 25, and her husband, 29, graduated from the University of Pennsylvania, she summa cum laude.
She also received a master's degree in counseling psychology and elementary education from Penn.


Market Place; A Federal Study of the Airlines Offers Turbulence for Investors
THE 15-member panel appointed by President Clinton and Congress to resuscitate the loss-plagued airline industry is perhaps best described as a double-edged sword with no handle -- it may help, it may hurt, or it may prove too unwieldy to accomplish much of anything.
The commission, which has a life of 90 days, meets for the first time today in Washington.
It will be an interesting few months for investors, who have sent airline stocks on a dizzying ride of late.
Shares of American, United and Delta, for example, rallied in April on reports of traffic increases and capacity cuts, only to drift back down on signs of weak business in certain markets.


World Economies


Acquittal in Doorstep Killing of Japanese Student
A jury today found a local meat market manager not guilty in the fatal shooting of a Japanese exchange student, ending a case that exposed major differences between the attitudes of Japanese and Americans toward guns.
The 12-member jury took just over three hours to acquit the defendant, Rodney Peairs, 31, of manslaughter in the killing of 16-year-old Yoshihiro Hattori last October.


Donna Farber, David A. Bell
Dr.
Donna Lynn Farber, a postdoctoral research fellow in the department of immunobiology at Yale University in New Haven, and Dr.
David Avrom Bell, an assistant professor of history there, were married yesterday.
Rabbi Sally Finestone performed the ceremony at the American Academy of Arts and Sciences in Cambridge, Mass.
Dr.
Farber, 29, is keeping her name.
She graduated from the University of Michigan, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa, and received her Ph.D. in biochemistry from the University of California at Santa Barbara.


Microsoft Soft-Pedaling Its Latest
A case of opening-night jitters pervades the sprawling corporate headquarters in Redmond, Wash., which has become the world's software capital.
On the verge of introducing its most ambitious software product yet, Windows NT, the Microsoft Corporation has found itself in an unusual position: It is trying to ratchet back the expectations of the computer industry and computer users, who have come to expect blockbuster products with clockwork regularity from the world's dominant software publisher.


Christian Sects in Kurdish Lands Dwindle
To the Editor:
It is time someone reminded William Safire ("The Kurdish Example," column, May 13) about the ethnic cleansing under way in the Kurdish areas of the Middle East.
In the last 10 years, the Kurds have driven tens of thousands of Assyrians and Chaldeans into exile, and yet Western commentators persist in their naive belief that the Kurds are the only oppressed people in the region.
The Chaldeans and Assyrians, among the earliest converts to Christianity, have lived in the north of Iraq and southeast of Turkey for almost four millennia.
They still speak Aramaic, the language of Jesus.
At the beginning of the 1980's there were 25,000 Chaldean Christians living around Mardin in the predominantly Kurdish southeast of Turkey.
Now there are only 200 or 300.
Churches and monasteries in existence more than 1,000 years have been forced to close forever.
These people left because the Kurds told them they had no future in a land the Kurds would soon control.
And with establishment of the so-called safe haven just across the border, the Chaldean and Assyrian Christians of northern Iraq have been driven to the same conclusion.
Since the Persian Gulf war tens of thousands of them have fled, mostly to Turkey and Jordan.
The United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees in Ankara pretends these Christian peoples have nothing to fear from the Kurds (who massacred them along with Armenians early in this century), from Saddam Hussein or from the rising tide of Islam.
Western countries support this line, despite the hundreds who have died trying to enter the European Community illegally.
The protection zone in northern Iraq may save the Kurds, but it does nothing to help the large numbers of Christians still living there.
Northern Iraq -- like the rest of that unhappy country -- is composed of minorities: Kurds, Turkomans, Yezidis, Assyrians, Chaldeans, and they all need Western protection.
Mr.
Safire is absolutely right to demand that the West should do more than it is doing, but without linking this aid to safeguards for all these peoples, the West will simply be facilitating in Northern Iraq the ethnic cleansing it condemns in Bosnia.
ALASTAIR BRUTON  London, May 18, 1993


Sports of The Times; Winning Ones You're Supposed to Win
THE Knicks were supposed to win, and they did.
John Starks wasn't supposed to outplay Michael Jordan, but he did.
Perhaps the heaviest burden on any good team is winning games that it's supposed to win.
Some teams never do.
It's a different burden than winning when you're not supposed to win.
And as the Knicks approached yesterday's opener of the Eastern Conference finals with the Chicago Bulls in the cauldron of Madison Square Garden, this burden hung not only on them but in the air.


Ann Zetoony, Jonathan Cheris
Ann Meryl Zetoony, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Victor S. Zetoony of Bayside, Queens, was married yesterday to Jonathan Alan Cheris, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Leon J. Cheris of Port Washington, L.I.
Rabbi Martin S. Rozenberg officiated at the Fresh Meadows (Queens) Jewish Center.
Mrs.
Cheris, 28, is a lawyer with the family court litigation unit of the New York City Office of Legal Affairs in Jamaica, Queens.
She graduated from the State University at Binghamton and received a law degree from Hofstra University.


Israelis Debate Army's Rights Record in Uprising
At a military court in Jaffa last week, an Israeli Army officer listened impassively as a judge sentenced him to three months in jail and three months of work detail for killing a 12-year-old Palestinian boy in the occupied West Bank in November.
The court session was brief.
In a matter-of-fact tone, the judge reviewed how the officer, a member of an elite undercover unit, had shot the boy, Amjad Jaber, in the back while chasing stone-throwers who had pelted cars on a highway north of Jerusalem.


Esiason, in Interview, Says Son Has Cystic Fibrosis
In an interview on ESPN yesterday, Jets quarterback Boomer Esiason disclosed publicly that his 2-year-old son, Gunnar, has cystic fibrosis, a congenital disease that attacks the body's mucous glands and causes respiratory problems.
"I will give anything in the world to change places with my son right now," Esiason said in the interview.


Review/Opera; 'Mose,' a Rarity by Rossini
For a composer of bel canto operas, the story of Moses and the Exodus was not ideal plot material.
Granted, it offers drama and special-effects possibilities, and when Rossini composed "Mose in Egitto," in 1818, it was a way around prohibitions against presenting secular theater works in Naples during Lent.
Still, the story lacks a strong-willed female character at the center of the conflict, a considerable operatic deficiency.
Cecil B. DeMille faced the same problem in making "The Ten Commandments," and so manufactured a romance between Moses and Pharaoh's wife.
Rossini's solution was similar, but the composer and his librettist, Andrea Leone Tottola, put the romance at arms length.
In the work's final (1827) version, the romance is between Moses's niece Anaide and Pharaoh's son Amenofi, both invented for this work.


Lisa Flaxman, Jonathan Martel
Lisa Judith Flaxman, a daughter of Drs.
B.
Allen and Rhoda Flaxman of Seekonk, Mass., was married yesterday to Jonathan Stuart Martel, a son of Dr.
William Martel and Rhoda Martel of Ann Arbor, Mich.
Rabbi Leslie Guterman performed the ceremony at Temple Beth-El in Providence, R.I.
Ms.
Flaxman, 27, is keeping her name.
She is a law clerk at the Washington law firm of Arnold &amp; Porter and a law student at Georgetown University.
She graduated from Brown University.


Dance in Review
'Symphonie Concertante' American Ballet Theater Metropolitan Opera House


Mother Hoped to Win Custody Of Boy Who Was Later Killed
The biological mother of a 5-year-old boy who was beaten and strangled, then found dead in a trash compactor in Brooklyn, said yesterday that just a few days before her son was killed she had been excited at the thought of regaining custody of him.
The 20-year-old woman, Kaaron Blackledge, said the child's legal guardian, who she said is her aunt, had even called her recently and instructed her to go to the courthouse in Brooklyn to collect the necessary legal documents.


Adm. Sir Mark Pizey, World War II Hero, 93
Sir Mark Pizey, a British admiral who led a famed Royal Navy pursuit of three Nazi warships in World War II and later became Commander in Chief of the Indian Navy, died on Monday in Burnham-on-Sea in southwestern England, British newspapers reported.
He was 93.
In 1942, Sir Mark commanded a flotilla of six aging destroyers that made a dogged but vain attempt to stop the battle cruisers Scharnhorst and Gneisenau and the heavy cruiser Prinz Eugen from completing a dash to safety from the French Atlantic port of Brest through the Straits of Dover to Germany's western coast.


Dozens of New Equity Issues Are Expected This Week
The following equity offerings are expected this week:
American Safety Razor Co., Staunton, Va., 5 million shares, 4 million in the United States Smith Barney, Harris Upham &amp; Co.
Audio/Video Affiliates Inc., Dayton, Ohio, 2 million shares. Prudential Securities.


Allies Seem to Hope Serbs Won't Attack
The peacekeeping troops that would protect safe havens for Muslim civilians in Bosnia under a new allied plan would have the capability to respond to small, localized attacks, but are unlikely to be large enough to respond to a determined Serbian assault, Western officials said today.
Under the "division of labor" worked out over the weekend by Washington and its allies, peacekeeping troops from Western Europe and Canada would assume the primary burden of defending the Muslim citizens of Srebrenica, Gorazde, Zepa, Tuzla, Bihac and Sarajevo against Serbian attack.


Mayor's Inconsistency on Two Parades Must Puzzle Catholics
To the Editor:
Last March, Mayor David N. Dinkins and New York City Council President Andrew Stein loudly refused to participate in the St.
Patrick's Day parade.
They made a major issue over the position taken by the Ancient Order of Hibernians in excluding the Irish Lesbian and Gay Organization from marching under their own banner.
The Mayor was labeled by many as anti-Catholic in refusing to march in a parade honoring a Roman Catholic saint.
Some gave him the benefit of the doubt, believing that his decision was a matter of conscience.


Karen E. S. Fein, J. C. McAlhany 3d
Karen Elizabeth S. Fein, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Kenneth Fein of New Canaan, Conn., was married yesterday to Joseph Carlisle McAlhany 3d, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
McAlhany Jr. of Greenville, S.C.
The Rev.
Lawson Elmer Jolly Jr., a Baptist minister who is an uncle of the groom, officiated at the Talmadge Hill Community Church in Darien, Conn.


Marshall Papers Reveal Court Behind the Scenes
The papers of Thurgood Marshall, the late Supreme Court Justice, show that Roe v.
Wade, the 1973 ruling that established a constitutional right to abortion, was nearly overturned in a 1989 case with three Justices proposing a dissent saying, "Roe no longer survives," according to a news article today in The Washington Post.
The attack on the abortion-rights ruling, led by Chief Justice William H. Rehnquist, centered on a case involving a Missouri law that imposed restrictions on women seeking abortion.
But in the waning days of the Court's term, Justice Sandra Day O'Connor would not accept Justice Rehnquist's sweeping language.
As a result, a majority upheld the Missouri law, but without overturning Roe.
Battle Over Roe
The behind-the-scenes battle over the Missouri abortion law has long been surmised, but the Marshall papers, disclosed today in two articles in The Washington Post, describe the struggle in vivid detail as the majority position evolved in a paper swirl of draft opinions and dissents.


Carol Watson, Gary Mucciolo
Carol Lynne Watson, a social worker the Parkmed medical clinic in New York, and Dr.
Gary L. Mucciolo, an obstetrician and gynecologist, also in New York, were married there yesterday.
The Rev.
David Denison Cockcroft performed the Presbyterian ceremony at the Water Club.
Ms.
Watson-Mucciolo, 38, graduated from the University of South Florida.
She is a daughter of the late Rev.
James D. Watson and the late Alice Arnold Watson.
Her father, a civil rights leader, was a pastor and the New York regional head of the United Presbyterian Church.
Her mother was the executive director of the Jamaica Service Program for Older Adults, which provided services to senior citizens in Jamaica, Queens.


Tiny Liberty Takes On Cable Giant in Manhattan
Every weekday for the last two months, the Liberty Cable Company has advertised on the front page of this newspaper a Manhattan apartment building that has chosen Liberty's cable service over that of what it calls the "cable monopoly" -- a reference to Time Warner's two cable systems in Manhattan.
Liberty Cable -- like the print in its ads -- is diminutive.
It has acquired only 12,000 subscribers in the last two years.
But while it is too tiny to challenge the dominance of Time Warner's two systems, Liberty is proving it can be an annoyance to the media giant.


Some New Yorkers on Probation Will Begin Reporting to Machines
In a radical overhaul of the traditional probation system, thousands of New York City's least risky novice criminals will soon be monitored electronically by simply reporting to automated kiosks, freeing probation officers to provide intensive therapy sessions of four hours a week and more to the most violence-prone offenders.
The change is a kind of triage, an attempt to single out the most threatening cases for the resources of probation services -- society's often overlooked but critical last chance to intercept fledgling felons before they graduate to a prison sentence.


Mieczyslaw Horszowski Is Dead; Pianist, 100, Mastered the Greats
Mieczyslaw Horszowski, a pianist whose performances were admired for their elegance, reflectiveness and clarity of musical intent in a career that lasted more than nine decades, died on Saturday at his home in Philadelphia.
He was 100.
John G. Zawadziski, a friend of the family, said the cause was heart failure.


Market Place; A Federal Study of the Airlines Offers Turbulence for Investors
THE 15-member panel appointed by President Clinton and Congress to resuscitate the loss-plagued airline industry is perhaps best described as a double-edged sword with no handle -- it may help, it may hurt, or it may prove too unwieldy to accomplish much of anything.
The commission, which has a life of 90 days, meets for the first time today in Washington.
It will be an interesting few months for investors, who have sent airline stocks on a dizzying ride of late.
Shares of American, United and Delta, for example, rallied in April on reports of traffic increases and capacity cuts, only to drift back down on signs of weak business in certain markets.


Aspin Resuming Travels, and Tennis Game
Two months after having a pacemaker implanted, Defense Secretary Les Aspin is setting off on two European trips and playing tennis in his spare time.
Mr.
Aspin's doctors, while pleasantly surprised at the Secretary's recovery so far, are fretting over his insistence on playing occasional tennis games against their advice.


Claire Berkowitz, Daniel Goldstein
Claire S. Berkowitz, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Henry D. Berkowitz of Villanova, Pa., was married yesterday to Daniel M. Goldstein, a son of Dr.
Judith H. Berg of North Miami Beach, Fla., and Richard Goldstein of New York.
Rabbi Max Hausen performed the ceremony at Greystone Hall, a historic house in West Chester, Pa.
Ms.
Berkowitz, 27, is keeping her name.
She teaches social studies at Cholla High School in Tucson, Ariz.
She and her husband graduated from the University of Pennsylvania.


Gathering to Celebrate Special-Birth Miracles
SHE is only 4 years old, but Lindsay Powers is well aware that hers was a special birth.
"What happened when mommy wanted to have a baby but couldn't?" her mother, Donna Powers, asked her.
"What did mommy do?"


Anti-Tax Fervor Comes Rolling Down the Plains
It should come as no surprise that two of the leaders of the revolt within President Clinton's own party against his economic package are Oklahomans: Senator David L. Boren and Representative Dave McCurdy.
Oklahoma voters were the first in the nation to impose term limits on their state legislators.
In a rage after the oil-price collapse of the 1980's led to huge tax increases, they approved a new constitutional amendment: no state tax increases without a direct vote of the people, period.


G.O.P. Seeks Alternatives To Badillo, Says Giuliani
Rudolph W. Giuliani, the Republican candidate for Mayor of New York City, said last night that the growing frustration of party leaders waiting for Herman Badillo to decide whether to run for Comptroller as a Republican had led party officials to begin considering other candidates.
Mr.
Giuliani spoke to reporters following a meeting of more than 100 Republican county leaders after they gave their official blessing to Susan D. Alter, the Democratic Councilwoman from Brooklyn, to cross party lines as Mr.
Giuliani's choice to run for City Council President, a job to be renamed Public Advocate.


Better Than Nothing on Bosnia
After rejecting President Clinton's plan to help the Bosnian Government defend itself, Britain, France, Russia and Spain have won American agreement to a less ambitious proposal.
The new plan, if it can be implemented, is less than adequate but better than nothing.
The plan would station some 15,000 European and Canadian ground troops under a U.N. flag to deter Bosnian Serb attacks against six U.N.-designated safe havens.
That would concentrate outside forces where they are most needed -- in the beleaguered cities of Sarajevo, Bihac, Gorazde, Srebrenica, Tuzla and Zepa.
These cities are now home to 1.2 million Bosnian Muslims, roughly two-thirds of the surviving Muslim population.


Cyclists Tour the Boroughs to Benefit a Youth Hostel


G.O.P. Rivals Face Apathy, Then Florio
After nearly six months of campaigning by Cary Edwards, James L. Wallwork and Christine Todd Whitman, the primary race for the Republican gubernatorial nomination has entered its final three weeks with a rush of radio and television advertisements, a stream of barbed exchanges and scant evidence that any of it has stirred the public's interest.
It may be nearing the end of a frustrating political season for Mr.
Edwards and Mr.
Wallwork, who began their campaigns trying to overtake a huge lead in the polls by Mrs.
Whitman but still trail her by double digits with just over two weeks before the June 8 primary.


Bridge
A charity game that may be the world's oldest and largest was played Thursday night at the Harmonie Club, at 4 East 60th Street in Manhattan.
It was the 30th U.J.A.-Federation Games, and it generated about $40,000 for Jewish charities.
All of them have been organized by Tubby Stayman, who handed checks for services rendered to the three regular tournament directors, Sol Weinstein, Bob Katz and Bob Goldwater.
The checks were, as always, promptly returned to her as donations, although this time Katz demanded a raise.


A Spotlight, a Fly Ball, A Grimace by Bonilla
The New York baseball spotlight is indefatigable in its tracking of Bobby Bonilla.
It knows no logic, feels no pity.
It can't be reasoned with or run from.
And so again and again, it finds Bonilla.
There are the odd moments when that spotlight warms instead of burns the right fielder for the Mets.
More often than not, though, the spotlight has exposed Bonilla's incompleteness as a player and his emotional vulnerability.


New Awards For Creativity
Established brands and new talent will be honored by two organizations as they create awards to recognize achievement in marketing and advertising.
Absolut, Coca-Cola and Nike will become the first brands to be named to the new Marketing Hall of Fame, the New York chapter of the American Marketing Association said last week.
The organization's Effie awards are bestowed annually in recognition of effective advertising; honorees for the Hall of Fame will be drawn from brands that have shown sustained success and represent innovative, trail-blazing marketing.
The three brands will be honored at the organization's 25th anniversary Effie awards ceremony in New York on June 10.


CHRONICLE
A year after his final appearance on May 22, 1992, as host of "The Tonight Show" on NBC, JOHNNY CARSON is scheduled to be honored today by the Center of Communication, the nonprofit educational organization that was created 13 years ago by Dr.
FRANK STANTON, former president of CBS, to help prepare a new generation for the communications industry.
Mr.
Carson will receive the center's annual Communication Award at a luncheon at the Plaza Hotel.
For the occasion, the three major networks are sending their respective chiefs, ROBERT C. WRIGHT of NBC, DANIEL B. BURKE of ABC and LAURENCE A. TISCH of CBS.


Kiss of a Giddy G.M.: Magic Snags No. 1 Pick
There on stage, before dozens of television cameras, reporters and photographers, stood Pat Williams, kissing a little blue Ping-Pong ball as if the two had been in love since grade school.
He kissed and kissed and kissed, puckering without shame.
For a brief moment, the Orlando Magic general manager had been transformed into a giddy little boy and, well, who could blame him?
Moments earlier, Orlando overcame tremendous odds in yesterday's National Basketball Association draft lottery to earn the No. 1 pick in the June 30 draft.


G.M. Cites Requests By Lopez
Just days before resigning from the General Motors Corporation, Jose Ignacio Lopez de Arriortua attended top-level G.M. strategy meetings in Europe and requested copies of all reports and written material presented there, G.M. executives said over the weekend.
Their comments provided the first details about their decision to file a criminal complaint against the former head of the company's global purchasing operation.
G.M. executives say they believe that Mr.
Lopez, knowing he was about to resign on March 10 to take a job with Volkswagen A.G., planned to take the copies and other important documents with him.
G.M. officials said the documents contained the prices the auto maker pays for parts and materials, their specifications and long-range schedules for the introduction of new models in Europe.


Spend $2,500, Save $10
As Congress considers President Clinton's economic plan, the focus is on reducing the deficit, spending less and increasing investments that create jobs.
But there's another deficit we're addressing as well, the trust deficit: a widespread belief Government simply can't be trusted to spend tax dollars wisely.
To eliminate that credibility gap, we're working to develop a new customer-service contract with the American people that has a simple goal.
We want to make the Government work better and cost less.
Since President Clinton asked me to lead the National Performance Review -- a six-month comprehensive study of every Government agency -- I've heard from thousands of Federal workers and private citizens.


Pippen Tells Critics He Played His Role
The evenness of Scottie Pippen's low-pitched voice, the lack of emotion in his eyes and the confidence in his words after his team's first playoff defeat this spring all seemed to combine to form his own message.
Let the others attempt to place him on trial.
Let less-experienced players, without championship rings, without Dream Team status, try to maintain that the physical nature of the series between the Knicks and the Bulls will somehow determine the place Pippen occupies among the leading players in the game.
Let them say what they want.


Amy D. Cohen, John P. Burke
Amy Deborah Cohen and John Patrick Burke, vice presidents at Barclays Bank in New York, were married yesterday at the home of the bridegroom's parents in New Canaan, Conn.
The Rev.
Kevin T. Royal, a Roman Catholic priest, performed the ceremony.
Mrs.
Burke, 30, graduated cum laude from the State University at Albany.
She is a daughter of Rhoda G. Cohen of Forest Hills, Queens, and Herman Cohen of Santa Rosa, Calif.
Her father, who is retired, was a certified public accountant in New York.
Her mother is an elementary-school teacher at Public School 144 in Forest Hills.


Corrections
A chart in Business Day on Saturday with an article about warehouse shopping clubs included incorrect entries for two companies in the column labeled "average sales per store." The entry for BJ's Wholesale Club should have been $48 million; the figure for Sam's Club was not available.


Lisa J. Tanner, R. B. Whitestone
Lisa J. Tanner, the daughter of William and Mitzi H. Tanner of Great Neck, L.I., was married there yesterday to Randall B. Whitestone, a son of Dorsey and Patricia F. Whitestone of Branford, Conn.
Judge Irving Tenenbaum, the village justice of Great Neck, officiated at the home of the bride's parents.
Mrs.
Whitestone, 32, is a product manager at Chemical Bank in New York.
She graduated from the University of California at Berkeley, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa.
She and her husband, 32, received M.B.A. degrees from the University of Pennsylvania.
Her father, who is retired, was an executive of regulatory review with the New York Stock Exchange.
Her mother retired as a guidance counselor with the New York City Public Schools.


White House Memo; On Washington High Wire, Clinton Loses His Sure Step
The White House is a strange place.
Politicians who move in often seem to lose track of how the public feels.
But that was not supposed to happen to Bill Clinton and his band of MTV-bred advisers with their quicksilver reflexes.
During the Presidential campaign, Mr.
Clinton was hailed by friend and foe as a rare, natural politician who would never lose the populist touch.
But now the biggest question consuming Washington, and particularly Democrats, is this: How could such a political thoroughbred seem to keep stumbling out of the starting gate in a race for which he seemed to have been bred?


Susan Leavitt, Evan P. Cohn
Susan Celia Leavitt, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Julian Leavitt of Longmeadow, Mass., was married yesterday to Evan Paul Cohn, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Myron Cohn of New York.
Rabbi Ely Rosenzweig officiated at Kodimoh Synagogue in Springfield, Mass.
Mrs.
Cohn is a travel agent at the Vacation Outlet in Boston.
She graduated from the University of Vermont and received a master's degree in journalism from Northeastern University.
Her father is the president and chief executive of Sweet Life Foods Inc. in Suffield, Conn.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
A growing shortage of doctors willing to practice general medicine has left some hospitals and health-maintenance organizations desperate for qualified candidates and, in the long term, stands as a major obstacle to overhauling the nation's health-care system.  [ Page A1. ]
Oklahoma is a hotbed of opposition to President Clinton's proposed energy tax.
There is also deep skepticism among the state's voters that tax increases in the President's economic package will ever be used, as he pledges, to cut the deficit.  [ A12. ] International
Exploiting the North American Free Trade Agreement is the aim of cocaine smugglers working with Colombian drug cartels, according to United States intelligence and drug-enforcement officials.
The Mexican smugglers are starting to set up factories, warehouses and trucking companies in Mexico to exploit the flood of cross-border commerce that is expected under the pact, these officials say.  [ A1. ]


Gathering to Celebrate Special-Birth Miracles
SHE is only 4 years old, but Lindsay Powers is well aware that hers was a special birth.
"What happened when mommy wanted to have a baby but couldn't?" her mother, Donna Powers, asked her.
"What did mommy do?"


Fire Routs 100 Families in Westchester


Accounts
*
Times Mirror Cable Television, Irvine, Calif., to Grey Entertainment &amp; Media, Burbank, Calif., and New York, for its national advertising and promotion account, with billings estimated at $4.5 million.
Grey Entertainment was awarded the account after a review that also included the incumbent, Salvati, Montgomery, Sakoda, Costa Mesa, Calif., and three other agencies. *
Micrografx, Richardson, Tex., to Joiner Rowland Serio Koeppel, Dallas, to handle advertising for the manufacturer of graphics software for personal computers, previously handled in-house.
Billings were not disclosed.


Decriminalization Would Just Boost Drug Use; Cali Cartel's Threat
To the Editor:
Over the last few years we have lost our focus on illegal drugs as a national security threat.
Editorials increasingly demand a United States counternarcotics policy that attempts to solve the drug problem solely through domestic actions.
Increased resources for drug prevention and treatment can pay big dividends, and should be pursued.
But we also need a focused foreign counternarcotics policy.
The news that Gilberto Rodriguez-Orjuela, the Cali cartel drug kingpin, ordered the killing in New York City of Manuel de Dios Unanue to silence his writings about the cartel (front page, May 11) should serve as a wake-up call to all Americans that an isolationist counternarcotics strategy would be a tragic mistake.


Public Relations Executive Hired
John Scanlon, the longtime public relations executive, is changing his base of operations.
Mr.
Scanlon, 58, will join the Abernathy/MacGregor Group Inc., a financial and crisis communications agency in New York, as a partner, effective June 1.
At that time, the agency will become Abernathy/MacGregor/Scanlon.


Bear Stearns President Addresses St. John's U.
James E. Cayne, president of Bear Stearns, delivered the main address at the first of two undergraduate commencement exercises at St.
John's University yesterday in Alumni Hall.
It was the 123d commencement celebrated at the Queens campus.
In the first ceremony 674 undergraduate degrees were conferred on students in the College of Business Administration and Allied Health Professions.
Mr.
Cayne received an honorary Doctor of Commercial Science degree.


In Yonkers, an Effort to Take Tarnish Off Badges
Physically, this city's bunker-like police headquarters and its ornate City Hall sit facing each other on separate grassy hills.
But the character of the police and of the city administration have never been as separate as the geography might suggest.
Until recently, officials here say, promotions to detective or assignments to leisurely beats could be lubricated by "kissing the ring" of the Democratic or Republican leader with the most sway at City Hall.
One Democratic boss held court at restaurants like Pagliaccio's and Reggia Morelli, and candidates for police captaincies regularly dropped by his table along with other job seekers.


Islanders, Swinging Back, Want Penalty on Canadiens
The Islanders have formally requested a league review of a stick-swinging incident in Game 4 of the Stanley Cup semifinals Saturday night at Nassau Coliseum.
Late in the Islanders' 4-1 victory over the Montreal Canadiens, Lyle Odelein of Montreal hit Ray Ferraro of the Islanders in the side of the head with his stick, knocking Ferraro to the ice for several minutes and putting him out of the game.


CHRONICLE
The family made a fortune in natural resources.
And when Peter Putnam, the last family member, died six years ago at the age of 62, a promise he made with his mother, who died in 1983 at the age of 93, finally became reality: a gift of $37 million to the Nature Conservancy, which buys and protects lands that harbor endangered plants and animals.
In the May-June issue of its magazine, the nonprofit conservancy said the gift was the largest contribution it had ever received, and from an unusual source: a night watchman.


A Celebration of African Dance


Creditors Chip Away at Aga Khan's Legend
With his thoroughbred horses and luxury resort in Sardinia, with friends like Giovanni Agnelli of Fiat and his appetite for the best yachts, the Aga Khan has long been a symbol of wealth.
In Italy, the country where he has concentrated much of his business, "ricco come l'Aga Khan" -- "rich as the Aga Khan" -- is an expression frequently heard.
But in a striking illustration of the severity of the recession afflicting Europeans and the fracturing of Italy's close-knit business establishment, even the Aga Khan has come unstuck.
Creditor banks moved on Friday to seize the assets of his publicly traded Italian holding company after it missed a payment on its increasing debt.


Paris Fashions Clay Into Tough Champions
Although it boasts nothing less than Paris in the spring as its backdrop, there are some unesthetic aspects that need to be conquered by any conqueror of the French Open, which gets under way today at Roland Garros Stadium.
The contestants of the year's second of four Grand Slam tournaments not only compete atop a surface composed of grit, red brick grit to be precise, but need to have that substance in abundance internally if they expect to slip, slide and slam their way through two weeks of clay-court tennis.


Tenri Journal; Emperor's Buried Secrets: No Digging Allowed
A few feet from what looks like a wooded hillock, amid gently rolling persimmon orchards in western Japan, Hiroaki Matsumoto has made one of the more important archeological discoveries here in years.
Laboriously scraping away the earth from what had been a moat surrounding an ancient burial mound, his team has found shards of distinctive funerary figures suggesting that the huge keyhole-shaped tomb may be 1,600 years old, a century or so older than was previously thought.


Books of The Times; The Sixth Episode in James Clavell's Asian Saga
Gai-Jin By James Clavell  1,038 pages. Delacorte Press. $27.50.


Social Security Stamps
To the Editor:
"Be Fair to Domestics" (editorial, May 14) notes the need to preserve Social Security benefits for domestic workers, who often have multiple employers.
I suggest creation of Social Security stamps, which could be available in varying denominations at post offices.
Domestic workers (or others working for multiple employers) could apply for a Social Security stamp book, with pages for each of the dollar denominations of Social Security stamps.


Treasury Financings Listed For This Week's Auctions
The Treasury's schedule of financings this week begins with today's regular weekly auction of three- and six-month bills.
A two-year note auction follows tomorrow, a five-year note auction on Wednesday and a one-year bill auction on Thursday.
Traders said that by the close of the New York cash market on Friday the rate on the three-month bill outstanding was 2.99 percent and the rate on a six-month bill 3.11 percent.
And in when-issued trading the two-year note was offered at a price to yield 4.17 percent, with the five-year note at a price to yield 5.35 percent.
The one-year bill was trading at a discount rate of 3.35.


Review/Theater; A Flock of 'What Ifs?' Comes Home to Roost
In the multicultural American theater, A. R. Gurney may be the last playwright who writes full time about that quaint old bird, the New England WASP.
Maybe it's an unfashionable calling, but Mr.
Gurney's view of his terrain is so objective that his plays often fill in the missing pieces of the fractured American social puzzle.
When you meet the economically rarefied yet often emotionally disadvantaged characters in Gurney plays like "Love Letters" and "The Cocktail Hour," you remember just why the rest of the country has spent 25 or so years fleeing in the opposite direction.
Austin, the Boston banker at the center of "Later Life," Mr.
Gurney's enjoyable new 80-minute comedy at Playwrights Horizons, is one of the playwright's saddest creations. (Or half-creations. In the Playbill, Mr. Gurney acknowledges a debt to Henry James, whose tale "The Beast in the Jungle" seems the play's point of departure.) A smart and genial preppie in late middle age, Austin rather resembles the President he voted for in the last election.
He's likable and polite, and he puts in his time at the office, but what exactly is he doing with his life?
His children grown, his marriage ended by divorce, he is an empty suit longing to breathe free.


Defying Rebels, Voters Throng Cambodia Polls
More than 1.5 million Cambodians defied Khmer Rouge threats of violence today to vote in this nation's first multiparty election in two decades, a vote that many Cambodians hope will end a generation of tyranny and unrelenting carnage.
United Nations peacekeepers, who had predicted that the Khmer Rouge rebels would try to sabotage the six-day election by attacking polling stations, were relieved to report that there had been only a few instances of violence on the first day of voting, none of them resulting in deaths.


Some Investors Enjoy Yields in Double Digits
Despite the rush by states, cities and communities to refinance old higher-interest-rate debt, there are still a few high-interest-rate bonds out there that are clearly keeping some holders very happy in this new era of lower interest rates.
In some instances the investors who bought bonds in the 1980's with coupons of 10 to 15 percent are going to continue to be pleased because the bond issuers are having trouble refinancing them.
In other cases, the bonds may be refinanced soon but the issuers have taken longer to act than they could have, so the bondholders have had a few more years of high interest rates than they might have.


Dance in Review
Joan Peters Dance Company Symphony Space


No Headline
"You have the absolute legal right in this country to answer your door with a gun. In your house, if you want to do it, you have the legal right to answer everybody that comes to your door with a gun." -- LEWIS UNGLESBY, attorney for the killer of a Japanese exchange student who rang the wrong doorbell.  [ A1:4. ]


Inquiry Focuses on Councilman's Residence
The City Council's Ethics Committee has begun a preliminary investigation of published reports indicating that the Council's majority whip -- its third-ranking member -- does not reside in his South Bronx Council district, contrary to the state's election law, a Council spokeswoman said yesterday.
The spokeswoman, Peg Breen, said the committee's staff was looking into reports that Councilman Rafael Castaneira Colon, a 57-year-old member of the Council since 1982 and a close ally of Council Speaker Peter F. Vallone, does not live in the 17th Council District, where he represents 189,000 residents of the South Bronx and Melrose areas.


Observers See Haiti Police Force As Brutal Obstacle to Democracy
Not long ago, when the value of Haiti's national currency, the gourde, was plummeting, Maj.
Michel Francois, the aggressive chief of this country's police force, is said to have conceived a plan to stop its free fall.
Ordering his men to round up some of the capital's ubiquitous money changers, Major Francois reportedly fixed the rate at which they would be allowed to trade in dollars.
To those who might not comply, say businessmen who dealt with the changers afterward, the 40-year-old police chief gave a warning that he would personally administer their pistol whipping.


Hefty Paydays and Palookas Are Pleasing to Bowe
The joyous venality and misery of boxing played themselves out in adjoining dank underground rooms at Robert F. Kennedy Stadium not long after midnight today.
Victors (or at least their lawyers) were dividing the spoils of the heavyweight kingdom, imagining riches that would accrue to Riddick Bowe and Lennox Lewis, following Bowe's overwhelming performance against the outclassed Jesse Ferguson.


Free-Trade Treaty May Widen Traffic In Drugs, U.S. Says
Cocaine smugglers working with Colombian drug cartels are starting to set up factories, warehouses and trucking companies in Mexico to exploit the flood of cross-border commerce expected under the North American Free Trade Agreement, United States intelligence and law-enforcement officials say.
The Mexican smugglers are buying and setting up the companies "as fronts for drug trafficking," said a report written by an intelligence officer at the United States Embassy in Mexico City.
The phenomenon was confirmed by a senior United States official who oversees enforcement of anti-drug laws and who spoke on condition that he not be identified by name.


Lord Kenyon, 75, Dies; Led British Museums
Lord Kenyon, the chairman of the National Portrait Gallery in London from 1966 to 1988, died last Monday in Gredington, his family seat in Shropshire in western England, the British press has reported.
He was 75..
Lloyd Tyrell-Kenyon, the fifth Baron Kenyon, was also the president of the National Museum of Wales from 1952 to 1957 and a trustee of the National Portrait Gallery from 1953 to 1988.


Free-Trade Treaty May Widen Traffic In Drugs, U.S. Says
Cocaine smugglers working with Colombian drug cartels are starting to set up factories, warehouses and trucking companies in Mexico to exploit the flood of cross-border commerce expected under the North American Free Trade Agreement, United States intelligence and law-enforcement officials say.
The Mexican smugglers are buying and setting up the companies "as fronts for drug trafficking," said a report written by an intelligence officer at the United States Embassy in Mexico City.
The phenomenon was confirmed by a senior United States official who oversees enforcement of anti-drug laws and who spoke on condition that he not be identified by name.


Round 1 Goes to Inspired Starks and Game 1 Goes to Knicks
Guarding Michael Jordan during a playoff game intimidates some players.
It inspired John Starks.
Crushing Chicago's spirit with his 3-point shooting and giving Jordan fits with his defense, Starks led New York to a 98-90 victory in Game 1 of the Eastern Conference championship series yesterday afternoon at Madison Square Garden.


Iraq Said to Prepare Attack On Kurds' Enclave in North
President Saddam Hussein is preparing to attack the independent Kurdish enclave in northern Iraq in an attempt to retake part or all of the territory, Western diplomats in the region and Kurdish military commanders say.
The assault, which the officials said could start as soon as the first week of June, appears to be intended to recapture Kurdish-held territory south of the no-flight zone that coalition forces established two years ago, they said.
But according to Western intelligence reports, a drive to recapture the entire area has not been ruled out.


Ann Ginsberg, Glen H. Weiss
Ann Susan Ginsberg, a lawyer, was married yesterday to Dr.
Glen Howard Weiss, an ophthalmologist.
Rabbi Frederic Pomerantz performed the ceremony at Tappan Hill in Tarrytown, N.Y.
Ms.
Ginsberg, who is keeping her name, works in the New York law firm of Anderson Kill Olick &amp; Oshinsky.
She and her husband graduated with honors from Johns Hopkins University, where they were elected to Phi Beta Kappa.
She received a law degree from Columbia University.


A Rally at the United Nations for Peace in the Balkans


Pride of New York; At Long Last, Knicks Are Back
The last time the Knicks played in a conference final the Watergate scandal was brewing, lines of cars crowded gas stations and New Yorkers, in leisure suits and platform shoes, swarmed theaters showing newly released movies like "Blazing Saddles," "Serpico" and "The Sting."
"We've been waiting a long time for a winner," lamented Larry Bagelle, whose bar sits in the shadow of Madison Square Garden.
"That era," he added, pointing to fading photographs of the 1974 Knicks, "was magic for basketball fans."


Cult Film Is a First On Internet
As historic moments go, this one, it could be argued, was closer to "Watson, come here!" than to another Saturday night at the movies.
A small audience scattered among a few dozen computer laboratories gathered Saturday evening to watch the first movie to be transmitted on the Internet -- the global computer network that connects millions of scientists and academic researchers and hitherto has been a medium for swapping research notes and an occasional still image.


Reputation Will Get You Nowhere
Bobby Rahal knew he had a shaky car even as he began preparations this month here at the Indianapolis Motor Speedway.
But his plans to switch to a more competitive car for the race that follows the Indianapolis 500 turned out today to be one race too late.
Rahal, the 1986 winner here and the defending national champion of Indy-car racing, was bumped from the starting lineup of the Indianapolis 500 by Eddie Cheever with 16 minutes left in time trials and failed to get back into the field with a last-minute qualifying run.


When Heroes Turn Into Outlaws; Firefighters' Arson Arrests Raise Complex Questions
Some do it to be heroes.
Some do it for the rush.
And some, psychologists and arson investigators say, do it simply to relieve the tedium of a pursuit that they had imagined would be a lot more exciting.
The arrests last week of four volunteer firefighters on charges of setting a series of blazes in the Smithtown, L.I., area has focused attention once again on a phenomenon that, while still fairly rare, never ceases to infuriate fire officials and to confound many of the experts: firefighters who turn arsonists.


Consistent and Steady And $97,500 Richer
In what had been anticipated as a return to the winner's circle for either Lee Trevino and Jack Nicklaus, the Senior Tour's old reliable, Bob Charles, used his metronomic steadiness today to win the Bell Atlantic Classic.
So while Trevino and Nicklaus remained collectively without an official victory in the last 12 months, the left-handed Charles won his second senior event of the year and became the first player ever to go over $4 million in Senior Tour earnings.
Today's top prize was worth $97,500.


Essay; Scalpgate's Poetic Justice
As the white flag of surrender flutters over the White House, the main concern inside is not with the weakness of Christopher of Foggy Bottom but with the ridicule generated by $200 Presidential haircuts from Cristophe of Beverly Hills.
It's the little things that get to people.
Thomas E. Dewey's crack about an "idiot engineer" rubbed Americans the wrong way; Richard Nixon's desire to outfit the White House police in Graustarkian helmets drew hoots, as did Jimmy Carter's fear of "killer rabbits."


CHRONICLE
Another familiar name, BRENDAN GILL, the New Yorker writer and architectural critic, was honored last night by the New York Landmarks Conservancy for his dedication in preserving New York City's architectural heritage.
The honor took the form of a roast at the Century Association in which the author was kidded about his life and writings and had his well-developed sense of humor tested.


Grounding Star Wars
Star Wars has finally been brought down to earth, where it belongs, 10 years and $32 billion after Ronald Reagan first dreamed up the space-based anti-missile shield.
The Pentagon will now concentrate on developing ground-based antiballistic missiles to protect American forces in the field and citizens in the continental U.S. against limited missile attacks.
The change is more symbolic than substantive.
Congress had already begun the reorientation.
And the Clinton Administration is keeping 1994 spending at this year's lavish $3.8 billion.
That's sure to rise as the program moves from research to prototypes.


Berkeley Graduates Urged to Support Education
After a steel-band version of "Pomp and Circumstance," the California State Treasurer, Kathleen Brown, urged graduating law students on Saturday to "remember who you represent and be as generous to this state as it has been to you."
Elected in 1990, Ms.
Brown is the daughter of one former California Governor and the sister of another.
She has been the state's chief financial officer during what has been called the state's worst economic times since the Depression and is considered a possible Democratic candidate for governor in 1994.


Suspension of Episcopal Priest Draws Anger in Bronx
Few of the faithful heeded the peal of bells at St.
Ann's Church yesterday morning, but not because of a lack of faith among their South Bronx community.
Instead, several dozen parishioners protested outside the graceful stone church, demanding that the Episcopal Diocese of New York reinstate a popular priest who was suspended earlier this week after several instances of "vocational immaturity."


Pro Bono Accounts
*
The Museum of Fine Arts, Boston, to Ingalls, Quinn &amp; Johnson, Boston, to handle its account, previously at Hill, Holliday, Connors, Cosmopulos of Boston.


Solo Flex: Vaughn Powers Red Sox
When Jimmy Key and Mike Stanley met before tonight's game to discuss the Red Sox lineup, there was little discussion on Mo Vaughn.
According to Stanley, the Yankees' catcher, Key had one big worry: Carlos Quintana, Boston's No. 3 hitter, who has averaged .385 against left-handers this year.
Key figured that Vaughn, a left-hander, would be manageable.
He might look at things differently next time.


Lise A. Lustgarten, Jeffrey R. Schwartz
Lise Anne Lustgarten and Jeffrey Robert Schwartz, lawyers at the Securities and Exchange Commission in Washington, were married yesterday.
Rabbi Peter Weintraub performed the ceremony at Tarrytown House, a catering establishment in Tarrytown, N.Y.
Mrs.
Schwartz, who works in the Office of International Affairs, graduated from Northwestern University and received a law degree from Columbia University.
She is a daughter of Rhoda Lustgarten of Scarsdale, N.Y., and Ira H. Lustgarten of New York.
Her mother is a travel agent at World Travel Specialists in White Plains.
Her father is a partner in the New York law firm of Willkie Farr &amp; Gallagher.


Solo Flex: Vaughn Powers Red Sox
When Jimmy Key and Mike Stanley met before tonight's game to discuss the Red Sox lineup, there was little discussion on Mo Vaughn.
According to Stanley, the Yankees' catcher, Key had one big worry: Carlos Quintana, Boston's No. 3 hitter, who has averaged .385 against left-handers this year.
Key figured that Vaughn, a left-hander, would be manageable.
He might look at things differently next time.


Lynn Appelbaum and Joseph Spivack
Lynn Diane Appelbaum, the press manager for the NBC News program "Today," was married yesterday to Joseph Spivack, a vice president in the mergers and acquisitions department at the New York Life Insurance Company.
Both work in New York.
Rabbi Irving Goodman performed the ceremony at Tavern on the Green in New York.
The bride graduated magna cum laude from Ithaca College and received a master's degree in arts administration from Indiana University.
She is the daughter of Sidney and Sylvia Appelbaum of Liberty, N.Y.


MEDICINE SUFFERS AS FEWER DOCTORS DO GENERAL WORK
A growing shortage of doctors willing to practice general medicine has left some hospitals and health-maintenance organizations desperate for qualified candidates and, in the long term, stands as a major obstacle to overhauling the nation's health-care system.
Almost all changes under consideration include a central role for what used to be known as the family doctor -- today generally an internist or family practitioner -- who can save the system money by taking care of a wide variety of ailments on his own and referring patients for more costly specialty care or tests only when absolutely necessary.
Once a Cornerstone
Although such primary-care doctors were once the cornerstone of American medicine, their numbers have dwindled as younger doctors have been drawn to specialty fields by money and the lure of new technology.
So today, as more patients enroll in health-maintenance organizations or physician networks that rely heavily on general doctors to hold down costs, a rising demand is confronting a declining supply.


Chaya K. Weissman, Alan E. Rothman
Chaya Karen Weissman, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Joseph Weissman of Hillcrest, N.Y., was married yesterday to Alan E. Rothman, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Henry I. Rothman of New York.
Rabbi Hershel Schachter performed the ceremony at the Radisson Hotel in Newark.
Mrs.
Rothman, 22, and her husband graduated from Yeshiva University, she cum laude and he summa cum laude.
She is a third-year law student at Yeshiva.
Her father is the vice president of sales at Eurospark Industries, a jewelry manufacturer in Long Island City, Queens.


Boost for G.O.P.
The President's recent problems have improved the morale of the Republican Party, which emerged from last fall's campaign perplexed about its future.
Page A12.


It Took a Role Reversal To Reverse Knick Fortunes
Can you believe what the officials let that Chicago bully, Scottie Pippen, get away with?
The Knicks couldn't.
Downright vicious, a heinous act, is what it was.
What is this sport coming to, they wanted to know?


Gay Sailor's Killer Allowed Lesser Plea, Limiting Trial
A military judge today accepted the guilty plea of a United States Navy airman apprentice on charges that he murdered a gay shipmate, Allen R. Schindler, last year.
Originally charged with premeditated murder in what has become a politically sensitive case, the sailor, Terry M. Helvey, faced a possible death sentence.
But today the judge, Comdr.
David P. Holcombe, permitted Airman Helvey to plead guilty to a lesser charge of murder with intent to commit great bodily harm, with a maximum sentence of life in prison.


Nicole Marcus, Paul J. Church
Dr.
Nicole Emily Marcus, a daughter of Norman and Maria Marcus of New York, was married yesterday to Paul Joseph Church, a son of Virginia and Leonard Church of Pittsburgh.
Msgr.
Harry Byrne and Rabbi Roy A. Rosenberg officiated in a joint ceremony at the United Nations Chapel in New York.
Dr.
Marcus, 27, is a psychologist in Chicago.
She graduated from the University of Michigan and received a Ph.D. in clinical psychology from DePaul University.
Her father, a former counsel to the New York City Planning Commission, is counsel to the New York law firm of Bachner, Tally, Polevoy &amp; Misher.
Her mother is a law professor at Fordham Law School.


Fat Commissions and Scarce Profits
As manager of the Prudential Bache Securities branch here, Charles Grose was worried by what he saw in one customer's account: rapid buying and selling of securities that brought the client less than $200 but generated $1,600 in commissions.
He confronted the broker, accusing him of trading only for the commissions, and recommended disciplinary action.
"This guy is bad news," Mr.
Grose wrote in a confidential memo in November 1988 to the regional director, R. Peter Archbold.
"He is preying on old women."


Alison Levy, William Bird
Alison Beth Levy, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Stanley J. Levy of Great Neck, L.I., was married yesterday to William George Bird, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
John Bird of Syosset, L.I.
Cantor David Benedict and the Rev.
Gaylord Shimnoski, an Episcopal minister, officiated in a joint ceremony at the Harrison House in Glen Cove, L.I.
Mrs.
Bird graduated magna cum laude from Harvard University and received a law degree from Columbia University.
In June, she is to become a law clerk for Chief Judge Burton R. Lifland of the United States Bankruptcy Court for the Southern District of New York.


New Study Turns Up Volume in the British Debate on Compact Disk Prices
Abba sang about it, and so did Pink Floyd, and now Britain's Monopolies and Mergers Commission is going to investigate it: money, and, more precisely, why Britain's record companies and retailers charge so much of it for compact disks.
The commission's investigation, which is expected to take about 10 months, will examine the marketing of recorded music in Britain for evidence of anti-competitive practices.
The commission can recommend possible actions to the Trade and Industry Secretary.
The study follows another investigation into the price of compact disks, which was conducted earlier this month by the National Heritage Committee of Parliament.


EMILY DY SEE, STEPHEN MICHAEL GRAW
Emily Dy See, an editor, and Stephen Michael Graw, a doctoral candidate in development sociology at Cornell University, were married yesterday in Ithaca, N.Y.
Geshe Tenzin Rabgye officiated at the Tibetan Buddhist ceremony at Robert H. Treman State Park.
Mrs.
Graw, 33, worked until recently at The Manila Chronicle, an English-language daily newspaper there, where she served as an editor on the national, foreign and environmental desks.
She graduated from Maryknoll College in Manila.
She is a daughter of Lorenzo Co See and Pacita Cheng Dy of Manila, where her father is a cigarette distributor.


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY  PROBATION OFFICERS TO SHIFT RESOURCES
In a radical overhaul of the traditional probation system in New York City, the least risky offenders will soon be monitored electronically by simply reporting to automated kiosks.
The move will free probation officers to provide intensive therapy sessions of four hours a week and more to thousands of the most violence-prone novice criminals.
At present, most of the city's 60,000 criminals sentenced to probation make only token visits to probation officers, some as seldom as once or twice a year.
The new system, due to take effect this summer, will be the largest such effort ever and will be studied by criminal justice officials alarmed at the growing size and expense of the nation's prison culture.
A1.
JOY A LONG TIME COMING
The last time the Knicks lifted themselves to a National Basketball Association conference final, the Watergate scandal was brewing and the reigning fashion was leisure suits and platform shoes.
So faithful fans could be excused for the enthusiasm with which they streamed toward Madison Square Garden to watch the Knicks meet, and then beat, the Chicago Bulls.
Sidewalk vendors hawked shirts, buttons and hats with insignia, bar patrons made bets over pitchers of beer, and scalpers offered tickets for as much as $400.
Besides the basketball, the matchup took on an added edge: the Big Apple versus the Second City.
B3.


Corrections
An article on Friday about Iraqi antiaircraft fire against American warplanes described the origin and location of an earlier incident incorrectly.
American officials said that on April 26 a Navy pilot reported ground tracer fire and a possible missile launching, not a confirmed launching, in one of the no-flight zones.
The zone was in southern Iraq, not northern Iraq.


Dance in Review
'Swan Lake' American Ballet Theater Metropolitan Opera House


NEWS SUMMARY
International A2-9  U.N.
TO BACK BOSNIA PLAN  The Security Council plans to approve the new Western strategy for bringing peace to Bosnia, even though it still lacks the resources to make it work.
A1  DOUBTS ON SAFE HAVENS  The force sent to protect the havens established for Muslim civilians in Bosnia is unlikely to be sufficient to respond to a determined Serbian assault, Western officials said.
A7  The President of Bosnia rejected the new allied strategy.
A7


Ruling Likely On Olympia's U.S. Property
A Federal bankruptcy judge is expected to rule today on who will control the United States assets of Olympia &amp; York, the distressed Canadian real estate empire that is the biggest commercial-property taxpayer in New York City.
The ruling expected from Judge James L. Garrity Jr. comes on a motion by Citibank, a major creditor of the company's United States branch, that accuses the accountant named by a Canadian court to administer the remains of the parent company of trying to exert unacceptable control over the American property.
Enormous Properties
When the Canadian-based parent declared the equivalent of bankruptcy last spring, the United States branch did not, contining to function while it negotiated with creditors over $5.3 billion in debt on its United States properties.
Those buildings contain 18 million square feet, nearly four times the space in one of the World Trade Center's twin towers.


Critic's Notebook; Starring at Cannes: Rumors and Rumors About Rumors
If there are any professional bookmakers here, they may become door-to-door encyclopedia salesmen Monday night, immediately after the winners of the 46th Cannes International Film Festival are announced at the black-tie gala in the Festival Palace.
There are as many ways to figure the odds on the favorites as there are favorites.
This afternoon there were solid rumors, based on totally unsubstantiated facts, to support (and sometimes to discredit) each of the four films that appear to be in the running for the Palme D'Or, the award that goes to the best film.
The festival also distributes a bag full of other palmes, but it's the gold one that carries the prestige and counts at European box offices.


Despite Doubts, U.N. to Support Balkan Strategy
The Security Council plans to approve the modest new Western strategy for containing the war in Bosnia this week, but diplomats said today that the vote would not remove obstacles like an inadequate number of peacekeeping troops or resistance from Serbs and Muslims.
The Council plans to adopt three resolutions endorsing the "step by step" approach to curbing the fighting, which was hammered out by the United States, Russia and key European allies on Saturday after months of indecision and discord.


Two Promoted At BBDO New York
BBDO New York has named two executives to succeed Ted Sann, who was promoted to chief creative officer on May 14.
Al Merrin, 47, and Michael Patti, 40, who are executive vice presidents, have been promoted to executive creative directors from senior creative directors.
They assume management duties on accounts that Mr.
Sann handled like Pepsi-Cola, Gillette and General Electric.


I.R.A. Bombs Won't Stop Talks, A Catholic Leader in Ulster Says
John Hume, the most influential Roman Catholic political leader in Northern Ireland, said today that despite recent bombings by the Irish Republican Army he would continue to seek the framework of a peace agreement with Gerry Adams, president of Sinn Fein, the I.R.A.'s political wing.
Protestant leaders and others in the British province have criticized both men as the I.R.A. detonated three car bombs since Thursday, the day the vote count started after local elections in the province.
More than 20 people have been wounded, none gravely.


Review/Pop; Travis Tritt, Emissary From Another Country
"We are young country," sang Travis Tritt, Trisha Yearwood and Little Texas, who all gathered onstage during Mr.
Tritt's set at Radio City Music Hall on Friday night.
If so, young country is riddled with contradictions, trying to encompass the big gestures of arena rock, the nuances of traditional country singing, the smooth appeal of California country-rock, the local color of Southern honky-tonks and, now and then, a glimmer of self-expression.
Young country wants to prove it's steeped in tradition while aiming for hits and jettisoning most of the tradition's subtleties.
Often, it ends up picking up rock's leftovers and shifting country's heartfelt sentiment toward sentimentality.
Probably in emulation of the stadium-rock gimmicks of Garth Brooks, Mr.
Tritt performed on a stage set fit for a heavy-metal video clip: shiny scaffolds holding platforms and banks of spotlights.
He sang the deftly surly country waltz "Here's a Quarter (Call Someone Who Cares)" while standing high above his band between two vertical rows of spotlights, a high-tech, honky-tonk Sun King.
After the song, he slid down a firefighter's pole.


Decriminalization Would Just Boost Drug Use; Many Good Results
To the Editor:
We can no longer ignore calls like Judge Whitman Knapp's in "Dethrone the Drug Czar" (Op-Ed, May 9) to decriminalize drugs.
When most of our jails are filled with drug-related convicted criminals; when the criminal justice system is crippled by drug-related cases; when drugs cost us billions of dollars in police, judges, prosecutors and lawyers; when our streets, schools, subways, parks, homes and we are not safe from drug-related shootings, burglaries and muggings, our politicians can at least debate decriminalization honestly.
What are we afraid of?
That it would become too easy to obtain drugs?
How difficult is it now?
Are we afraid that more youngsters will use drugs?
Do we really believe that the fear of criminal punishment deters drug use?
If so, where is the proof of such deterrence?
These questions should be debated.


Patents
THE lazy days of summer are often consumed by the seemingly endless chore of keeping the grass trimmed.
But what if you could switch on the lawn mower, sit back with a glass of iced tea and watch the grass get cut?
That's precisely the picture the inventors of a robot lawn mower hope to see one day.
Thomas H. Noonan and two partners, John Fisher and Barry Bryant, have won a patent for an automatic, self-propelled mower that stores a map of terrain and a cutting route in its microprocessor.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Companies
The three top rivals for the right to develop high-definition television in the United States agreed to join forces on a single approach, hastening the biggest change in broadcasting since the advent of color in the 1950's.
The agreement eliminates the likelihood of protracted disputes and litigation.  [ Page A1. ]
The General Motors purchasing executive who left for Volkswagen denied taking any G.M. documents, filed a defamation complaint against the auto maker, and for the first time gave his reasons for resigning suddenly in March.  [ D1. ]


Gene Leads to Death For Fecund Queens Among the Fire Ants
AS Marie Antoinette and King Louis XVI learned only too well, there are times when the mark of royalty has its distinct disadvantages.
Scientists studying imported fire ants, those relentless and ruthless little stingers renowned for ruining many a picnic in the Southern United States, have discovered that the worker ants will selectively execute those queens in the colony bearing a telltale genetic trait.
Of great interest to researchers, the gene, called PGM-3, is associated with exceptionally high fecundity.


At Yale, Honors for an Acting Chief
Howard R. Lamar, who served as acting president of Yale University over the last year and was generally seen as a stabilizing force on campus, conferred degrees yesterday on 1,219 undergraduates and about 2,000 graduate and professional students at the university's 292d commencement exercises in New Haven.
Mr.
Lamar, who will hand over his powers on July 1 to Richard C. Levin, now dean of the Graduate School of Arts and Sciences, received an honorary degree of doctor of laws.
A poignant moment in the proceedings came when an honorary degree of doctor of humane letters was announced for Arthur R. Ashe Jr., the tennis champion who died of AIDS.
The degree was accepted by Alexandra Dell, a junior at Yale who was Mr.
Ashe's goddaughter.
The graduates stood in tribute to Mr.
Ashe.


Police Received Two Calls Detailing Boy's Slaying
A man called the Jersey City police on Thursday and told them that the pajama-clad body of a 5-year-old boy could be found in a trash compactor at a Brooklyn housing project, a law-enforcement official said yesterday.
The caller identified himself as Stephan Poole, whom the authorities have been seeking for questioning in the death of 5-year-old Kayesean Blackledge, the official said.
Mr.
Poole is married to Kayesean's legal guardian and lived with her and the boy in Jersey City.


Racers Are Back in Driver's Seat at Indy
All the new safety measures at the Indianapolis Motor Speedway have proved effective so far this month, but a crucial safety device will not be tested until the green flag falls on Sunday to start the Indianapolis 500.
It can be found inside the helmet of each of the 33 drivers.


In Memorium to Irving Howe


Clinton Aides Propose Renewal of China's Favored Trade Status
Top advisers to President Clinton recommended today that he renew China's favorable trade status, Government and human rights officials said this evening.
But they said he should require that Beijing improve its human rights record before any further annual renewals are granted.
The President did not immediately endorse the recommendation but told his aides to brief Congress on Tuesday.


Knicks Are Winning Battle of the Boards
Charles Oakley isn't big on sympathy.
So asked whether Horace Grant looked bothered by his sore right ankle in Game 1, Oakley had this response:
"This is my rule -- if you're playing, you're not hurt. As far as all that other, if your ankle, toe, or back hurts, stay at home."


Corrections
An obituary yesterday about the pianist Mieczyslaw Horszowski referred to the cellist Janos Starker incorrectly.
Mr.
Starker is alive and still performing; he presented the premiere of Chou Wen-Chung's Cello Concerto in January at Carnegie Hall.


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY PRESIDENT CHOSEN FOR CITY COLLEGE
The trustees of the City University of New York appointed Dr.
Yolanda T. Moses, a black anthropologist from a small urban California campus, as the next president of City College, long the jewel but now the most troubled of the university system's 21 campuses.
A1.
Dr.
Moses has won a reputation as a builder of bridges, not as a scholar.
B2.
POLICE RECEIVED CALLS IN BOY'S SLAYING
A man called the Jersey City police on Thursday and told them that the pajama-clad body of a 5-year-old boy could be found in a trash compactor at a housing project in East New York, Brooklyn, a law-enforcement official said yesterday.
The caller identified himself as Stephan Poole, whom the authorities have been seeking for questioning in the death of 5-year-old Kayesean Blackledge, the official said.
Mr.
Poole is married to Kayesean's legal guardian and lived with her and the boy in Jersey City.
Detectives also studied the tape of another call to the Jersey City police made on Friday by a man also identifying himself as Mr.
Poole.
B3.
REGION CAMPAIGN TESTS PARTY SHIFT
The Republican stronghold of Nassau County is facing its toughest challenge in 25 years in the race for county executive.
The machine that could always be counted on to turn out a Republican majority appears to be in trouble.
B5.
JUSTICES LIMIT SHIELDING OF SOURCES
In a case that grew out of a New Jersey man's effort to prove his innocence in the murder of a Newark police officer, a unanimous Supreme Court rejected the Justice Department's assertion that all sources supplying information to the F.B.I. in a criminal investigation should be treated as confidential and thus exempt from disclosure under the Freedom of Information Act.
A16.
FLORIO RECEIVES AWARD FOR COURAGE
Gov.
Jim Florio of New Jersey accepted an award for political courage from the Kennedy family and said he hoped the day would come when politicians would not have to be honored for sticking to their principles.
B4. 3 KILLED IN SHOOTING IN TEANECK
A gun battle among a group of men in the northern New Jersey suburb of Teaneck left three dead and two wounded, the authorities said.
Seven people were in custody, they said.
A judge temporarily barred New York State from going forward with plans to borrow more than $6 billion to finance a transportation plan.
B4.
A disbarred lawyer charged with stealing more than $1.5 million from at least nine investors, including the actress Shirley Jones, was arraigned in Federal District Court in Hauppauge, L.I.
B4.
The secret blackball system that enables New Jersey Senators to block gubernatorial appointments, without saying why, is again the subject of a public debate that Governor Florio hopes will enable him to eliminate it.
B5.
Chronicle B4 Commencements B4 Our Towns by Peter Marks B5


In His Class, Ducklings And 5-Year-Olds Mingle
NIGHTFALL enveloped the grassy fields behind the school.
Up the hill, the narrow woods were bathed in the glow of lights from houses on the other side of the trees, and the noise of the insects was drowned out by the sounds of passing traffic.
Ah, suburban wilderness.
So muted.
So accessible.
So perfectly suited to the gentle, evocative lessons of Ray Lesch, a man among kindergartners.


No Headline
"I'd just like to know Clinton's horoscope. I want to see if he's a Gemini and capable of changing his mind one more time." -- MIRSAD GABELA, Bosnian Defense Ministry official.  [ A7:6. ]


SCIENTIST AT WORK: Solomon Snyder; Brain Researcher Makes It Look Easy
Dr.
Solomon Snyder, the soft-spoken director of the department of neuroscience at Johns Hopkins University in Baltimore, slouches on the sofa in his inner office and speaks of the great passions of his life.
At age 54, Dr.
Snyder has won 29 scientific awards for his research on brain chemistry and published over 700 papers.
His curriculum vitae runs 50 pages.
He is at the peak of his career.
Yet he seems self-effacing, very different from the popular image of the successful scientist as the hard-driving person who lives only to beat the competition.
He speaks lovingly of his wife and two grown daughters.
Children, he says, are more important than any honors.
They "are why we're here on earth." He keeps a couple of music stands in his office so that when his octogenarian father drops by, they can play duets -- his father on the flute and Dr.
Snyder on the guitar.


Jack Gould, Critic, Is Dead at 79; Covered Television for The Times
Jack Gould, a television and radio critic and reporter for The New York Times from 1944 to 1972, died yesterday at the Manor Care Convalescent Home in Concord, Calif.
He was 79.
The cause was complications of a gall bladder infection, said his son Lewis.


G.M. Shifts Top-Level Executives
The General Motors Corporation named a new treasurer today and shifted two other high-level executives.
G.M.'s assistant treasurer, Heidi Kunz, was named treasurer, replacing Charles E. Golden.
Mr.
Golden was named managing director of Vauxhall Motors Ltd., which is based in Luten, England.
He will remain a vice president of G.M.


On My Mind; Preventing More Bosnias
Two tragedies are taking place in Bosnia.
The first is the slaughter of its people.
The second is the failure of the officials responsible to think seriously about how to prevent future slaughters in future Bosnias.
Maybe that is because those officials are still on the job -- in all three sides in the civil war, in Europe and in the U.S.


Rural America Is Growing Slightly, Population Studies Show
Rural America, with its enticing vistas of fields, forests, buttes and mountains and its unenticing economy of failing farms, depleted mines and low-wage factories, hemorrhaged population throughout the 1980's.
But new statistics for the early 1990's show that the countryside, at least for the moment, is holding its own again.
From one rural county to another, the changes documented by Kenneth Johnson, a demographer at Loyola University-Chicago, and Calvin Beale, a demographer at the Department of Agriculture in Washington, are slight but consistent.
While only 47 percent of all rural counties in the United States gained population in the 1980's, two-thirds gained population from the spring of 1990, when the 1990 census was completed, to the spring of 1991.


Before Skies Become Entirely Barren of Birds
To the Editor:
Julian Simon and Aaron Wildavsky in "Facts, Not Species, Are Periled" (Op-Ed, May 13) believe scientists are being unscientific when they warn of an impending tidal wave of extinction of animal species caused by humans.
They claim, "both of us have documented the complete absence of evidence for the claim that the extinction of species is going up rapidly -- or even going up at all."
Wrong.
Dead wrong.
Consider first the data on fishes.
According to a 1989 report from the American Fisheries Society, 40 species and subspecies of North American fishes have vanished in this century.
Thirteen became extinct between 1900 and 1950, and 27 have disappeared since 1950 -- a doubling of the rate over this century.


Abbott Labs Settles in Florida Suits
Abbott Laboratories, the nation's largest producer of infant formula, agreed last week to pay more than $140 million to settle lawsuits charging that it conspired with other major producers to drive up the price.
In a series of agreements concluded on the eve of a trial against Abbott in Tallahassee, Fla., the company agreed to pay $79 million to wholesale purchasers of formula to settle a class-action suit, $8 million to the state of Florida, and most of the rest -- about $53 million -- to three major supermarket chains -- Albertson's, Safeway and American Stores.


Who Needs Barkley? Suns' Sink Overflows
Charles Barkley spent most of tonight's fourth quarter sitting on his hands.
Trying not to yawn and wearing a towel like a shawl, he watched the Suns' unheralded Cedric Ceballos, Oliver Miller and Frank Johnson dry up the Seattle SuperSonics, 105-91.
By game's end, the Sonics were wheezing and Barkley was drawing up his acceptance speech for the league's most valuable player award.
Seattle trails the four-of-seven-game Western Conference finals, 1-0, because it tried double-teaming Barkley, and Barkley's partners did not drift into a shell.


Supreme Court Roundup; Justices Limit Shielding Sources Who Aid F.B.I.
A unanimous Supreme Court today rejected the Justice Department's sweeping assertion that all sources supplying information to the Federal Bureau of Investigation in a criminal investigation should be treated as "confidential" and thus exempt from disclosure under the Freedom of Information Act.
Congress never gave the F.B.I. a blanket exemption of that type, either in the original Freedom of Information Act in 1966, or in later amendments, Justice Sandra Day O'Connor wrote for the court.


Accounts
*
Cadbury Schweppes, London, to Leo Burnett Guangzhou, Guangzhou, China, the first agency to handle its Cadbury candy brands in China.
Billings were not disclosed. *
Wee Three Records, Philadelphia, to the Weightman Group, Philadelphia, to handle the music retailer's account, previously handled by Gyro Advertising Inc., Philadelphia.
Billings were not disclosed.


Top Prize at Cannes Is Shared
As if unable to make up its mind, the jury at the 46th Cannes International Film Festival tonight split the Palme d'Or, the festival's top prize, between two films: "The Piano," Jane Campion's romantic comedy set in New Zealand in the 1850's, and "Farewell to My Concubine," Chen Kaige's epic covering approximately 50 years of recent Chinese political and cultural history.
The awards were presented in the Festival Palace at closing ceremonies with Jeanne Moreau as the host.


Prices on Long-Term Bills Climb
Longer-term Treasury prices rose yesterday, but the price of shorter- term maturities fell and the rates on Treasury bills moved higher.
Worries about a move by the Federal Reserve to raise short-term interest rates and the normal selling ahead of Treasury auctions contributed to the weak performance of shorter maturities.
The Treasury is selling $41.5 billion of one-year bills and two- and five-year notes this week.


Marshall Not Yet an Oiler
WILBER MARSHALL, an All-Pro linebacker, remained deadlocked yesterday in talks on moving from the Washington Redskins to the Houston Oilers, with only $150,000 holding up the deal.
Marshall, who had a career-high 138 tackles for the Redskins last season and led the team with six sacks, lowered his asking price from $3.7 million to $2.9 million late last week.
But the Oilers reportedly have not budged from their original $2.75 million offer.


Redhead from Germany Takes On Red Clay of Paris. So Far, Becker's Ahead.
Boris Becker has never won the French Open, but he couldn't help but swagger away from Center Court today after opening the curtain on this year's red-clay Grand Slam tournament with a 6-0, 6-3, 6-0 thrashing of a very young native son of France, 17-year-old Nicolas Estude.
Becker, after all, accomplished great things at 17, but that was at Wimbledon.
And long ago.
Here in Paris nothing terribly great has happened to him lately, or ever, so he didn't let himself be underwhelmed today after preventing the 579th-ranked Estude from becoming a local hero.


Experts Ponder Cuban Epidemic
AMERICAN medical experts returning from Cuba have different theories about the nature of the epidemic that has struck there in recent months, affecting some 25,000 people.
The disease impairs vision and can damage peripheral nerves, causing symptoms like burning sensations in the legs.
The underlying cause of the disease, all agree, is a nutritional deficiency, most probably resulting from changes in the diet caused by worsening economic problems in Cuba.


Michael Jordan, Marketing M.V.P.
For the third consecutive year, the basketball superstar Michael Jordan has finished first in a survey by The Sports Marketing Letter of "the 10 most wanted" sports endorsers.
The Westport, Conn., newsletter listed the Chicago Bulls player as the best-paid sports endorser for his work for brands like Nike, Gatorade, McDonald's, Chevrolet, Wheaties and Upper Deck trading cards.
All that activity will bring him an estimated $28 million this year.


Media Memo; Struggling to Bring the Health-Care Debate Home to Readers
There are many unknowns about the health-care proposal that President Clinton is to unveil next month, but one thing is certain: press coverage of it will be virtually endless after the secret Washington sessions end.
Less certain is whether all that coverage will be comprehensible.


Still Funny and Still a Major Draw, Carson Wows an Awards Luncheon
Johnny Carson returned to center stage in the entertainment world yesterday, bringing out the biggest names in the television business for a lunch in his honor at the Plaza Hotel.
He provided convincing evidence that as a performer, he has hasn't lost a step.


Agency Accused of Race Bias
Don E. Newquist, the chairman of the International Trade Commission, has ordered a formal investigation of the agency's hiring and promotion practices after several commissioners received copies of an anonymous letter complaining of racial discrimination.
He told the agency's 464 employees on Friday that he had asked Jane E. Altenhofen, the agency's inspector general, to assess the agency's compliance with Federal equal opportunity laws and regulations.


Books of The Times; When a Regular Guy Sees a Ghost
Seaward By Brad Leithauser 384 pages. Alfred A. Knopf. $23.


4 Israeli Soldiers Die as Squads Fire on Each Other
In the most serious mishap of its kind suffered by the Israeli Army in years, four soldiers were killed today when two Israeli paratrooper squads fired on each other in the so-called security zone that Israel maintains in southern Lebanon.
It was not clear what ignited the predawn shootout, in which three other soldiers were wounded, two seriously.
But there was a good chance that the episode would have political ramifications.


New Rules Enacted to Prohibit Espionage
If organizers for the 1995 America's Cup yacht races have their way, the spying and skulduggery that have dominated the cup event for a decade will subside.
CHUCK NICHOLS, president of the San Diego Yacht Club's 1995 event committee, and ERNIE TAYLOR, representative for the 14 challengers, announced yesterday that a common base for both challengers and defenders would be established at a central yacht basin.
And yacht keels, which have in recent cups been shrouded to protect a team's technology, must be uncovered before the finals in trial racing.


COMPANY NEWS
ELBIT LTD., Haifa, Israel, has signed an agreement to upgrade MIG-21 aircraft for an undisclosed foreign country.
The transaction was valued at $300 million.
IMO INDUSTRIES INC., Lawrenceville, N.J., said it had sold the assets of its Heim Bearings Division to Roller Bearing Co. of America Inc., a privately held manufacturer in Newtown, Pa.


Walter R. Warner, 75, A Cosmetics Executive
Walter Rolf Warner, a retired New York cosmetics executive, died on Thursday at Indian River Hospital in Vero Beach, Fla.
He was 75 and had moved from Rye, N.Y., to Vero Beach after his retirement in 1984.
He had a lengthy illness, his family said.


Howard D. Goldberg, Talent Agent, 40
Howard D. Goldberg, a talent agent and founding partner of a Hollywood agency, died on Sunday at Sherman Oaks Medical Center in Los Angeles.
He was 40 and lived in Los Angeles.
His family said the cause was complications from AIDS.


Corrections
A picture caption on Friday about the illumination of the old Smallpox Hospital on Roosevelt Island described the project incorrectly.
The building was lighted for only one night, to kick off a campaign to raise money for its permanent illumination.


New York Times Begins New Stock Options List
The New York Times introduces a new listing of stock options today, consolidating coverage of stock options that trade on more than one exchange and providing comprehensive coverage of the most active options and the ones that rise and fall the most.
The table appears on page D17.
Options provide relatively low-cost ways to speculate on stock prices and also offer opportunities to protect a stock portfolio.
In addition, the trading in options can provide indications of which stocks are attracting the most speculative interest.


Punishing Youths Without Throwing Away the Key; In Experimental Program, Judge Provides Juvenile Offenders Hope for Rehabilitation
Tell me what you did, the judge begins, addressing Manhattan teen-agers who have been charged with crimes so serious that they must be prosecuted in adult court.
Is that your grandmother sitting in the back of the courtroom? the judge may ask, searching for a way to hook a teen-ager's soul.
And do you know that the victim was about your grandmother's age?
How would you feel if somebody beat up and robbed your grandmother?


For True School Decentralization, Close Central Board of Ed; Caring Leadership
To the Editor:
"A School System -- For the Kids" (editorial, May 15) attacks the new president of the New York City Board of Education, Carol Gresser, for representing "narrow interests." To the contrary, Mrs.
Gresser, the parent of four city schools graduates, a former parent teacher association president and teacher, represents the views and interests of the schoolchildren, parents and residents of Queens -- almost 2 million strong.


For True School Decentralization, Close Central Board of Ed
To the Editor:
"A School System -- For the Kids" (editorial, May 15) and "Who Can Fix the City's Schools?" (May 18), on school governance in New York City, claim that what is needed is to go beyond mere "tinkering at the margins." Yet this is the tack you take.
Few argue with the need to abandon the byzantine fashion we elect local school board members or to take steps to stem the patronage that eats away at the system.
However, it is only by attacking the systemic waste of resources that we can hope to turn the future around for our children.
The bill in Albany representing the proposal put forth by Queens Borough President Claire Schulman and myself gives parents, principals and teachers more authority over the running of their institutions.
It has the most sweeping anti-corruption package of any current proposal.
It increases mayoral accountability through a commissioner of education, who would oversee budget issues, monitor compliance with mandates and negotiate labor contracts.


Moscow Journal; The Latest Signs of Change: Russify That Name!
This spring, responding to fears that foreign signs, advertising and other influences were somehow sapping the Russian capital of its Russianness, the city of Moscow came out with a law requiring all stores and businesses to display signs in Russian, or at least transliterate them into the Cyrillic alphabet.
Since then, the city's Inspectorate for the Control of the Condition of Advertising and Artistic Decorations has been bombarded with a slew of questions from merchants who fret about the survival of registered trademarks in another alphabet.


Grammy Awards Expected To Return to New York in '94
The competition between New York and Los Angeles for the Grammy Awards has been resolved, at least for next year, and New York is the apparent winner.
Jonathan Tisch, the chairman of the New York City Host Committee for the 1994 Grammy Awards, said yesterday that the ceremony is to be held at Radio City Music Hall again after a one-year absence.
Reached by telephone late last night, Michael Greene, president of the National Academy of Recording Arts and Sciences, declined to confirm the return, but a news conference was scheduled this morning at City Hall.


Cardinal in Mexico Killed in a Shooting Tied to Drug Battle
One of Mexico's two Roman Catholic Cardinals was shot to death today along with six other people when gunmen believed to be involved with drug traffickers opened fire outside the airport in the western city of Guadalajara, police officials said.
Details of the shooting were still sketchy tonight, but the police and Government officials said it appeared that the prelate, Juan Jesus Cardinal Posadas Ocampo, had been caught in a crossfire as he he sat in his car at the airport parking lot.


Observer; Big Town Small Shots
They're running for mayor of New York again.
It must be the police escorts that go with the job.
Or maybe it's the free rent that goes with Gracie Mansion.
If you've ever had to pay rent in New York you know why a person will do almost anything to avoid it, even be mayor.
The truth about being mayor of New York is that it doesn't make much difference who does it.
New York goes right on being the same eternally exasperating, lovable old mess under Mayor Dinkins that it's been since His Honor was named Impellitteri, and maybe longer.


Sony Names Chief in U.S.
The Sony Corporation yesterday appointed Michael P. Schulhof president and chief executive of the Sony Corporation of America, previously Sony U.S.A.
Inc.
It is the parent company of Sony's United States operations, which include electronics manufacturing and marketing as well as the company's worldwide entertainment operations.


Market Place; Adobe's New Acrobat Software Could Prove to Be a Winner
ADOBE SYSTEMS INC. is dramatically silencing its doubters.
The creator of the software technology called Postscript, which has enabled high-quality printing in the personal computer market, recently fought off a substantial challenge from Microsoft and Apple Computer to keep its role as industry standard-setter.
Now it is preparing to ship a new software technology for electronic documents that many industry experts believe will be an even bigger win than Postscript.


Review/Television; Politics Dominates the Health Debate
Look for no scoops tonight about the Administration's health-care plan, which experts are presumably beating into final shape for its promised unveiling next month.
Instead, "Frontline" examines how the body politic has gone about producing what the program's narrator says "could be the most important social legislation of the past 50 years" and "the defining issue" of the Clinton Presidency.
As "The Health Care Gamble" notes, Bill Clinton was not the first Democrat to focus on health-care reform.
Harris Wofford of Pennsylvania won a Senate seat in 1991 with the slogan, "We want national health insurance and we want it now." And before you could say "Me, too," every aspiring Democratic Presidential candidate picked up the theme.


Arrest Made in Subway Stabbing of Helpful Man
A Manhattan man who fled a work-release program early this month was arrested and charged in the stabbing of a man who came to the aid of a Queens mother in a subway station as she was being attacked by a mugger.
The suspect also was charged with four other knifepoint robberies of women in New York, the police said.
The transit police credited the arrest to victims who came forward and helped them track down the suspect, who is believed to have been involved in a series of crimes in Manhattan in the last month.


Ametek and Icahn Join In Bid to Control E-II
Ametek Inc., an industrial manufacturer, joined the tussle for control of bankrupt E-II Holdings Inc. yesterday with a final-hour offer to buy the holding company's Culligan water purification company in alliance with the billionaire financier Carl C. Icahn.
The company said in a statement that it was prepared to pay $265 million for the Culligan International Company, and Mr.
Icahn said he would pay $570 million for the rest of E-II, primarily Samsonite luggage and McGregor apparel manufacturing.


INSIDE
Haiti Police Plan Is Rejected
Haiti's military authorities rejected a plan for a United Nations-backed police force as part of a settlement of its long political crisis.
Page A8.
Ex-G.M.
Official Fights Back
The hard-driving executive who left General Motors for Volkswagen denied taking any G.M. documents and sued his former employer.
Page D1.
New Listing of Stock Options
Today The Times introduces a new listing of stock options, consolidating coverage of options that trade on more than one exchange and providing comprehensive coverage of the most active options.
Article, page D1; table, page D17.


Jordan Is Revealed To Be of This Earth
The name of LaBradford Smith was extracted from Michael Jordan folklore yesterday as the news-media contingent from Chicago and elsewhere searched for proof that truly terrible things await he who dares to walk all over Air.
Smith is a guard for the Washington Bullets, who are in some quarters considered a team in the National Basketball Association.
Back in February, Mr.
Smith of Washington went to Chicago and, in the first game of a home-and-home series, torched Jordan and the Bulls for 37 points.


TOP RIVALS AGREE ON UNIFIED SYSTEM FOR ADVANCED TV
The three top rivals for the right to develop the next generation of television technology in the United States agreed today to join forces on a single approach, hastening the biggest change in broadcasting since the advent of color.
The agreement to collaborate on high-definition television, a move strongly supported by top Federal officials, eliminates the likelihood of protracted disputes and litigation, which could have delayed the introduction of the technology for years.
With today's agreement, HDTV -- offering wide-screen pictures nearly as bright and clear as movies and sound approaching the crispness of digital compact disks -- could be available as early as 1995.


Smith Is Now Adjusting to Being Moved Around
He can stand being called soft.
Five seasons in the league have taught Charles Smith how labels can be affixed or avoided.
What was harder to take was the defense of the Atlanta Hawks against the Knicks in early March, when Smith's production had dropped to the point where he was not considered worth guarding.
"When I caught the ball, there was no guy within three or four feet from me," Smith remembered.
"They'd double-team the guard and I'd step back and I'd catch it and they weren't rushing at me, I'll tell you that. They were coming towards me, but they were in no hurry."


Corrections
Eleven tables on page 15 in the Business section on Sunday, summarizing the stock market's activity last week, included erroneous data supplied by Tribune Media Services.
The tables for the market indexes, the market diary, the most active stocks, the largest percentage gainers and the largest percentage losers reflected trading in the week ended May 14, not May 21.
Readers wishing copies of the corrected tables may write to the Sunday Business Editor, The New York Times, 229 West 43d Street, New York, N.Y. 10036.


U.S. and France Are Split On Role of U.N. in Bosnia
The United States and France are divided over how broad the mandate should be for United Nations peacekeeping forces that are to protect six Muslim cities and towns in Bosnia.
The French Foreign Minister, Alain Juppe, said in discussions with American officials today that the enlarged peacekeeping force must in effect have war-making powers, including the right to retaliate against attacks by Bosnian Serbs on the designated safe havens.
And as part of its mission, he added, the United States must be ready to use its air power to protect the 1.2 million people living in the enclaves, senior French officials said today.


Corrections
A music review yesterday about Willie Nelson's concert at Radio City Music Hall on Saturday night referred incorrectly to Django Reinhart.
He was a guitarist.


More a Builder of Bridges Than a Typical Scholar
Dr.
Yolanda T. Moses, who was appointed last night as the new president of City College, has won a reputation as a builder of bridges, not as a scholar.
At the California State University branch where she is a vice president, she is known for her efforts to diversify the faculty and bring together different ethnic groups on campus.
Like some other college administrators, she has never published a book, although she has written for scholarly journals and contributed one chapter to each of two books, one on multicultural education and the other on diversity in American higher education.


Christopher Warns Iraqi Chief Not to Attack Kurds in North
Secretary of State Warren Christopher issued a blunt warning to President Saddam Hussein of Iraq today not to stage an offensive against Kurds in an autonomous enclave of northern Iraq.
Mr.
Christopher said the United States would be "watching very carefully" to see if Iraq intended such an attack.
Other State Department officials called attention to a United Nations resolution that prohibits Iraq from engaging in repression of its people.


Q&amp;A
Birds' Nests
Q.
Do birds often re-use their nests?
And when they do, as a pair of phoebes seems to be doing in my back yard, is it the same pair from year to year, or their children, or the same female with a new mate, or what?
A.
"Yes, birds often do re-use their nests," said Dr.
Charles Walcott, the Louis Aggassiz Fuertes Director of the Laboratory of Ornithology at Cornell University in Ithaca, N.Y.
"Not always and not all birds, but the phoebe is a perfect example of a species that uses the same nest from year to year."


Before the Thrills and Chills, It's Nuts and Bolts


Corrections
A chart on May 3 about school board elections in Queens misstated one District 27 board member's position on whether to rehire the district superintendent.
The board member, James B. Egan, says he is undecided about the rehiring of the superintendent, Beverly Hall.


New! Improved! $100 Million Soap!
The Lever Brothers Company is giving a line of "super-concentrated" liquid detergents the most super-concentrated send-off in its history.
Lever will spend more than $100 million on advertising and promotional programs to bring out super-concentrated versions of its three liquid detergents, Wisk, Surf and All.
That is on top of the $100 million the company spent in the last three years on research and development to reformulate its flagship liquid brands.


Prudential's Firm Within a Firm
The atmosphere was tense last July at a meeting in the Manhattan headquarters of Prudential Securities as a roomful of senior executives considered a single question:
Could Prudential, the nation's third-largest brokerage firm, finally dismiss J. Frederic Storaska, a Dallas stockbroker?


Study on Lead in Water Confuses Matters
To the Editor:
Re "High Level of Lead Found in Water Serving 30 Million" (news article, May 12): The Environmental Protection Agency's survey of lead in drinking water is a disservice to efforts to protect the public from lead exposure.
Not only do the results inflate potential public health risks, but they may also fail to flag the water systems posing the greatest hazard.


RJR NABISCO OPENS COUNTRY'S LARGEST MARGARINE PLANT


W. A. Lapp, Collector And Doctor, Dies at 78
Dr.
Warren Anthony Lapp, who practiced obstetrics and gynecology in Brooklyn for 35 years, died on Thursday at his home in Charlotte, N.C.
He was 78 and had moved to North Carolina after his retirement in 1981.
He had a long illness, his family said.


New Yorker Articles on Analyst Harmed Their Relationship, His Ex-Lover Tells Jury
Jeffrey M. Masson's former girlfriend today described harassing telephone calls and insulting remarks directed at her by readers of Janet Malcolm's articles about Mr.
Masson in The New Yorker magazine and said his "obsession" with the unflattering profile contributed to the breakup of their six-year relationship.
The former girlfriend, Denise Weinstein, testifying on Mr.
Masson's behalf in his libel lawsuit, said telephone calls and visitors to clothing stores that she she owned at the time the articles were published mocked her for her romantic entanglement with a man of confessed promiscuity.


As Good as the Hype, Canadiens Set for Final
There was a moment, on a quiet practice day at Nassau Coliseum, when it all got to Ray Ferraro.
The Montreal Canadiens had taken a 2-0 lead in the four-of-seven-game Wales Conference championship series and the underdog Islanders had returned home to Long Island for Game 3.
Already, there was talk of a sweep, suggestions that the Islanders would not be able to steal a single game from the newly ordained Stanley Cup favorites.
It made Ferraro angry.


Government Levels $11.1 Million Environmental Fine


Flyers Choose Simpson to Be New Coach
The Philadelphia Flyers yesterday named TERRY SIMPSON head coach to replace BILL DINEEN, who will remain with the club as a scout.
Simpson, 49, was an assistant with the Winnipeg Jets the last three seasons and was head coach of the Islanders in 1986-87.
"Terry has been known for his hard-working teams who play sound defense and an aggressive physical style," General Manager RUSS FARWELL said.


I.B.M. Going To Markets For $3 Billion
I.B.M. announced yesterday that it planned to raise up to $3 billion in the financial markets for corporate expenses that could include paying for higher-than-expected cutbacks in its work force.
The International Business Machines Corporation last year took a big charge against earnings to help pay for reducing its payroll by 25,000 workers this year.
Earlier this year, the company acknowledged that the number would exceed 25,000, but has not been more precise.
That, company officials say, is partly because work force decisions are increasingly left to the heads of its business divisions.


Navy Hearing on Killer's Penalty May Skirt Victim's Homosexuality
After months of speculation about the effect the beating death of a gay sailor might have on the debate over homosexuals in the military, hearings in the sentencing of a shipmate who killed him produced one surprise today: it appears that the homosexuality of the victim may not play a big role in these proceedings.
Airman Apprentice Terry M. Helvey, 21, has pleaded guilty to murdering Allen R. Schindler last year in a public toilet outside the United States Navy base at Sasebo, in southwestern Japan.
Today, the military judge accepted the plea, and a hearing began before a jury to determine the sentence.


Review/Rock; Growling, Gnashing And Much Moshing. As Usual.
The audience came to mosh at Roseland on Saturday night, and so did the bands.
With each song's first pounding, gnashing riff, the dance floor became a maelstrom of flailing arms and colliding bodies.
As the bands played, members of Living Colour and Bad Brains climbed atop the speaker cabinets and leaped down onto the outstretched hands of fans, who passed them around and then carried them back to the stage.
Even after the final encore, Vernon Reid, Living Colour's guitarist and founder, took one last jump.
The novelty has worn off the fact that Living Colour, four black musicians, play heavy metal, an overwhelmingly white genre.
But as it settles in for the long haul, Living Colour keeps proving itself with remarkable musicianship that galvanizes audiences like the sold-out house at Roseland.
Rock critics have complained that some of Living Colour's songs are didactic, but the crowd didn't seem to mind having the occasional conscientious message slipped in amid the furious crunch and improvisational frenzy of the music.


White House Asked Aid Of F.B.I. in Dismissals
Amid concern in the White House last Friday over charges that cronyism lay behind the dismissal of seven travel aides, Clinton advisers summoned a senior official in the Federal Bureau of Investigation to a political strategy session and solicited a public statement from the agency backing their version of events.
By calling on the F.B.I. to help save the Administration from embarrassment, the White House appeared to be deviating from two decades of efforts to insulate the law-enforcement agency from even the appearance of Presidential manipulation.


Clock Runs Out on the Islanders' Overtime Season
A season to savor ended tonight for the Islanders when the Montreal Canadiens eliminated them from the Stanley Cup playoffs.
The cold statistics showed a 5-2 decision at the Forum and a 4-games-to-1 triumph in Wales Conference finals for Montreal, which will meet either Los Angeles or Toronto in the Stanley Cup finals.
But beyond the immediate disappointment, the Islanders begin their off season with major points of pride.
They reached the Stanley Cup semifinals for the first time since 1984, when their four-year cup dynasty ended in the final round to Edmonton.


Meek He's Not. M.V.P. He Is.
Charles Barkley has finally put a trophy where his mouth is.
Had he swiped a most valuable player ballot, he would have voted for himself, twice, but instead he legitimately has won the award.
The National Basketball Association will not make the official proclamation until Tuesday, but league executives confirmed this afternoon that this 6-foot-4 1/2-inch forward, who shaves his head twice a week, plays golf four days a week and prefers not to be a role model, has been anointed its premier player in balloting by writers and broadcasters.


Innis Campaign for Mayor: A Quixotic Quest?
In his quixotic candidacy for mayor of New York City, even Roy E. Innis himself reluctantly acknowledges what many political pundits take as a forgone conclusion: that his chances of being elected are slim.
But that appears to matter very little to the 58-year-old Mr.
Innis, who seems to thrive on whatever attention he can get in a candidacy that is as unconventional as its candidate.
He has raised little money and his campaign for the Democratic nomination operates on a shoestring.
But what matters most, Mr.
Innis says, is that his views are now getting an airing.
"My aim is to give a voice to the silent majority in both the white and black communities," Mr.
Innis said.
"I want to give them a focal point to rally around. I bring to this campaign the passion, skills and personality of leadership."


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
6.50
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
3.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.13
2.96
3.74
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.06
2.99
3.67
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.19
3.11
3.77
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
5.79
5.78
7.02
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.00
7.04
7.82
TELEPHONE BONDS
7.93
7.95
8.77
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
5.92
5.93
6.61
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Dow Advances 14.95 on Moderate Volume
The stock market rose yesterday in relatively modest trading after a sharp drop on Friday.
But the winning stocks seemed to be concentrated among blue-chip issues like A.T.&amp; T., I.B.M. and Disney.
Indeed, on the New York Stock Exchange, losing stocks narrowly outnumbered winners 992 to 950.


People
*
William Vieser was, as expected, named executive vice president and group account director for the Mercedes-Benz of North America account at Scali, McCabe, Sloves, New York, succeeding Philippe R. Defechereux, who left.
Mr.
Vieser was most recently president at McCaffrey &amp; McCall, New York, Mercedes-Benz's previous agency. *
Tom Darbyshire, copywriter and creative group head at Earle Palmer Brown, Bethesda, Md., was promoted to co-creative director, succeeding Terry Taylor, who will continue as creative group head.
Mr.
Darbyshire will share the agency's creative responsibility with Robin Sherman.


The Reds Have A New Manager: Name Is Johnson
After the Cincinnati Reds named Tony Perez manager last Oct. 30, they also hired two others who had sought the job and a third former major league manager.
With Davey Johnson, Bobby Valentine and Jack McKeon on the Reds' roster of employees as consultants or advisers, Perez understandably could have felt uneasy and insecure about his position.
But two months ago, in spring training, Perez said: "Everybody feels sorry for me but myself. I know what we're doing. We're trying to be as good as we can be. It doesn't matter that they're here. If I don't do my job, I get fired. They could get anybody over here, whether they're working for you or not."


Knicks Aren't Allowing the Bulls to Shoot the Breeze
No other team has stymied the Chicago Bulls' offense this season as the Knicks have.
And if that trend continues, New York has an excellent chance to dethrone the Bulls.
In five meetings this season, the Knicks have never allowed Chicago to reach 100 points.
And even when Michael Jordan has exploded for an inevitable big game, New York has found ways to control the rest of Chicago's lineup.


Bridge
It is quite possible to be very unlucky and very lucky on the same deal.
The diagramed case in point is provided by David Berah, who used to represent Venezuela in international competition and now lives in Manhattan.
Playing at the Regency Whist Club, 15 East 67th Street, he sat South, and reached a normal contract of six hearts.
He won the opening diamond lead with the ace, crossed to his hand with a club lead to the king, and ruffed his remaining diamond.
But when he cashed the heart king, planning to finesse the jack on the next round, he had a rude shock: West discarded a diamond.


BUSINESS MEN'S ASSURANCE TO ACQUIRE JONES &amp; BABSON
The Business Men's Assurance Company of America, a provider of life and health insurance policies, said yesterday that it was acquiring Jones &amp; Babson Inc., a mutual fund company which manages $1.7 billion in 19 mutual fund portfolios, for undisclosed terms.
Giorgio Balzer, the chairman and chief executive of Business Men's, which is based in Kansas City, Mo., said the acquisition would help the insurance company become a bigger force in the pension and retirement fund market.


Blacks at Penn Drop a Charge Of Harassment
Saying they could not get justice, five black students at the University of Pennsylvania today dropped their charge of racial harassment against the white student who called them "water buffalo" after they refused to break up a party in front of his dormitory.
The black students' decision ends a university disciplinary proceeding that has drawn national attention to the way Penn handles racial incidents.
The case has drawn special interest because the university's president, Sheldon Hackney, is President Clinton's nominee to head the National Endowment for the Humanities.


Chess
The road to a match for the world championship with Gary Kasparov of Russia is a long, hard one.
It runs through a round of zonal tournaments all over the globe to the interzonals, from which candidates are selected for the elimination matches that eventually produce a championship challenger.
And Judit Polgar, not yet 17 years old, is on the way.
In fact, she is the first woman to make it to the interzonal stage, to be held this summer in Biel, Switzerland.
Polgar, who lives in Budapest with her two extraordinary, chess-playing sisters, Zsuzsa, 24, and Zsofia, 18, got through narrowly by achieving a tie for second place behind the Bulgarian grandmaster Kiril Georgiev in the Budapest zonal competition.
Polgar then won a double-round elimination tie-break tournament in March in Budapest against the three players deadlocked with her.
TIE-BREAK STANDINGS Player . . .
W. . . .
L. . . .
D. . . .
Pts.
Polgar . . . 3 . . . 1 . . . 2 . . . 4 Ftacnik . . . 2 . . . 2 . . . 2 . . . 3 Wojtkiewicz . . . 1 . . . 1 . . . 4 . . . 3 Gdanski . . . 0 . . . 2 . . . 4 . . . 2
The third qualifier for the interzonal was Lubomir Ftacnik of Slovakia, who played even with the Polish champion Alexander Wojtkiewicz in the tie-breaks but beat him out in their games against each other by a score of 1 1/2- 1/2.
Polgar incisively disposed of the Polish international master Jacek Gdanski's French Defense in Round 2 with a powerful mating attack.
There are not many openings as demanding as the Winawer Variation of the French Defense, initiated by 3 . . .
Bb4.
After 4 e5 Ne7 5 a3 Bc3 6 bc, White has the bishop-pair and a space advantage on the kingside as against his awkward doubled c pawns and Black's space advantage on the queenside.
The most direct, aggressive way to exploit this is 7 Qg4.
Yet Black need not passively defend but can plan on a counterattack with 7 . . .
Qc7.
For example, after 8 Qg7 Rg8 9 Qh7 cd 10 Ne2 Nbc6 11 f4 Bd7, it is difficult to contain Black's dynamic possibilities.
Polgar, of course, knows all this and has previously shown a preference for the gambit sideline with 8 Bd3 that she used here.
For a long time, it was thought that accepting the gambit with 8 . . . cd 9 Ne2 dc 10 Qg7 Rg8 11 Qh7 Qe5 12 Bf4 Qf6 13 h4 was unfavorable for Black, but in a Milu-D.
Popescu game last year in Bucharest, Romania, Popescu boldly tried 13 . . .
Rg2!?, with the idea that 14 Bg3 e5 15 Kf1 Rg3 16 Ng3 Bg4 would give him powerfully dynamic counterplay.
Milu backed off with 14 Kf1, but after 14 . . . e5!? 15 Kg2 ef 16 Qh5 Nbc6 17 Qf3 Ng6 18 Bg6?
Qg6 19 Kf1 Bg4! 20 Qc3, Black would have had the upper hand with 20 . . .
Qe4 21 f3 Bf3 22 Re1 O-O-O 23 Ng1 Bg2 24 Kf2 Qg6.
Gdanski avoided this, surely because he suspected that Polgar had come prepared with a new deadly wrinkle.
Still, his supposedly quiet method of closing the position with 8 . . . c4 9 Be2 O-O was not a permanent damper to White's aggressions.
Polgar's 11 Bg5 Qa5 12 Kd2! left the black king pretty much cut off from its potential queenside defenders, while the white king was really secure, as Polgar would soon show.
Gdanski's 12 . . . f5 had the clever point that 13 ef?! e5! 14 Qh5 g6! 15 Qh6 Nf5 16 Qh3 16 Nfd4 turns the attack over to Black.
Gdanski must have felt safe in taking a defender away from his king with 14 . . .
Nc8.
He was right in thinking that he had a legitimate attack of his own but erred in underestimating how fast Polgar could strike.
Polgar halted Gdanski's attack with 18 Ra4!
Qa4 and then charged with 19 h6!
After 19 . . . g6 20 Bf6, Gdanski suddenly realized that she was about to crush 20 . . .
Kg8 by 21 Qg6! hg 22 h7 Kf7 23 Ng5 Ke8 24 h8/Q Qa3 25 Qg7 Ne7 26 Rh8.
After 20 . . .
Rf6 21 ef Kg8 22 Qc7!, defense by 22 . . .
Rd8 would crack under 23 Ne5 Qa5 24 f7 Kf8 (24 . . . Kh8 permits 25 Qd6 followed by 26 f8/Q) 25 Nd7.
Gdanski's 22 . . .
Nb4 was desperation.
After 23 cb Qb4 24 Kg3 g5 25 Ng5, there was no help in 25 . . .
Qc3 26 Bd3!, so Gdanski gave up.


CHRONICLE
JIMMY STEWART missed his own birthday party Saturday night in Beverly Hills, Calif.
More than 600 people turned out at the Regent Beverly Wilshire Hotel for the party, but Mr.
Stewart, who turned 85 on Thursday, stayed home on the advice of his physicians.
His wife, Gloria, said, "There's nothing really wrong, but he just didn't feel well enough."
The actor was hospitalized for several days in March at St.
John's Hospital and Health Center in Santa Monica, Calif., with an irregular heartbeat, which is being controlled with medication.
He had a pacemaker implanted three weeks ago.
Last month, the hospital asked fans to send birthday cards.
More than 15,000 were received, MARY BARROW, a spokeswoman for the hospital's fund-raising foundation, said yesterday.


Man Held in Fraud Pleads Not Guilty
A disbarred lawyer charged with stealing more than $1.5 million from at least nine investors, including the actress Shirley Jones, was arraigned today in Federal District Court here.
The defendant, Alan David Harris of Westwood, Calif., and Roslyn Harbor, L.I., pleaded not guilty to 40 counts of mail and wire fraud.
Since his arrest in December on charges that he recruited investors for a series of bogus real-estate projects in New York, California and Nevada, at least four more victims have come forward, said John La Perla, an investigator for the Postal Service.
The losses are now estimated at more than $3 million, he said.
At the arraignment, the prosecutor, Bradley D. Simon, asked Judge Leonard D. Wexler to hold Mr.
Harris without bail, saying that since his arrest Mr.
Harris has continued to defraud investors.
Paul K. Rooney, the fourth lawyer to represent Mr.
Harris since December, argued against that request, maintaining that his client has done nothing to harm anybody.
Judge Wexler scheduled a hearing for June 1 on whether Mr.
Harris should be held without bail.


TIBETANS PROTEST CHINA'S IRON RULE
Hundreds of Tibetans protested against Chinese rule today in the most serious such demonstration in the last few years, American travelers said by telephone.
The authorities initially permitted the protest, but when it grew, they responded by firing barrages of tear gas at the protesters.
The police detained at least nine foreigners briefly and warned all foreigners to stay off the streets on Tuesday because of concerns that the protests will continue.


DNA to Be Used to Monitor Effects of Ozone Depletion
IN a novel approach to assessing the harmful biological effects of sunlight, a researcher in Florida and the Federal Environmental Protection Agency plan to use a device that contains human DNA to measure surface exposure to cancer-causing ultraviolet radiation.
The scientist, Dr.
James Regan, a biology professor at the Florida Institute of Technology in Melbourne, will direct a three-year study with the agency to evaluate the DNA dosimeter and adapt it for use as a personal monitor.
It measures ultraviolet-B radiation, the type most closely linked to skin cancer in humans.


Bar on H.I.V.-Infected Immigrants Is Retained in Final Capitol Test
Supporters of allowing those infected with the virus that causes AIDS to enter the United States lost a final battle today as conferees from both houses endorsed continuing a prohibition on entry by infected travelers and immigrants.
The decision came as the conferees approved and sent both houses a bill reauthorizing the National Institutes of Health and authorizing $7 billion of its $10 billion budget for the 1994 fiscal year. 'Votes Were Simply Not There'
The bill contained a number of disputed provisions, but none was more debated than the issue of whether persons infected with H.I.V., the virus that causes AIDS, should be prevented from entering the country.
Both Dr.
Louis W. Sullivan, the Secretary of Health and Human Services in the Bush Administration and President Clinton said in campaign speeches that those with AIDS should not be excluded from the country.


Review/Dance; 4 Works From the 60's: 2 Exuberant, 2 Quiet
Choreographically, 1960 was a vintage year for George Balanchine.
The New York City Ballet presented four of his creations from that year on Sunday afternoon at the New York State Theater as part of its "Balanchine Celebration." Each was joyous.
But where two were exuberant, two were quiet.
"Donizetti Variations" is surely a ballet for a bright spring day.
Although it is set to music by an Italian composer, this piece has often reminded dancegoers of the works of August Bournonville, the 19th-century Danish choreographer who is celebrated for the speed and lightness of his steps.
The movements Balanchine devised for "Donizetti Variations" are equally airy, and the piece received a buoyant performance by a cast in which the male star was the Danish-born Nikolaj Hubbe.


Corrections
An article on May 17 about the increasing number of black, Hispanic and Asian converts to Judaism misidentified the branch chosen by most converts.
It is Reform Judaism, not Orthodox or Conservative.


After the Minks, Elegantly Simple Furs
Fur fashion shows actually focus on a woman's second fur coat in tacit acceptance of the fact that the first one is usually a mink.
There are plenty of lavish mink coats in most collections, but only a sampling is put on the runway for fear of boring the audience.
The second styles in the fall fur showings last week were casual shearlings, sheared beaver or squirrel or luxurious fisher, sable, lynx or chinchilla, depending on whether the customer would be trading up or down.
Still, there was considerable news in mink.
Now that the enormous shoulder pads of the past decade have been relegated to fashion limbo and the structure of most coats has been softened by the elimination of most stiffening and inner construction, even the basic mink has changed its look.
Often it is fitted, with just a suggestion of a higher waistline.
Gold buttons marching double file down the front contribute to the military look also strong in cloth coats.
Ranch-Bred Skins
The favored skins this season are on the dark side, referred to in the programs as "wild-type mink." This is to reassure viewers and wearers that the furs are from ranch-bred animals, not trapped ones.
Prices quoted by various companies for good-quality long coats range from $5,500 to $16,000.


Board of Trade Is Cited In Futures Complaints
The regulator for the nation's futures markets filed its first complaint ever against the Chicago Board of Trade yesterday, with charges related to the 1990 collapse of Stotler &amp; Company, a futures trading firm.
Also named in the complaints brought by the Commodity Futures Trading Commission were Coopers &amp; Lybrand, the accounting firm for Stotler, and three senior officers of companies tied to Stotler, which was owned by Karsten Mahlmann, the former head of the Board of Trade.


Gun Crazy
Last October a 16-year-old Japanese exchange student named Yoshihiro Hattori adopted an old American custom and got all dressed up for Halloween.
He put on a white tux, a lot of jewelry and presto! he was Tony Manero, the swivel-hipped protagonist of "Saturday Night Fever." A few hours later he was dead -- because of another old American custom.
Yoshi and a friend were looking for a party in Central, a suburb of Baton Rouge, La., and rang the wrong doorbell.
On opening the front door and seeing a stranger, Bonnie Peairs was scared witless.
"I wish I could have thought," she said later.
"If I could have just thought."


Annenberg Donates A van Gogh to the Met
In one of the most glittering additions in recent years to its outstanding collection of 19th-century European paintings, the Metropolitan Museum of Art has been given Vincent van Gogh's "Wheat Field With Cypresses." The 1889 scene of a windswept landscape beneath a roiling sky has been donated by Walter H. Annenberg, a former United States Ambassador to Britain and a longtime trustee of the museum, who has promised to bequeath his entire collection of paintings to the Metropolitan.
Mr.
Annenberg, who made his fortune in publishing, said yesterday that he paid $57 million for the van Gogh, the most he had ever spent on a single painting.
He acquired it from the collection of the family of the Swiss industrialist Emil G. Buhrle, who died in 1956.


Real Estate Is Restricted For Pensions
The Supreme Court ruled in an important pension case today that employers cannot meet their financing obligations to employee pension plans by selling or transferring real property to the plans.
In an 8-to-1 decision, the Court overturned a ruling by a Federal appeals court in New Orleans that United States Government pension regulators had viewed as opening a loophole in the rules governing defined-benefit plans.


Topics of The Times; Big T
New York City police recently confiscated more than a million T-shirts in a raid on a mid-Manhattan building that was churning out "designer" counterfeits.
Police raids don't often bag as many as a million of anything, but a million T-shirts?
Yes, and that's just a drop in the bucket.
T-shirts are big business, especially shirts that say something funny or raunchy, or shirts that advertise macho blue jeans or where you've been -- or wish you'd been -- like a rock concert or Sun Valley.
The man who shuttles Russia's U.N. diplomats around New York in a bus wears one that says: President Bill Clinton / Georgetown Class of '68.


Talks Ordered in Battle to Control Olympia
A Federal bankruptcy judge yesterday ordered the two sides battling for control of the American arm of Olympia &amp; York Developments Ltd. of Canada to try to resolve their differences within the next three weeks.
In ordering a cooling-off period, Federal Bankruptcy Judge James L. Garrity Jr. in Manhattan ruled against a motion filed by Citibank to give control of the United States holdings to the unit's current president, John Zuccotti.


Pazienza Comes to Aid of Fellow Fighter
VINNY PAZIENZA, making a boxing comeback form a serious injury, has donated $10,000 worth of boxing tickets to a fund benefiting SERGEI ARTEMIEV, the Russian boxer who collapsed in a fight in March after suffering a brain injury.
Artemiev will never fight again, but he is lucky to be alive.
There was a period when doctors did not know if he would regain clear vision or a functioning memory after surgery removed a blood clot in his brain.


Play Taps for Nuclear Tests
The nuclear arms race has run its course, but the nuclear laboratories and the Pentagon don't seem to know it.
They want to resume testing this year.
Test blasts may have made sense when it was important to deter a Soviet attack.
But in today's changed climate they would set a terrible example for would-be proliferators.
A group of 23 Democratic senators recognize this dangerous anachronism.
They've urged President Clinton to announce that the U.S. will not be the first to break the current moratorium on tests that is now being observed as well by Russia and France.
Resumption would discourage negotiation of a truly comprehensive ban on nuclear tests to replace the moratorium.


Japanese Joining Computer Display Venture
Kaleida Labs, a joint venture of Apple Computer and I.B.M., announced here today that three Japanese electronics giants had joined its quest to create a standard for computers that can display video images and reproduce music and voices.
Hitachi Ltd., the Mitsubishi Electric Corporation and the Toshiba Corporation -- along with Apple Computer Inc. and the International Business Machines Corporation -- have become charter members of an alliance to use Script X, Kaleida's computer language for the creation and playback of multimedia programs.
Also joining is Creative Technology Ltd. a Singapore company known for its Sound Blaster circuit board that allows personal computers to reproduce sounds.
Opportunity for Growth
Script X is being advanced as a standard for multimedia computers and consumer devices, particularly those that store programs on CD-ROM's, variations of the audio compact disk.
But many leading companies have not yet signed up to use Script X.


Expatriate Germans Lack a Law of Return
To the Editor:
"Germany Pays to Keep Ethnic Germans in Russia" (front page, May 9) states that "The German Constitution recognizes nationality by blood and birth, and in Germany, like Israel, there is a law of return."
There is no such far-reaching provision in the German Constitution.
Aside from offering protection against involuntary loss of citizenship, the Constitution grants the right of immigration and a claim for citizenship to people persecuted in World War II for their German ethnic background.
The reason was moral.
The Constitution simply recognizes that these ethnic Germans would not have been subject to persecution had it not been for the war, for which Germany has accepted responsibility.


Florio Gets Singled Out By Kennedys For Courage
Gov.
Jim Florio of New Jersey accepted an award for political courage today from the Kennedy family, saying he hoped the day would come when politicians would not have to be honored for sticking to their principles.
"I tell you, I look forward to the day when public servants who follow the dictates of their conscience are not regarded as heroes worthy of awards, but simply as men and women who are worthy of the offices to which they've been entrusted," he said in a ceremony at the John F. Kennedy Library here.


Before Skies Become Entirely Barren of Birds; What Data?
To the Editor:
In "Facts, Not Species, Are Periled" (Op-Ed, May 13), Julian Simon and Aaron Wildavsky state that the "standard source of all the apocalyptic forecasts" of mass extinction of species is "a 1979 book, 'The Sinking Ark,' by a conservation biologist, Norman Myers."
Since writing this book, I have published several dozen papers in scientific journals and three further books that clarify and substantiate my 1979 assertions -- except that these further writings demonstrate that the extinction rate is not 100 species a year but more like 50 to 150 species a day.
This finding has been confirmed by independent analyses by other leading biologists, such as Professor Edward O. Wilson of Harvard.


Software Sag
ISG International Software, an Israeli company, has thrived by writing software meant to enhance productivity, as with one of its best-selling programs that generates reports.
But last Friday, it reported lower-than-expected quarterly earnings, citing completion of a contract with I.B.M.
Yesterday, ISG closed at a new 52-week low.


Patterns
Raised Eyebrows in England
Some readers of the June issue of British Vogue have their knickers in a twist over a photo spread of underwear, which they say has overtones of pedophilia.


Washington at Work; Clinton's Woes on Capitol Hill Spur Sharp Criticism of His Top Lobbyist
When President Clinton made Howard Paster his chief lobbyist on Capitol Hill, he turned to the ultimate Washington insider.
As a lobbyist for the United Automobile Workers, Mr.
Paster had played a leading role in negotiating the loan bailout for the Chrysler Corporation.
He kept Eastern Airlines flying a few more years by negotiating tax breaks for the carrier.
And representing the oil industry, he helped soften environmental provisions in the 1991 Clean Air Act.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A2-8  RIGHTS PROPOSAL FOR CHINA  Top advisers to President Clinton recommended that he renew China's favorable trade status but require Beijing to improve its human rights record before any further annual renewals are granted.
A1  TIBETANS PROTEST CHINESE RULE  A protest against inflation in Lhasa broadened into a condemnation of Chinese rule, and police responded with tear gas.
A3


Now, Repeat After Me: The Quick Brown Fox
A KEYBOARD that talks back may sound crazy, but think about it.
What if you are learning to type?
A keyboard that says aloud the letter you have struck could be reassuring.
Someone entering material from a printed source would not have to keep shifting eyes from paper to screen.
A person with a speech disability could type a message and let the computer read the words.
This is made possible by a family of products from Intellitools, formerly Unicorn Engineering, of Richmond, Calif.


After Gunman's Acquittal, Japan Struggles to Understand America
From the moment a Japanese exchange student was shot to death near Baton Rouge, La., last October, the stereotype of the United States that streams across Japan's airwaves seemed amplified night after night: America the nation of gun-wielding paranoids, an out-of-control society where .44 Magnum revolvers are as common as toaster ovens.
Today, with the acquittal of Rodney Peairs, a homeowner who shot the 16-year-old Japanese high school student, Yoshihiro Hattori, just outside his door, Japan's anger shifted from America's gun culture to its justice system.
Under what logic, television commentators and newspaper editorialists demanded, could the courts turn free a man who, under the Japanese legal system, would almost certainly be facing years in prison?


School Computers Emulate Games To Capture the Attention of Pupils
A NEW wave of innovative computer programs and interactive devices is about to hit the nation's schools, driven by a national desire to address education problems, rapidly falling prices of computer and video technology, and the keenness of software companies to invade the vast educational market.
Representatives from Sega and Nintendo, the computer games companies, joined Apple, Sun Microsystems and Silicon Graphics and luminaries from government and education at a conference convened in Washington this month by the National Academy of Sciences.
Their purpose was to explore how the bright new technologies of computer entertainment and communication might be harnessed to enliven the nation's classrooms.


LEADERS IN HAITI SPURN POLICE PLAN
After two days of talks and a month of intense diplomatic pressure, Haiti's military authorities have rejected an American-backed United Nations plan to deploy an international police force here as part of a settlement of Haiti's long political crisis, diplomats said today.
The rejection was delivered to President Clinton's special adviser for Haitian affairs, Lawrence Pezzullo, and the United Nations special envoy to Haiti, Dante Caputo.
It came after American diplomats expressed strong confidence in recent days that army leaders would accept the return of the country's elected President, the Rev.
Jean-Bertrand Aristide.


A Birthday for a City Landmark


Bowe's Bums Rush Into HBO's Arms
Just because Riddick Bowe, the 66 2/3 percent heavyweight champion, is in the bum-of-the-trimester business, does HBO Sports have to be?
Sure.
But before we proceed, remember not to call Jesse Ferguson, who plotzed to Bowe in 107 seconds Saturday night, a bum, or Bowe's second easy title defense a mismatch to Seth Abraham, the chieftain of HBO Sports.


Hostility to Allies' New Plan For Bosnia Increases at U.N.
Two days after the United States and four other countries announced a new strategy to contain the fighting in Bosnia and Herzegovina, opposition appears to be growing so rapidly that doubts were raised today about the plan's early enactment in the Security Council.
Fifty-one Islamic countries denounced the agreement by the United States, Russia, Britain, France and Spain because it failed to authorize military force to roll back territorial gains by the Serbs against the Bosnian Muslims.


Trade or Colonialism? Ruins May Give Answer
ON a limestone bluff overlooking the Euphrates in southeastern Turkey, a low mound spreads across several acres, blanketing the ruins of a settlement that bustled with life and trade in the late fourth millennium B.C.
The ruins may tell a tale of how the world's first urban societies reached into the hinterlands for raw materials and thus started the earliest practice of colonialism.
Or it may turn out to be a somewhat different story.


A NEW PRESIDENT FOR CITY COLLEGE
The trustees of the City University of New York last night appointed a black anthropologist from an urban California campus as the next president of City College, long the jewel but now one of the most troubled of the university system's 21 campuses.
In selecting Dr.
Yolanda T. Moses as City College's new president, the board chose a little-known vice president for academic affairs from California State University in Dominguez Hills, a largely black suburb of Los Angeles, who is known as a strong proponent of cultural diversity.


George M. DeLalio, 63, Aeronautical Engineer
George M. DeLalio, an aeronautical engineer and authority on electron beam technology, died on Friday at his home in Dix Hills, L.I.
He was 63.
In 1965, Mr.
DeLalio was founding president of E B Industries of Farmingdale, L.I., which over the years has used electron-beam technology on a broad range of projects for NASA, I.B.M., A.T.&amp; T. and other major corporations.
In this process, an accelerated stream of electrons is used to fuse precision components together.


Coslet Voices Confidence About Esiason
Jets Coach Bruce Coslet says he isn't worried about how quarterback Boomer Esiason will handle the fact that his 2-year-old son, Gunnar, has cystic fibrosis.
"I know Boomer will fight it," Coslet said yesterday.
"He won't accept defeat in it. With my limited knowledge of the disease, I know they've made great strides just recently. He'll handle his job. As he has said, the football is therapy for him."


Innis Seeking to Speak for the 'Silent Majority'


Daly Pleads Guilty to Misdemeanor
JOHN DALY pleaded guilty to a lesser charge of misdemeanor harassment arising from a disturbance at his Castle Rock., Colo., home on Dec. 20, the PGA Tour said in a statement yesterday.
The plea will be withdrawn when Daly completes a counseling program for alcohol abuse.
The original charge of third-degree assault was dismissed.


Proposed Incinerators Protested at Recycling Celebration in Brooklyn


Audi Names Review Finalists
Audi of America Inc. said yesterday that it had narrowed the review on its $23 million to $28 million account to three finalists, from seven semifinalists.
Since 1969, the account had been at DDB Needham Worldwide, which was previously eliminated from the review.


Topics of The Times; Old 'Cheers,' New Fan
There is at least one American who owns two television sets and a VCR who had never seen "Cheers." She even missed the nationwide party that was last Thursday's farewell performance.
Sunday's rerun, however, gave her a second chance to see what the fuss was all about.
So she tuned in for episode 275.
It was not, "Cheers" regulars say, one of the truly great scripts.
"You shoulda seen it the night Diane . . ." or "You shoulda seen it when Sam . . ." people told her the next day.
But it was enough to confirm an old and favorite theory.
When it comes to sitcoms, Smaller Is Better and Familiar Is Forever.


For Yanks, a Bit Of Everything, Except a Victory
Talk about emotion.
Talk about theatrics.
Talk about drama.
Talk about fear.
Then talk about Yankee Stadium last night because the fabled park was fraught with these elements as the Yankees and Orioles slugged and slogged through nine strange innings of baseball.
There was Danny Tartabull lying stiffly on the outfield grass for five minutes with an injury, the scary stuff on a wacky night.
Before Tartabull's collision with Gerald Williams, there were two runners thrown out at home in the same inning, two homers by Kevin Maas and leads vanishing like free beer with Jim Abbott and Rick Sutcliffe pitching.
Finally, when was the last time anyone saw Cal Ripken hit a homer away from Baltimore?


By Design; Romantic Accessories
Women of all ages have been swept up suddenly by the romantic appeal of accessories that echo the Edwardian era.
Many stores are having a hard time keeping up with the demand for ribbon chokers suspending hearts, flowers, crosses or cameos.
The same is true of chokers of delicate braided leather dangling arrows or eggs.
The more diminutive the pendant, the more desirable it is.
Itty-bitty earrings are big time, too.
More evidence of the desire for dainty accessories is the current popularity of wispy straw or linen hats, their small brims perhaps dolloped with silk or paper flowers.
To be properly a la mode, these hats should look as if they had been caught in a summer shower or crushed in a pocket.
Their bedraggled, knockabout shapes are part of their appeal.


Health Care Keeps Rank As Job Leader
Even amid the steep job losses that have buffeted the New York City economy since 1989, the city's health care industry has grown rapidly, solidifying its position as the city's largest employer by far, according to a new Federal report.
But the explosive growth of the industry also underscores a problem for the city, experts say, as the skills and education demanded by health-care jobs outpace what New York's young workers have to offer.


Review/Dance; 4 Works From the 50's Show Balanchine's Range
Anyone who attends the New York City Ballet soon discovers that George Balanchine was the most astonishingly varied choreographer of this century.
More than that, as the City Ballet is demonstrating in its Balanchine Celebration at the New York State Theater, this choreographic chameleon could take on several different stylistic colorations in a single season.
The program on Thursday night featured four works that had their premieres in the season from November 1957 to January 1958: "Square Dance," "Agon," "Gounod Symphony" and "Stars and Stripes." All four are plotless.
Otherwise, in terms of mood, they have little in common.
To see them together was an eye-opening experience.


Illegal Chinese Immigrants Are Smuggled Into San Francisco


Phils Bring Dynamite, Mets Ignite the Fuse
A slugfest with the Phillies? For the Mets, it wasn't much of a strategic concept.
Delivering the first shot and then every major blow, the Phillies dizzied the Mets, 6-3, tonight at Veterans Stadium.
They may have to have their bats tested for steroids before the season is over.
This time the first-place Phillies cranked out three homers and knocked the Mets 15 1/2 games back in the cellar of the National League East.


Cambodia Vote Seems to Lure Rebels
Khmer Rouge guerrillas and other Cambodians living in areas under the control of the Maoist rebels have begun to vote this week at United Nations polling stations, eager to cast ballots in an election that the Khmer Rouge once threatened to sabotage.
Startled United Nations peacekeepers said today that hundreds of Cambodians, including Khmer Rouge officials, have left rebel-held areas in northwestern Cambodia since the six-day election began on Sunday, walking to polling stations to vote.


TRANS WORLD AIRLINES INC.
Trans World Airlines reported a loss of $303.6 million in the first quarter, compared with a loss of $86.8 million a year earlier.
But this year's loss was largely a result of a one-time charge of $342.4 million to settle a shortage in the pension fund of the carrier, which is operating under bankruptcy protection.
On an operating basis, T.W.A.'s loss shrank to $93.4 million, compared with $104.2 million a year ago.


CHRONICLE
What RIA LUBBERS, wife of Rund Lubbers, Prime Minister of the Netherlands, did on Sunday evening gives new meaning to the term Dutch treat.
Mrs.
Lubbers had returned from a reception at The Hague for Mikhail S. Gorbachev, when she encountered 50 demonstrators outside her front door in Rotterdam.
They were protesting proposed cuts in Government grants to students and the planned abolition of unemployment benefits for people under 21.


Balkan Powder Keg Watches the Fuse
There is one thing the Serbian military and police authorities who govern here in Kosovo Province and the two million restive ethnic Albanians who resist them agree on.
It is that if the war in the Balkans spreads here, the bloodletting will be worse than anything yet.
"The situation is very dangerous and explosive," said Ibrahim Rugova, a dark-haired former literary critic whom all the Albanians here, but none of the few hundred thousand Serbs who rule them, recognize as their elected president.
The Albanian majority wants independence and freedom from Serbian rule; the Serbs fear that they want unification with Albania.


Budget Plan Short of Votes In House, Democrat Warns
Amid White House insistence that Congress would enact its package of tax increases and spending cuts largely unchanged, a leading Democratic critic said today that the plan still lacked enough support to survive a vote by the full House on Thursday.
Opposition to the package's most contentious provision, a $71 billion energy tax, also continued to mount in the Senate Finance Committee, the measure's next stop.


With Ivory in Short Supply, Pianists Tickle the Polymers
IMPORTING ivory into the United States has been illegal since 1989, but a team of engineers, materials scientists and piano builders believes it has developed a piano key to gladden the hearts of musicians as well as elephants.
The existing supply of ivory, traditionally used as a thin veneer to cover wooden piano keys, is being depleted, and conservationists and elephant lovers hope it will grow scarcer still.
But many pianists still swear by ivory, and swear at imitations.


Allied Officer Nominated for Commerce Job
The Clinton Administration turned from high technology to more basic industry yesterday as it nominated Mary L. Good, senior vice president for technology at Allied Signal Inc., as Under Secretary of Commerce for Technology.
The nomination comes in the wake of the withdrawal of John A. Rollwagen as the nominee for the higher-ranking post of deputy secretary.
Unless another person with a technological background gets the post intended for Mr.
Rollwagen, Dr.
Good would be the highest-ranking technological official in the department.


CHRONICLE
RUSSELL BAKER, columnist for The New York Times who has twice won the Pulitzer Prize, has been elected chairman of the Pulitzer Prize board, Columbia University's president, Michael I. Sovern, announced yesterday.
Mr.
Baker, who has been a board member since 1985, succeeds Claude Sitton, the former editor of The Raleigh Times and The News and Observer, in Raleigh, N.C., who is a senior lecturer at Emory University.


Allies' Plan Angers Bosnian Muslims
The Muslim-led Government announced tonight that it would actively oppose any action to carry out the joint Western strategy for ending the bloodshed in this former Yugoslav republic.
"We will not accept implementation," said Sulejman Sulic, Under Secretary of Foreign Affairs.
He said Bosnia would urge the Security Council to reject the strategy and would continue to press military operations against Serbian nationalist forces.


Bumps in the Road to an Upgrade
THE INTEL CORPORATION's Pentium microprocessor made its formal debut last week as the eventual successor to the popular i486 chip.
At the same time, at least a dozen PC makers made known their plans for using the powerful Pentium chip in expensive, high-performance computers.
The trouble is that since last year those same PC makers have been selling i486-based PC's that are advertised as "Pentium upgradeable." No doubt many buyers have been enticed with the implied promise that they will be able to "upgrade to the power of Pentium" when the chip becomes available, thus prolonging the productive life of their new PC's.


Executive Who Left Sues G.M.
The conflict between the General Motors Corporation and Jose Ignacio Lopez de Arriortua, the hard-driving executive who left G.M. for Volkswagen in March, intensified today into a barrage of attacks and counterattacks.
Mr.
Lopez denied taking any G.M. documents, filed a defamation complaint against his former employer, and for the first time stated his reasons for resigning from the world's largest auto maker.
"We have not taken anything from these people, not any document that is confidential," Mr.
Lopez said in a telephone interview from Germany.
"We will not even pass confidential information that is in our heads." Press Fascination in Germany
Earlier in the day, though, the new issue of Der Spiegel, the popular German news weekly, appeared, with a photo of Mr.
Lopez on its cover -- his arms folded and with a grim stare.
The headline said: "The Unscrupulous One. VW Manager Lopez Under Suspicion: Industrial Espionage."


Race for Nassau Executive Tests Party Shift
The campaign poster from Richard M. Nixon's 1972 re-election bid still hangs in the Republican Election Commissioner's office here.
In Nassau County, isolated somehow from the doubt Mr.
Nixon has since ignited in much of the rest of the country, the picture is a reminder of the Republican Party's traditional invincibility.
But this year, this Republican stronghold faces its toughest challenge in 25 years in the race for county executive.
The machine that could always be counted on to turn out a Republican majority in local, state and national elections, to provide funds and field statewide candidates, appears to be in trouble.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball National League  CINCINNATI REDS -- Fired Tony Perez, manager; Dave Bristol, third base coach; and Larry Rothschild, pitching coach.
Named Davey Johnson manager.
Announced the resignation of Ron Oester, first base coach.
Traded Travis Buckley, pitcher, to the Seattle Mariners for Charles "Bubba" Smith, first baseman.


3 Killed and 2 Wounded In Gun Battle in Teaneck
A gun battle among a group of men in a home in the northern New Jersey suburb of Teaneck left three dead and two wounded last night, the authorities said.
At least six other men were in custody, they said.
The police in Teaneck said two of the men, none of whom had been identified, were found dead at the scene, while a third died while undergoing surgery last night at the Hackensack Medical Center.


Florio Fans Public Debate Over Senate's System of Blocking Appointments
The secret blackball system that enables New Jersey Senators to block gubernatorial appointments, without saying why, is once again the subject of a public debate that Gov.
Jim Florio hopes will enable him to eliminate it.
New Jersey governors, who have the broadest appointive power of any state chief executive, have long railed against the system, which they say makes it difficult to find worthy candidates for appointments because of the chance they may be blocked for some petty political reason by the senator from the candidate's home county.
Mr.
Florio proposes a referendum question on the November ballot on what he calls "this ugly remnant of back-room, old-boy politics."


Sports of The Times; A Full-Court Press That Lacks Color
A NEW sports day begins in New York City.
Layers of editors and general managers at the city's daily newspapers, radio and TV stations pile into conference rooms to plot a course.
Pro basketball playoffs, pro football signings, college recruiting, baseball races are all under way.
In nearly every case, the stories will involve African-American or Hispanic athletes.
But in New York, how many of those heading into conference rooms this morning with the power to make decisions and shape the sports news will be black or Hispanic?


Van Gogh Is Bought for $57 Million, Then Donated to the Met


Rare Glimpses of Judicial Chess and Poker
When the Supreme Court first considered whether the Constitution should protect private homosexual acts, the Justices showed little interest.
Only two of the nine voted in 1985 even to hear the case of an Atlanta man arrested for having sex with another man in his own bedroom.
But over the next year and a half, the case known as Bowers v.
Hardwick became a high-stakes poker game among the Justices, as conservatives and liberals on the Court struggled behind the scenes to make it a definitive constitutional statement on homosexual rights.


Odelein Won't Be Penalized
After reviewing videotape and hearing testimony today, the National Hockey League ruled that Lyle Odelein of the Montreal Canadiens wouldn't be suspended or fined for hitting Ray Ferraro of the Islanders in the head with a stick late in New York's 4-1 victory in Game 4 of the Wales Conference finals on Saturday night at Nassau Coliseum.
Odelein and Ferraro played tonight at the Forum in Game 5 as Montreal won, 5-2, to clinch the four-of-seven-game series.


Democrats Drop Donors' Session With President
The Democratic Party must have figured it had come up with an an offer no lobbyist could refuse.
In invitations faxed and mailed all over the city last week, the party offered a weekend retreat, including a big breakfast with President Clinton, intimate briefings with senior White House officials and a gala dinner party.
The price: $15,000 a couple.
Political action committees and deep-pocket corporate contributors were especially welcome.


Results Plus
YACHT RACING No Wind, No Way for Schooner Light winds forced the British schooner ADIX to withdraw yesterday from its attempt to break an 88-year-old trans-Atlantic sailing record.
"With the prospect of no wind for the next day at least now, we are motoring to make landfall in reasonable time," reported Capt.
Paul Goss, skipper of the 184-foot yacht, in a ship-to-shore message.
The three-masted vessel was sailing for the Atlantic Challenge Cup, a trans-Atlantic trophy recently established by the New York Yacht Club.
ADIX needed to complete its 3,000-mile voyage in less than 12 days 4 hours, the pace set in 1905 by a similar vessel, the schooner Atlantic.
ADIX set sail May 15 from Sandy Hook, N.J.
CYCLING Italian Wins Second Stage of Tour Adriano Baffi outsprinted his fellow Italian Marco Saligari and Dimitri Konychev of Moldavia yesterday to win the second stage of the Tour of Italy.
Moreno Argentin of Italy, who fought off Miguel Indurain, Franco Chioccioli and Gianni Bugno in the final stages, retained the overall lead, after finishing in the same time as the winner.
Baffi scored his first victory this season by covering the 141.9-mile distance from Grosseto to Rieti in 5 hours 52 minutes 54 seconds, an average speed of 23.610 miles an hour.
Greg LeMond, who lost several minutes in the first part of Sunday's opening stage, trailed the winner by 1:10 yesterday and was virtually out of contention for the overall victory.
LeMond, a three-time Tour de France winner, fell to 98th place over all, 9:35 behind Argentin, a former world champion.
The second stage was almost flat, except for a high hill about five miles from the finish.
In the overall standings, Argentin leads runner-up Maurizio Fondriest of Italy by 36 seconds and the third-place Indurain, of Spain, by 38.
Bugno and Chiappucci were fifth and sixth, respectively, with a gap of 44 and 47 seconds.
Today's stage -- a hilly course of 97.3 miles -- will end in Scanno, in central Italy.
The 21-stage race ends on June 13. (AP)


Rival Black Groups Clash in South African Townships


Judge Bars State Borrowing for Transit
In the latest victory for an indignant taxpayer who has made a second career of challenging New York State's budgets, a judge today temporarily barred the state from going forward with plans to borrow more than $6 billion to finance a transportation plan.
The temporary order by JusticeLawrence E. Kahn of State Supreme Court in Albany, will have little immediate effect because the state has no plans to begin borrowing the money until the fall.
But some officials said they feared that the lawsuit by the taxpayer, Robert L. Schulz of Glens Falls, N.Y., would have long-term consequences because the borrowing plan might not stand up to legal scrutiny.


A Real Go-Getter
To the Editor:
Keron Thomas ("Subway Caper Fueled by Passion for Trains," front page, May 12) taught himself a marketable skill: How to drive a subway train.
Because he is a young black male he is perceived as dangerous and branded "obsessive."
Wasn't Einstein obsessed with math, Steve Jobs with computers, Marc Chagall with painting and Bill Clinton with becoming President?
Are not most successful people obsessed with what they do?


Software Sag
ISG International Software, an Israeli company, has thrived by writing software meant to enhance productivity, as with one of its best-selling programs that generates reports.
But last Friday, it reported lower-than-expected quarterly earnings, citing completion of a contract with I.B.M.
Yesterday, ISG closed at a new 52-week low.


Before Skies Become Entirely Barren of Birds; Mass Extinctions Grow
To the Editor:
Julian L. Simon and Aaron Wildavsky (Op-Ed, May 13) state that biologists have greatly exaggerated the extent of species extinction.
"No one has disputed our documentation," they say.
I do so now.
They have no documentation.
Moreover they ignore the mass of data that accumulates from one month to the next in monographs and scientific journals devoted to biodiversity.
All biologists know that as habitat is reduced, species go extinct.
The rate of loss, established by hundreds of independent studies on many kinds of plants and animals, has been found in the great majority of cases to fall between the third and sixth root of the area.
The estimated rate of loss of tropical rain forest in the 1980's for example, translates at a typical value (the fourth root) to .5 percent species lost or doomed per year.


Contracts Renewed Despite an Inquiry
New York City's Office of Contracts has ordered the limited renewal of several disputed contracts to a South Bronx antipoverty agency headed by Ramon S. Velez while investigators look into allegations of malfeasance raised by City Comptroller Elizabeth Holtzman.
Ms.
Holtzman had sought to block renewal of contracts totaling $1.6 million for Head Start and senior-citizen services from the Hunts Point Multi-Service Center, the flagship in Mr.
Velez's South Bronx empire of social-service agencies and companies.


First Things First in Macedonia
As part of the latest allied plan for containing Serbian aggression in the Balkans, the United States is now considering stationing American ground troops in the Republic of Macedonia.
Such a preventive deployment outside the immediate war zone might be a good way for the U.S. to contribute to international peacekeeping efforts without thrusting American ground troops into combat.
And it would back up U.S. warnings dating back to the Bush Administration that Belgrade should keep its hands off Macedonia.
But there's an embarrassing catch.
In deference to the wishes of Greek-Americans and the Athens Government, Washington refuses to officially recognize Macedonia's independent existence.


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt  *
City of Forsyth, Rosebud County, Mont., is tentatively offering $90.2 million of tax-exempt pollution control revenue refunding bonds for a Montana Power Co. project through Goldman, Sachs &amp; Co.
The bonds, due in 2023 and priced to yield about 6.217 percent, are rated Baa-1 by Moody's , BBB+ by Standard &amp; Poor's and A- by Fitch Investors Service.
Preferred Stock  *
Citicorp, New York, is offering 13 million depositary shares at $25 a share through Lehman Brothers.
Each depositary share, representing one-tenth of a Series 16 noncumulative preferred share, is noncallable for five years and rated Ba-2 by Moody's and BBB- by S.&amp; P. and Duff &amp; Phelps.
Common Stock  *
Johnstown America Industries Inc., Johnstown, Pa., a railroad holding company, has filed for an initial public offering of up to 3.75 million shares at $12 to $13.50 a share through Salomon Brothers.


Charitable Giving Rose to $124 Billion in 1992
Despite the sluggish economy, individuals, corporations and foundations contributed $124.3 billion to philanthropy in 1992, a 6.4 percent increase over the previous year.
Still, the showing was disappointing considering that the number of millionaires increased fourteenfold and the baby boom generation moved into the 35-to-64 age category, the prime age for charitable giving.
The total giving for 1991 was $116.8 billion.


Wait-and-See Policy Backed for Prostate
FOR many men with early prostate cancer, the best thing to do may be nothing at all, a new report concludes.
Sifting through the scientific literature and generating statistical models of how patients will fare if they choose either to treat an early tumor aggressively with surgery or radiation or simply to watch and wait to see what happens, scientists with the Prostate Patient Outcomes Research Team could find no clear benefit of choosing invasive therapy in most cases.


Drug 'Czar' Nominee Would Review U.S. Strategy
In a presentation that recalled his cautious approach and sweeping goals upon taking over the New York City Police Department, Lee P. Brown told senators today that he would begin work as President Clinton's chief drug adviser with a thorough review of Federal anti-drug programs.
But under gentle yet persistent prodding at his confirmation hearing, Mr.
Brown refused to detail the kind of strategy he would advocate.


INSIDE
Dental Coverage Suggested For Health-Care Package
Hillary Rodham Clinton said she hoped the President's health plan would cover some dental care for children and adults.
Page D20.
Crackdown in Guatemala
Guatemala's leader dissolved Congress and the Supreme Court in what appeared to be a military-backed effort to quell protests.
Page A3.
Priests and Sexual Abuse
New York's Archbishop, John Cardinal O'Connor, ordered archdiocese priests to a rare meeting to discuss sexual abuse of minors.
Page B1.
Knicks Beat Bulls Again
The Knicks beat the defending champion Chicago Bulls, 96-91, for a 2-0 lead in their National Basketball Association playoff series.
Page B9.


Market Place; Stock mutual funds have piled up cash as managers turn cautious.
AS May began, equity mutual funds had more cash on the sidelines than at any time in the last two years.
That cash no doubt played a big role in driving stock prices up this month, particularly last week when the Dow Jones industrial average topped 3,500 for the first time.
That cash built up because fund managers were unable or unwilling to invest all of the record $11.6 billion that investors put into stock funds in April.
Fund managers said big inflows continued this month, but most said the pace had slowed a bit.


Marshall's Bequest . . .
Following is the disputed portion of the contract governing the transfer of Thurgood Marshall's papers to the Library of Congress.
It was signed by Justice Marshall on Oct. 24, 1991, and by James H. Billington, the Librarian of Congress, on Nov. 8, 1991.
I, Thurgood Marshall (hereinafter: Donor), hereby give, grant, convey title in and set over to the United States of America for inclusion in the collections of the Library of Congress (hereinafter: Library), and for administration therein by the authorities thereof, a collection of my personal and professional papers, more particularly described on the attached schedule.


METRO DIGEST
FLORIO'S CHIEF OF STAFF RESIGNS  Governor Florio has accepted the resignation of his chief of staff, Joseph C. Salema, whose bond firm is at the center of a Federal investigation into whether it improperly benefited from state bond deals.
Mr.
Salema resigned in an effort to spare the Governor further political embarassment in an election year.
A1.
NEW YORK CITY
DINKINS WEIGHS SERVICE CUTS  The Dinkins administration said for the first time that it would have to resort to serious cuts in city services to balance the new budget, and the City Council began considering what should be cut.
B3.
MAN WALKS AWAY FROM PRISON PROGRAM  A man charged in the stabbing of a good samaritan in the subway on May 12 had walked away on May 1 from a work-release program that he had been admitted to less than seven months after he started serving a prison sentence.
The State Corrections Commissioner said that while the case was an isolated one, it showed the risks posed by a program that is forced by tight money and prison overcrowding to return more than twice as many people to the streets as it did three years ago.
B2.
UNFULFILLED DREAMS FOR DEAD BOY  From the hospital bed where she is recovering from multiple-stab wounds, Dana Blackledge-Poole remembered the dreams she had had for the 5-year-old boy, her legal ward, whose body was found in a Brooklyn trash compactor on Thursday.
The police are searching for her husband, Stephan Poole, for questioning in the killing of the boy, Kayesean Blackledge, and the stabbing of his wife.
B3.
2 KITCHEN WINDOWS WIN A REPRIEVE
The Landmarks Preservation Commission and the owner of a Park Avenue apartment have reached an accommodation over two kitchen windows.
The owner can keep his windows as long as he owns his co-op but must change them if and when he sells.
B3.
REGION  F.B.I.
IN STING OF DRUG CARTEL  The Federal Bureau of Investigation laundered $22.5 million in cash for the Cali cocaine cartel between 1991 and 1992 in a sting operation that exposed illegal financial dealings from Colombia to Israel, Italy, Canada and New York, Federal officials in Connecticut announced.
Federal agencies jointly set up the sting by secretly running a small financial firm out of an office building near the Greenwich, Conn., railroad station.
B6.
ALBANY NOT RECEPTIVE TO CHANNEL ONE
Amid concerns about the commercial and news content of Channel One, legislation to allow public schools to show the current-affairs program for teen-agers appears almost certain to fail in the New York State Assembly.
B5.
BID TO KEEP PRATT &amp; WHITNEY  In a bid to prevent Pratt &amp; Whitney, Connecticut's largest private employer, from closing plants in the state, Gov.
Lowell P. Weicker Jr. has proposed a package of tax cuts and job-training grants that could save the company $32 million a year.
B5.
About New York by David Gonzalez B3
Commencements B6


N.F.L. Entry Fee Is Set at $140 Million
Officials from the five cities vying for two National League Football franchises to be awarded in October learned today that the N.F.L. owners' asking price is $140 million, the highest franchise fee in sports history.
When interest payments are included, along with the fact that the new teams will not receive a full share of television payments in their first three seasons, the fee is closer to $190 million.


CRUCIAL BARGAINING BEGINS AS THAWING ON BUDGET IS SEEN
With a critical House vote on President Clinton's budget imminent and perilously uncertain, the White House and conservative Democrats in Congress abruptly halted their sniping over the proposal's merits today and began talking up a deal.
By late today, it remained just talk.
But for the first time, both sides seemed to agree that the proposal would be changed.
The House wants to make at least a cursory effort to keep health-care spending from running up the deficit, and the Senate hopes to tone down at least part of a heavily debated energy tax.


60-Minute Gourmet
MANY home cooks shun rich-fleshed or oily fish like mackerel, sardines and bluefish.
They take some finesse to prepare properly so the richness does not overwhelm, but any amateur can get the knack easily.
I am particularly fond of dark-fleshed fish for outdoor grilling.
It takes on a smoky character, and the moisture holds the flesh together.
One of the bargains today in fish markets is mackerel, which admittedly has a slightly fatty flavor.
But this quality is easily counterbalanced with lemon juice, lime or tomato.


U.N. Aide Calls Cambodia Vote 'Free and Fair'
The head of the United Nations peacekeeping force in Cambodia described this week's internationally supervised elections as "free and fair" and said he would not rule out the involvement of the Khmer Rouge rebels in whatever government follows the voting.
Defying intimidation and threats of violence by both the Khmer Rouge and the incumbent Government, more than 85 percent of Cambodia's 4.7 million registered voters had cast ballots by the end of voting Tuesday, with three days of voting to go.
The first results are expected this week.


Will a Lower Tax Break Be Bad for the Appetite?
For the thousands of restaurant owners, food and equipment suppliers and others involved in food service who gathered here for the annual trade show sponsored by the National Restaurant Association, new equipment and products were not the hot topics.
"All everybody's talking about is the tax issue, the deductibility," said Ralph Brennan, the owner of Mr.
B's Bistro in New Orleans, as he left his hotel to go to the show at the McCormick Place Convention Center.


Food Notes
Columbia County Wares
On Sunday from 10 A.M. to 4 P.M., people in Columbia County who produce plants, herbs and herbal products like vinegar, chutney, cheese and mustard will sell their wares at the Shaker Museum and Library, Shaker Museum Road, Old Chatham, N.Y., which is near Albany.
There will also be culinary demonstrations.
Admission is $3 for adults, $1 for children under 12.
For more information: (518) 794-9100.
Introducing Coffee Milk
Ronnybrook Farm Dairy in Ancramdale, N.Y., the company that has been producing skim milk, whole milk, cream and chocolate milk and selling it in glass bottles, has introduced coffee milk.
It tastes like melted coffee ice cream.
The coffee milk, made with decaffeinated coffee, comes in regular and skim and is available so far only at Dean &amp; DeLuca, for $2 a pint bottle (plus $1 deposit).
Samples are being served at the Ronnybrook Farm Dairy stand in the Union Square Greenmarket on Wednesdays and Saturdays.
Delaware Valley Tour
An all-day tour of diners in the Delaware Valley will be held on June 19 by the Society for Commercial Archeology, a group based in Washington.
The tour, from 7:30 A.M. to 8:30 P.M., will encompass seven counties in Delaware, Pennsylvania and New Jersey.
The tour is part of a three-day diner extravaganza.
On June 17 and 18, the society is holding a conference about diners at the Sheraton Inn, Great Valley, Pa.
On June 18, from 6:30 to 10:30 P.M., there will be a diner dinner tour, including miniature golf.
The all-day tour costs $45, including breakfast and dinner; lunch is extra.
The dinner tour is $25, and the conference is $85 for nonmembers.
Also available, for $6, from the Delaware branch of the society, P.O.
Box 447, Montchanin, Del., 19710, is a guide to diners in the region.
Information about the tours, the conference or the guide is available from Michael Bennett, at (302) 366-7780.
On Buying Big Fish
If you want big fish, like a seven-pound bluefish, 89 cents a pound, or a four-pound catfish, 99 cents a pound, the place to go is Miracle Two Fish Plaza, 2169 Third Avenue, at 118th Street.
This busy, bright and impeccable market -- opened a few months ago by James Yoo and his wife, Jong Sun Yoo -- carries a good variety of whole fresh fish.
Smaller fish like silvery butterfish, for $1.29 a pound, and sleek Spanish mackerel, $1.99 a pound, also shared the ice.
Only the sea bass looked over the hill.
The market also stocks fish steaks and fillets like cod, for $3.99 a pound, and salmon, $6.99 a pound, as well as shellfish.
Shrimp are $4.99 to $10.99 a pound.
Fried fish and seafood are sold at a counter in the front of the store.
Raw shrimp and crabs purchased in the store can also be steamed there with hot-pepper seasoning.
The steaming is free and makes it appealing for Manhattanites to stop at Miracle Two for spicy shrimp before heading over the Triborough Bridge to the beach.
Miracle Two is open every day except Sunday, from 7:30 A.M. to 8 P.M.
Telephone: (212) 348-8490.
Women Organize
The International Association of Women Chefs and Restaurateurs, whose goal is to promote education and advancement of women in the restaurant industry, made its debut in New York this month.
The founding members are mostly chef-owners: Lidia Bastianich and Anne Rosenzweig in New York; Barbara Tropp, Elka Gilmore and Joyce Goldstein of San Francisco; Mary Sue Milliken of Santa Monica, Calif., and Johanne Killeen of Providence.
Barbara Lazaroff, a restaurateur and restaurant designer from Los Angeles, is another founder.
Other women's groups in the food business aren't dedicated solely to chefs and restaurant owners.
These women, from a generation now well established on the American restaurant scene, hope to help those entering the field by offering, among other things, guidance on legal and technical matters, an apprenticeship program and scholarships.
The next meeting will be held on Aug. 28 and 29 in San Francisco.
More information is available by calling Susy Davidson, the administrator for the group, at (212) 879-2709.
A New King Food Store
King Super Markets opened a new store this week in Fort Lee, N.J.
That makes store No. 19 for the New Jersey-based chain, owned by Marks &amp; Spencer of London, which is known for the quality of its produce, meat and prepared food.
The new store is just 15 minutes by car from the Upper West Side when traffic isn't heavy.
It's in the Linwood Plaza Shopping Center, 112-130 Fletcher Avenue, Route 9W at Route 4.
It is open from 7:30 A.M. to 10 P.M. every day.
The phone number is (201) 947-3440.


G.M. Acceptance Sale Dominates Trading
The General Motors Acceptance Corporation dominated the corporate debt market yesterday with its sale of $1.95 billion in certificates backed by auto receivables.
The domination was no small feat, considering that the First Chicago Corporation was also in the market selling $1 billion of asset backed certificates and Wal-Mart Stores Inc. was in with $1 billion of 10-year and 20-year notes.


Dumb Censorship at the U.N.
A foolish and worrying squall hit the United Nations yesterday.
Yielding to pressure from China, Secretary General Boutros Boutros-Ghali sought to keep a leading Chinese dissident from holding a news conference at U.N. headquarters.
He prevailed on the U.N.
Correspondents Association to move its press briefing by the dissident, Shen Tong, to an outside U.N. office.
When this compromise was rightly rejected by the group's rank and file as a dangerous precedent, U.N. press officials decreed that Mr.
Shen might speak in the main building, but not in the Correspondents Association's quarters, and no TV crews would be allowed.
So he spoke on the pavement, outside the U.N. gates, thus underscoring his essential theme -- that China is deeply worried about American attempts to tie trade benefits to human rights conditions.


Teaneck Killings Laid to Chinese Gang's Power Struggle
The authorities said today that a power struggle within a Chinese gang in Manhattan was responsible for the violence that spilled over into a placid, upper-middle-class suburban neighborhood here Monday night, leading to the fatal shooting of four gang members and the wounding of a fifth.
Some law enforcement officials theorized that the struggle in the Fuk Ching gang was rooted in its lucrative criminal specialty -- smuggling illegal immigrants into the United States from Fujian Province in southern China.
Officials say the immigrants are often charged $30,000 to $35,000 by gang members and then forced to pay off that debt through legitimate work or by slipping into crime, including extortion and prostitution.


Low Interest Rates Help U.S. Vehicle Sales
Sales of domestically built cars and trucks rose 18.4 percent in mid-May as consumers put aside fears of economic weakness and responded to low interest rates on financing, the auto makers said today.
The seasonally adjusted annual rate of car sales was 7.4 million for the period of May 11-20, up from 6.4 million in early May and up from 6.7 million for the same period a year earlier.


Croatia Faces a Showdown In Areas Occupied by Serbs
As the West backs away from a showdown with the Serbs over Bosnia, the question in the capital of Croatia is whether President Franjo Tudjman will bide his time or renew attacks on Serbian-held territory in Croatia.
Mr.
Tudjman and his Government had favored Western air strikes on Serbian positions in Bosnia and Herzegovina, not only in the hope that they might cripple roads and bridges used to supply Serbian forces in Croatia, but also to help morale at home.


Manuel Kessman, 82, A Retired Banker, Dies
Manuel Kessman, who began as an office boy with the Greater New York Savings Bank and retired as chairman 53 years later, died on May 17 at Mather Memorial Hospital in Port Jefferson, L.I.
He was 82 and lived in Ridge, L.I., and Fort Lauderdale, Fla.
The cause of death was prostate cancer, his family said.


Connecticut Can K.O. the N.R.A.
The Connecticut legislature can influence rational gun regulation far beyond the state's borders by voting to ban the sale of semiautomatic assault rifles.
It would be the third major defeat this year for the National Rifle Association's bully-boy lobbyists, and a strong prod for Washington to get moving on Federal legislation.
Barring last-minute glitches, the 36 members of the State Senate could get their chance today.
Gov.
Lowell Weicker supports the bill, as does the Senate's Democratic president, John Larson, and -- not incidentally -- an overwhelming 79 percent of the public, according to a recent poll.
Nonetheless a close vote is expected and, if the bill carries, another close vote in the House.


State Dedicates, and Opens, New I-95 Bridge Over Connecticut River


Dow Rises 8.85 Points, to Close at 3,516.63
With little encouraging news on the economy, the stock market once again drifted into a tentative trading range yesterday, although most indexes rose modestly.
Both the Dow Jones industrial average and the broader Standard &amp; Poor's 500 closed up slightly.
Volume on the Big Board was relatively light at 222.8 million shares, though heavier than Monday's 198 million shares.
Gold, usually a siphoner of investments from stocks, soared in price but failed to pull up gold stocks, which rose only modestly.


COMPANY BRIEFS
COCA-COLA CO., Atlanta, said its joint-venture subsidiary, Coca-Cola Nestle Refreshments Co., is selling ready-to-drink Nestea Iced Tea in Spain, Germany, Belgium and Italy.
ERICSSON, Stockholm, has signed a $100 million contract with Radiomovil DIPSA, Mexico's nationwide provider of the Telcel cellular telephone service.


Honors
*
Everett Studios, White Plains, took top honors at the Advertising Club of Westchester's annual awards presentation last week, winning 12 awards.
Other leading winners included APF Design Associates, Port Chester, with nine awards, and Gannett Suburban Newspapers, also White Plains, with seven.


Windows Can Stay, Landmark Commission Rules
For roughly two months the Landmarks Preservation Commission has been facing a challenge to its authority by a prominent New Yorker, Robert L. Bernstein, who had objected to a commission demand that he replace two windows in the kitchen of his Park Avenue apartment that are in violation of landmarks rules.
Yesterday, after a two-hour session that went into minute detail about the history of the windows in question, the commission decided to adopt a formula that Mr.
Bernstein had proposed at the outset of the case -- that he be allowed to keep his windows as long as he owns his co-op but must change them if and when he sells.


Mine Workers Expand Coal Walkout


Gibbs Accepts One-Year Deal With NBC
JOE GIBBS, the former Washington Redskins head coach, will follow a well-trod career path of pro football coaches-turned announcers at NBC with his decision yesterday to sign a one-year, $100,000 agreement as a game analyst.
The hiring of Gibbs follows NBC's recent signing of MIKE DITKA, the recently departed Chicago Bears head coach, as the studio analyst for its "NFL Live" pre-game studio show.
Gibbs will work at least 11 games, mostly on the West Coast, to accommodate his desire to watch his son play for the Stanford football team.
He will be a studio analyst for NBC's post-season schedule, including the Super Bowl.


Yevoli to Seek Re-election
Lewis J. Yevoli, the Oyster Bay Town Supervisor, said today that he would seek re-election, ending speculation that he would challenge the re-election bid of County Executive Thomas R. Gulotta.


Plan to Unclog Herald Square To Close Broadway for 2 Blocks
After years of delays, New York City is now moving forward on an ambitious redesign of Herald Square that will permanently block off part of Broadway, which has stretched virtually uninterrupted from the northern Bronx to the tip of Manhattan since the early 1800's.
While the changes encompass only a small area, they will ripple throughout Manhattan as motorists accustomed to driving through Herald Square will be forced to take other routes.


No Cash but a Nice Resale Value
Money is out as a reward for the winners at the world championships this year.
Instead, each will get a new Mercedes.
PRIMO NEBIOLO, president of the International Amateur Athletic Federation, said track's governing body signed a two-year deal with Mercedes-Benz worth about $3 million.


Chief Justice Assails Library On Release of Marshall Papers
In an angry letter on behalf of a majority of the Supreme Court, Chief Justice William H. Rehnquist accused the Library of Congress today of bad judgment in releasing the papers of Justice Thurgood Marshall so soon after his death, and he warned that Justices might no longer donate their papers to the Library.
"I speak for a majority of the active Justices of the Court," the Chief Justice wrote in an extraordinary and stinging letter to James H. Billington, the Librarian of Congress, "when I say that we are both surprised and disappointed by the library's decision to give unrestricted public access to Justice Thurgood Marshall's papers."


Review/Film; Teen-Agers Living Under the Gun
In the riveting opening scene of "Menace II Society," a tense transaction between a Korean grocer and two young black men in South-Central Los Angeles explodes into lethal violence.
Caine (Tyrin Turner), a high school senior who lives with his grandparents, has gone out to buy some beers with his volatile sidekick O-Dog (Larenz Tate).
When the grocer mutters an insult, O-Dog goes ballistic, pulls a gun and shoots him in the head.
Running to the back of the store, he kills the grocer's wife and seizes the store's surveillance tape.
Later in the film he boastfully plays and replays it for his friends, freeze-framing the video at the moment the grocer's brains are blown out.


Dental Care for Children Is Considered by Clinton
Hillary Rodham Clinton told consumer advocates today that she hoped the President's health plan would cover comprehensive dental care for children and some dental services for adults.
Mrs.
Clinton said she hoped the plan would include coverage of "acute dental care for adults." Such care usually includes emergency care and services to control infection and bleeding and to relieve pain.


In Vienna, It Ain't Just Wiener Schnitzel
This city may still present to the world an archaic image of waltzes, whipped cream and intransigent conservatism in the arts and politics.
But a lot of Viennese think differently.
The annual Vienna Festival Weeks in May and June, for example, have become a hotbed of lively and experimental theater, dance and music, with funky performance sites and a flamboyantly attired audience to match.
In the 1993 festival's opening week, two particularly striking efforts to rethink the very idea of opera were given their world premieres.
"The Cave," an exploration of the legacy of the patriarch Abraham by the composer Steve Reich and the video artist Beryl Korot, began a four-night run on May 15.
It will go to Berlin, Amsterdam, London, New York (where it will open the Brooklyn Academy of Music's Next Wave series on Oct. 13), Paris and Brussels.


Guatemalan, Supported by Army, Disbands Congress and the Court
President Jorge Serrano Elias dissolved the Congress and the Supreme Court today and suspended constitutional rights in what appeared to be a military-backed effort to silence growing political and economic protests.
Mr.
Serrano, a conservative former businessman whose two-year push to end the country's 32-year civil war has foundered in recent weeks, said he would rule temporarily by decree to stem a "breakdown in law and order."


Security Council Establishes War-Crimes Tribunal for the Balkans
An 11-judge tribunal was set up tonight by the Security Council to hear charges of war crimes in the former Yugoslav federation.
The tribunal will be able to impose prison terms but not to sentence anyone to death.
Today's decision, approved unanimously by the 15 member countries, is the first step in a three-part program for curbing the fighting in Bosnia and Herzegovina that Secretary of State Warren Christopher and the Foreign Ministers of Britain, France, Russia and Spain agreed upon Saturday in Washington.


Dinkins Administration Acknowledges Need for Cuts
The administration of Mayor David N. Dinkins said for the first time yesterday that it would have to resort to serious reductions in services to balance the new budget, and the New York City Council began considering what should be cut.
The statement from the city's Budget Director, Philip R. Michael, underscored the difficulty that Mayor Dinkins faces in trying to balance the budget for the next fiscal year, which begins in July, five months before the mayoral election.


Green Starts Hitting After the Mets Don't
The honeymoon lasted less than a week.
Dallas Green, his managerial reputation only beginning to be soiled by a 1-4 Mets' record since he took over, lashed out tonight, challenging the competitive passions of his club and sparing no one his legendary anger.
Green, having seen the Mets lose, 4-2, to the first-place Phillies and a pitcher he thought was ripe to be had, tore into his inept offense and then roasted his starting pitcher.


Police Detain Black Radicals, Imperiling South Africa Talks
The police detained scores of black nationalists today in what they called an anti-terrorist crackdown, prompting fury and amazement from black leaders just when the country was nearing accord on the date of its first universal elections.
In a series of raids that began hours before sunup, according to the South African Press Association news service, the police rounded up 73 leaders and members of the militant Pan Africanist Congress, whose guerrilla affiliate has taken responsibility for many killings of police and white civilians.


Mary Spencer Nay, 80, Painter and Professor
Mary Spencer Nay, a painter and retired art professor, died on Saturday at her home in Provincetown, Mass.
She was 80.
The cause was gastrointestinal illness, said her daughter Malu Nay Block of Provincetown.


Campus Tooth and Claw: Stalking a Speaker
For college students and their parents, commencement is a time of joy and flashing cameras.
But for people like Jeffrey S. Baron -- the senior class president at Colby College on whose shoulders fell the burden of finding a commencement speaker -- it is more like selling encyclopedias door to door.
Nearly a dozen greats and near-greats received the Colby sales pitch from Mr.
Baron, who was snubbed by Hollywood stars, singers and political figures, from Billy Crystal and Jodie Foster to Mikhail Gorbachev and Vaclav Havel.
By late April, nobody had said yes.


Metropolitan Golf
U.S. Open Qualifying
Adam Spring, who won the Metropolitan Golf Association junior title twice, celebrated his initiation into the pro ranks with rounds of 63 and 66 to lead all United States Open qualifiers from the area.
They advanced to the sectionals, the last test before the 1993 Open, at Baltusrol in Springfield, N.J., next month.


Executive Changes
BRANDON SYSTEMS CORP., Secaucus, N.J., a computer services company, appointed Domenica L. Schulz president and chief operating officer.
ERNST &amp; YOUNG, New York, the accounting firm, named Philip Laskawy deputy chairman and said he would succeed Ray Groves as chairman when Mr.
Groves retired in October 1994.
Mr.
Laskawy now heads the New York office of the firm.


Unhappy Sequel?
The First National Film Corporation has made "Happily Ever After," a cartoon sequel to "Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs," which opens over the Memorial Day weekend.
But doubts about the film's quality were cited in a CNBC television commentary yesterday by Dan Dorfman.
First National's shares fell sharply, although the company expects a strong box office.


Corrections
A report in the Chronicle column yesterday about Dutch protestors who were treated to a glass of wine and a chat on the Prime Minister's doorstep referred incorrectly to the Prime Minister.
He is Ruud Lubbers.


Myopia at the White House; Scrambled Ethics
After a week of one political blunder after another, a light bulb finally went on somewhere in the White House, and the Democratic National Committee canceled the White House fund-raising breakfast with President Clinton it was planning for lobbyists and other fat-cat contributors.
But the rest of the tawdry affair will proceed next month as planned.
What possessed the party chairman, David Wilhelm, to schedule the event in the first place?
And who in the White House approved a breakfast session so obviously destined to leave the populist-posing President with more egg on his face than on his plate?


Riggs Selects a Specialist In Move to Regain Health
The Riggs National Corporation said yesterday that it had hired Paul M. Homan, a specialist in fixing troubled banks, to return the largest bank in Washington to health.
Mr.
Homan will be chief executive of the Riggs National Bank, the main subsidiary, and vice chairman of the holding company.
Joe L. Allbritton, the 68-year-old real estate investor who is the bank's largest shareholder, gives up the bank's chief executive position he has held since 1982; he will remain chief executive of the holding company.
"We will run this as a partnership," Mr. Homan said.


Military Supplier's Sale Cleared
The Clinton Administration has decided not to cancel the sale of a high-technology computer equipment producer to a Japanese corporation, a Treasury Department official said today.
An interagency group has determined that the Applied Magnetics Corporation, which is based in Goleta, Calif., had provided adequate information on the national security implications of the sale of its laser disk drive unit to the Nakamichi Corporation, which is based in Tokyo, the Treasury official, who insisted on anonymity, said.


'Hearings' on Gays in the Military Are a Sham; Not a Preference
To the Editor:
Homosexuality is not (as you label it in "A Recruiter's Dream," editorial, May 13), a sexual "preference." No sane person (and both the American Psychological Association and the American Psychiatric Association advise us that heterosexuals and homosexuals are equally sane) would prefer to suffer the hostility gay men and lesbians so frequently encounter.
No one would voluntarily choose to experience the ostracism, bigotry, discrimination and fear of violence you acknowledge prompted Col.
Fred Peck to admit that he would fear for his gay son's safety if he chose to enlist in the military.


Nasdaq Market Refuses to Coddle Short-Sellers
Short-sellers continue to bet against a Nasdaq market that has refused to cooperate.
Short sales rose to another new high in the latest month, continuing a streak of records that began in September 1991, but the Nasdaq composite index also advanced.
The shorts suffered the greatest pain while building their positions in some issues, like Snapple, whose continuing price gains stand to confound the laws of finance and investment.
In other runaway stocks, like Cisco Systems, some short-sellers evidently decided they could bear no more, and bought the stock to end their losses.


13 Arrested In a Sting Pulled Off By the F.B.I.
The Federal Bureau of Investigation laundered $22.5 million in cash for the Cali cocaine cartel between 1991 and 1992 in a far-flung -- and profitable -- sting operation that exposed illegal financial dealings from Colombia to Israel, Italy, Canada and New York, Federal officials in Connecticut announced yesterday.
Thirteen defendants were charged in the case, which used a small financial firm secretly set up and run by the F.B.I., the Drug Enforcement Administration, the Internal Revenue Service and the Customs Service out of an office building near the Greenwich, Conn., railroad station.


Where Alfresco Is an Art Form
SUMMER wines.
Two words that convey so much: a pristine white beach with a picnic spread out under a colorful umbrella; a leafy green dell or a clearing next to a stream with bottles of chardonnay chilling in the clear, running water.
Sound good to you?
Not to me.
Just because it's hot is no reason to be uncivilized.
If I'm eating outdoors, I like a waiter around to take care of the flies.
Unless it's in Morrocco, where they seem to like flies.


Metropolitan Diary
"THIS may be the last free thing in Manhattan," Sylvia Miles was saying the other afternoon as she removed her shoes and jacket and hung her hefty purse on the hook of a sturdy gray scale.
The scale stands guard near the Republic National Bank of New York, on the southeast corner of Eighth Avenue and 58th Street.
Weighing in is a Monday through Friday ritual for Ms.
Miles and a number of others in the neighborhood.
The scale has not always been in the same spot, but Ms.
Miles has always been a fan.
She first encountered it in the Excelsior Savings Bank, which once stood on 57th Street where the Hard Rock Cafe thrives today.


Tracy Adapts To Penske's Ways
Before Roger Penske's 50-member caravan of mechanics, engineers, cooks and gofers left for its May encampment here, he sat down with Paul Tracy, who represents at least half the reason for it all.
"I just got ahold of Paul," Penske said at the Indianapolis Motor Speedway the other day, referring to his 24-year-old driver, "and I pointed out that he was going to Indy with two of the best cars and the best crew, and I said it was because we had worked together the last two years."


FLORIO AIDE LEAVES AMID BOND INQUIRY
Joseph C. Salema, Gov.
Jim Florio's chief of staff, resigned today in an effort to spare the Governor further political embarrassment.
Mr.
Salema's bond company is at the center of a Federal investigation into whether it improperly benefited from state bond deals.
In accepting the resignation, Mr.
Florio is heeding the advice of aides to shield himself and his re-election campaign from Republican attacks on Mr.
Salema.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-13 WEST SEES GAINS, SERBS ASSERT
From Yugoslavia, the plan to contain the fighting in Bosnia and Herzegovina that the United States, Russia, Britain, France and Spain agreed on last weekend looks like a recognition by the outside world that the Bosnian Serbs have won their war against the Muslims.
A1


Remembering the Life of a Child Who Is Gone
From the hospital bed where she is recovering from multiple stab wounds, Dana Blackledge-Poole yesterday remembered the dreams she had for the little boy whose bruised body was found in a Brooklyn trash compactor on Thursday.
Ms.
Blackledge-Poole, the legal guardian of 5-year-old Kayesean Blackledge, said she used to lull the boy to sleep every night with a Diana Ross medley.
She would stop singing and turn off the lights only when his eyes closed, she said.
The gentle lyrics, promising a better world, captured her hopes.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
6.50
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
3.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.19
3.15
4.02
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.05
3.06
3.75
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.20
3.19
3.90
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
5.79
5.79
7.09
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.00
7.00
7.91
TELEPHONE BONDS
7.93
7.93
8.85
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
5.91
5.92
6.63
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Campus Journal; The 60's Versus the 90's In a Quiz Show Reprise
Before there was "Jeopardy" there was "The G.E. College Bowl," the quiz show broadcast Sunday evenings on NBC from 1959 to 1970, pitting teams of students against each other from colleges around the nation.
The all-time champions of "College Bowl" came from Brandeis University, a small liberal arts college in the suburbs of Boston.
Not only was the team forced to retire after winning five games in a row in the spring of 1968, but in a final game with Arkansas State University, the Waltham Wonders, as they were called, also racked up the highest score in College Bowl history: 515 to minus 10. (Teams were docked points for wrong answers.)


Rethinking Herald Square


Legislators Meet, But Marino's Away
With this year's legislative session entering its final stage, the Senate majority leader, Ralph J. Marino, skipped this week's activities in Albany to take a 10-day pleasure trip to Italy.
Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo said he had not been told until Monday that Mr.
Marino would be gone.
He said the Senator's absence caused him to cancel a scheduled meeting with the legislative leaders at the Executive Mansion on Monday afternoon.


Profile Writer Has Last Word In Defense Against Libel Suit
It was Jeffrey M. Masson who did most of the talking during seven months of interviews that produced a two-part profile about him in The New Yorker magazine a decade ago.
But it was Janet Malcolm, the writer accused of libel in a trial here, whose voice was heard last in a Federal courtroom today, testifying that "it was the totality of my experience that determined what quotations I used" to capture his essence, make sense of him in 48,500 words.


Verdict in Death of Student Reverberates Across Nation
Three days after Rodney Peairs walked out of a Louisiana courtroom a free man in the shooting death of a Japanese exchange student, the case is reverberating from radio talk shows to newspaper editorial pages, raising difficult issues of law, justice and race in a nation with more than 200 million guns and where 4.2 million new guns are sold each year.
Legal experts say that in cases like those of Mr.
Peairs and Bernard Goetz, the New York subway gunman whose case became a cause celebre in 1984, jurors tend to sympathize with otherwise law-abiding people confronting what they believe is a threat in an increasingly violent society.


Hubble Shows Results of Collision by 2 Galaxies
In a revealing glimpse of what happens when two galaxies collide, the Hubble Space Telescope has detected some of the most remarkable creations of such cosmic cataclysm: a rotating, pinwheel-shaped disk of gas at the merging galaxies' core surrounded by clusters of bright, young stars.
Photographs of the discoveries were released yesterday by the National Aeronautics and Space Administration.
Astronomers said these and other observations of merging galaxies provided the best evidence yet to support the theory that giant elliptical galaxies originate in collisions between disk-shaped galaxies, flattened stellar systems resembling the Milky Way galaxy.


Book Notes
First Gutenberg, then the Book-of-the-Month Club, and now bookselling via infomercial.
Try to wrap your literary and commercial imagination around this: the next generation of literary lights may soon find themselves, like Cher in one of her miracle shampoo spiels, pitching their wares in television ads disguised as programs and on the proliferating number of home shopping channels.
Publishers have long recognized the value of booking authors on news and talk shows, but on the whole they have stayed away from television advertising, especially direct-mail ads that peddle a product, then supply a toll-free number for ordering it.
The exception had been how-to books or books in a series, like the Time-Life home improvement series. 30 Minutes, 5,000 Sales
But this season, novelists have broken into the 800-number book-hawking.
Barbara Taylor Bradford went on QVC last month and, in two 15-minute segments, sold 5,000 autographed copies of her latest novel, "Angel" (Random House).
Dominick Dunne followed suit on Monday night on QVC with his latest novel, "A Season in Purgatory" (Crown).


Qualifier Stuns Lendl In Paris
For Ivan Lendl, a three-time champion here, familiar Court 1 was transformed into a shrill chamber of horrors this afternoon as he was ushered from the first round of the 1993 French Open by a French qualifier, 297th-ranked Stephane Huet.
All the sweet intimacy of the small court was reserved for the 22-year-old Huet, whose fans screamed and applauded as they virtually goaded their unlikely hero into a 3-6, 7-5, 6-0, 7-6 (7-2) upset of Lendl, whom they acknowledged only with hisses.


Shocked Mexico Mourns Prelate Slain in Shootout
All through the day, long lines of mourners encircled the old Metropolitan Cathedral in the center of this city, waiting for as long as three hours to glimpse the polished wooden coffin of Juan Jesus Cardinal Posadas Ocampo.
The Cardinal was killed in a shootout at the airport here on Monday in what officials said tonight was a battle between rival groups of drug traffickers in which the the Cardinal "was mistaken for one of them."


Clinton Says U.S. Car Makers Are 'Winning the Quality Race'


The Pop Life
New Rules for Grammys
Now it's official: the National Academy of Recording Arts and Sciences formally announced yesterday that the Grammy Awards would return to New York City in 1994, for the 36th annual ceremonies, after a year in Los Angeles.
The academy has also changed eligibility rules that will affect who takes home some awards on March 1 from Radio City Music Hall.


Renault to Appear on French 'For Sale' List
Renault S.A., France's leading auto maker and largest industrial company, is among corporations chosen by the French Government for possible privatization, Renault's chairman, Louis Schweitzer, said today.
In an interview, Mr.
Schweitzer said that the auto manufacturer would appear on a list of privatization candidates expected to be issued on Wednesday by Prime Minister Edouard Balladur's new conservative Cabinet.
"I am not at all hostile to an eventual sale of Renault to the private sector, which seems to me a logical step," Mr.
Schweitzer said.


U.N. Chief Bars Chinese Dissident
Bowing to pressure from China, Secretary General Boutros Boutros-Ghali today barred a Chinese dissident from holding a news conference at United Nations headquarters here, despite the organization's official commitment to press freedom and the protection of human rights.
The dissident, Shen Tong, one of the leaders of the pro-democracy movement that organized the 1989 demonstrations in Tiananmen Square, was invited to speak and hold a news conference in the press room by members of the United Nations Correspondents Association.
The Secretary General, enforcing a decision he announced last week, ordered the room locked and posted guards outside.


Fox Plans a News Magazine for Fall
The Fox Broadcasting Company, whose signature has been its brash, youthful programming, is hoping to reach out to older viewers this fall by introducing a prime-time news-magazine program.
Correspondents for the show, titled "Front Page," will include Ron Reagan, the former President's son.
Like most news-magazine programs, "Front Page" will feature three main stories, but it will also feature video essays and short commentary pieces.


Tower Bombing: Retracing the Steps
Three months after a huge bomb ripped a crater under the World Trade Center and killed six people, a complex picture has emerged of the events that investigators believe led to the bombing.
While the outlines of the story have been reported, months of interviews with witnesses, investigators and suspects' associates have produced a detailed account of those events -- beginning with the moment when, the authorities say, a man with an Iraqi passport arrived in New York and set the plot in high gear.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball American League  NEW YORK YANKEES -- Recalled Bobby Munoz, pitcher, from Columbus of the International League.
Optioned Andy Cook, pitcher, to Columbus.
SEATTLE MARINERS -- Signed Ryan Franklin and Brian Williams, pitchers.
National League  FLORIDA MARLINS -- Signed Tony Turnbull, catcher, to a minor-league contract.
MONTREAL EXPOS -- Placed Jimmy Jones, pitcher, on the 15-day disabled list, retroactive to May 24.
Recalled Mike Gardiner, pitcher, from Ottawa of the International League.
Basketball United States Basketball League  CONNECTICUT SKYHAWKS -- Signed Henri Abrams, center-forward, and placed him on the taxi squad.
MIAMI TROPICS -- Activated Grant Gondrezick, guard, from the injured list.
Placed Luther Burke, guard, on the injured list.
WESTCHESTER STALLIONS -- Released Henri Abrams, center-forward, and James Hodges, forward.
Football Canadian Football League  SACRAMENTO GOLD MINERS -- Signed Mark Mraz, defensive end; Larry Wallace, wide receiver; Randy Schneider, offensive tackle; and Charles Fryar, cornerback.
Hockey National Hockey League  FLORIDA PANTHERS -- Reached agreement with the Cincinnati Cyclones of the International Hockey League on a three-year contract whereby Cincinnati will become the primary affiliate of the Panthers.
PITTSBURGH PENGUINS -- Signed Troy Loney, left wing, to a multiyear contract.
International Hockey League  SALT LAKE GOLDEN EAGLES -- Named Mike Forbes general manager.
College  CALIFORNIA -- Named Billy Kennedy and Scott Perry assistant basketball coaches.
DARTMOUTH -- Named Jim Webster inside linebacker coach.
Promoted Kevin Lempa to defensive coordinator-defensive backs coach.


Gun Protesters Gather in Connecticut


Floyd Won't Be a Rocket for Long
ERIC (SLEEPY) FLOYD's six-year run with the Houston Rockets is about over.


Bird Ceremony Nets $1 Million for Charity
LARRY BIRD was petrified about filling the spotlight at his Boston Celtic retirement ceremony last winter.
He endured the adulation, and yesterday it paid off in the amount of $1 million.
Those proceeds from Larry Bird Night last Feb. 4 at the Boston Garden were distributed to 25 Boston-area organizations engaged in charitable activities.
"I was sort of scared to death about it," Bird said yesterday, "but after seeing the money we raised, I can't wait to do another one."


Words to the wise on the Omnicom strategy for acquiring agencies.
BRUCE CRAWFORD has some advice for other advertising moguls: If it's broke, don't fix it.
"None of us are that good in fixing troubled situations, troubled agencies, troubled groups with second-rate operations," said Mr.
Crawford, the president and chief executive of the Omnicom Group, the fourth-largest advertising company in the world.


Miscellany
*
Girgenti, Hughes, Butler &amp; McDowell Inc., New York, opened GHB&amp; M Public Relations.
The new unit will be headed by Linda Rosenbaum, who will be the vice president and general manager.


Oregon Agency Gets Third Kelly Award
For the second consecutive year, and the third time in four years, Wieden &amp; Kennedy in Portland, Ore., has won the Stephen E. Kelly Award from the Magazine Publishers of America for the most creative magazine advertising.
In an unusual twist, the campaign which earned Wieden the $100,000 prize for 1992 was the same one for which the agency won the prize for 1991.
Wieden was awarded the 1992 Kelly last night, at the association's 12th annual Kelly presentation, which was held for the first time in Chicago.
Again, the winning campaign was for women's athletic shoes marketed by Nike Inc.
Though the advertisements were different from those which won last year, they were similar in appearance and tone, which were praised for appealing to women in a manner that was not stereotypical.


Students Challenge Ban On Prayer at Graduation
To many Americans, the issue seemed to have been settled last June with a firm ruling from the Supreme Court: the First Amendment bars public schools from having members of the clergy lead prayers at graduation ceremonies.
But in this crossroads hamlet in western Virginia and in dozens of communities around the nation, the debate is very much alive.
Seizing on a point left unaddressed by the Supreme Court -- whether such prayers were legitimate if led by students -- a legal institute led by the evangelist Pat Robertson has offered to go to court to fight any school board that tries to prevent student-led prayers.


S.E.C. Said Investigating Prudential
The Securities and Exchange Commission is conducting a wide-ranging investigation into whether Prudential Securities Inc. violated a 1986 settlement with the agency that required the adoption of new, strict supervisory rules throughout the firm, lawyers and executives with knowledge of the inquiry said yesterday.
The central focus of the S.E.C. investigations is on trading activities in Prudential's Atlanta branch, one of two branches where the original improprieties that prompted the 1986 settlement occurred.
But the investigation of supervisory problems at Prudential has also spread to other branches, including north Dallas and Laguna Hills and Newport Beach, Calif.


Defense Rests in Police Officer's Retrial


SHARES OF BOMBAY TO START TRADING ON BIG BOARD TODAY
The Bombay Company, a specialty home-furnishings retailer which operates 379 stores, announced yesterday that its extraordinarily popular shares would trade on the New York Stock Exchange starting today.
The shares, which have been listed on the American Stock Exchange, have been trading at strikingly large multiples, hitting an all-time-high price-to-earnings ratio of 95.9 last month, according to Bloomberg Business News.


Holding a Pose as Artists Make Their Marks


Ewing Isn't Worried About M.V.P.
They had dominated the second half and seemed to have turned the Bulls into a bunch of tired, old whiners.
Then the Knicks came out of a timeout with three minutes and change left in the game and the scoreboard was telling them their lead was somehow down to 3.
It is, apparently, going to be this way right on into June.
Tense.
Sloppy.
Tight.
This is how the Knicks play.
The score was 86-83 when the Knicks set up in their half-court offense.
Patrick Ewing, on the right side of the lane, slid a shoulder into the Bulls' Will Perdue.
Suddenly Ewing had inside position, Perdue on his back hip.
A perfect bounce pass was delivered by John Starks.
Ewing laid the ball gently into the net.
Perdue hacked him from behind.
The Madison Square Garden crowd roared, began to chant "m.v.p., m.v.p."


James H. Orr, 94, Dies; Investment Counselor
James H. Orr, investment counselor and founder of Colonial Group Inc. of Boston, one of the nation's leading mutual fund organizations, died on Saturday at the Massachusetts General Hospital.
He was 94 and lived in Boston.
The cause was pneumonia, said his son, James H. Orr Jr.


IRANIAN JETS BOMB FOES' BASES IN IRAQ
Iranian military planes attacked two opposition guerrilla bases inside Iraq today in "retaliation for recent sabotage raids," the official Iranian news agency reported.
The report added that Teheran reserved the right "to chase and punish seditionists" inside Iraqi territory.


Treasuries Volatile, Yet Change Little
Prices of Treasury bonds and notes were little changed yesterday in a day of volatile trading.
Instead of getting a lift from a good two-year note auction, the benchmark 30-year bond seemed to have been pulled lower by the sale.
The 30-year bond's yield closed unchanged at 7.00 percent, with the price inching up 1/32 .


Islanders Look Ahead on Day After
Today was Day 1 of the "off season" for Don Maloney, although there won't be much time off for the Islanders' general manager this summer.
Following his team's elimination from the Stanley Cup playoffs on Monday night in Montreal, Maloney contemplated a list of major chores and other issues that were obscured while his surprisingly successful team surged deep into springtime and to the third round of the four-round tournament.
His first priority, Maloney said, is to sign Al Arbour, the coach who is free to stay or go as he pleases.
The second will be to sign Glenn Healy, a free-agent goalie whose stature grew considerably in the 18 post-season games against Washington, Pittsburgh and Montreal.


Wickman Makes It Look Easy
Bob Wickman, the pitcher the Yankees did not always believe in, the pitcher who wondered day after day during spring training if he would start the year in the minor leagues and the pitcher who rarely makes pitching look easy, eliminated some doubt and made everything seem so simple last night.
Tossing a nifty three-hitter through eight innings, he helped the Yankees claim a 1-0 victory against the Orioles.
In his 16th major league start, Wickman, the pitcher with the nasty sinker and the splendid fortune, fooled the Orioles almost all evening until Leo Gomez ruined his pursuit of perfection with one out in the seventh inning by grounding a single through the middle.
The sparse crowd at Yankee Stadium, 15,062 fans who had earlier booed when the Knicks-Bulls game was displayed and then removed from the video scoreboard, gave Wickman a standing ovation after his no-hit dream was dashed on an 0-1 sinker.


White House Retreats on Ouster At Travel Office, Reinstating 5
The White House today reinstated five of the seven travel aides who were dismissed last week for incompetence, and blamed President Clinton's chief of staff, Thomas F. McLarty 3d, for the handling of the travel office affair.
Mr.
Clinton and Vice President Al Gore said they had nothing to do with the messy dismissals, rehirings and enlistment of the F.B.I. to buttress the White House's case, and they referred all questions to Mr.
McLarty.


New Office At Lincoln Center To Oversee Programs
In its latest effort to be perceived primarily as an arts-presenting organization rather than a real-estate operation, Lincoln Center for the Performing Arts yesterday announced the formation of Lincoln Center Productions, an umbrella under which it will offer its current performance programs.
Nathan Leventhal, the president of Lincoln Center, said the new production office would oversee all the series presented by Lincoln Center.
These are the Mostly Mozart Festival, Serious Fun, Great Performers, Jazz at Lincoln Center, Lincoln Center Out of Doors and Midsummer Night Swing.
Their combined annual budget is about $12 million.
The office will also administer Lincoln Center's commissioning program, which the center's newly appointed vice president for programming, Jane S. Moss, said would be expanded considerably.


Manufacturers Recycling Half of Chemical Wastes
The nation's manufacturers recycled more than half of the 38 billion pounds of chemical wastes they produced in 1991, as the amount of such waste released into the environment continued to decline, the Environmental Protection Agency reported today.
The agency's annual inventory of toxic compounds also showed that Pennsylvania was the largest exporter of chemical wastes, shipping 185 million pounds out of state in 1991.
Texas, Ohio and New Jersey were the next largest exporters of such wastes.


Greece Sues Gallery for Return of Mycenaean Jewelry
The Government of Greece, seeking the return of rare Mycenaean gold jewelery and ornaments from the 15th century B.C., has filed suit against the Michael Ward Gallery at 9 East 93d Street in Manhattan.
The objects, on sale as a lot at the gallery for $1.5 million, include necklaces with lilies, large cusped rosettes from a belt, huge decorated gold rings, sealstones and other stylized jewelry and ornaments.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Companies
Dell Computer reported an unexpected 48 percent drop in first-quarter profits and a stunning setback in its notebook computer operations.
Dell's shares plunged 23 percent.  [ Page D1. ]
Prudential Securities is said to be under investigation by the S.E.C. for possible violations of a 1986 settlement.  [ D1. ]


The Bombing: Retracing the Steps -- A special report; Fitting the Pieces of Terrorism -- Accounts Reconstruct Planning of Trade Center Explosion
The following article is based on reporting by Ralph Blumenthal, Robert Hanley, Alison Mitchell, Joseph B. Treaster and Mary B. W. Tabor and was written by Mr.
Blumenthal.
At 4 A.M., in the early-morning chill of Feb. 26, a yellow Ryder rental van pulled into an all-night gas station on Kennedy Boulevard in Jersey City, tailed by a blue Honda sedan.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article on Monday about drug activity at factories along the Mexican border misidentified a senior United States customs official.
The official, Mike Lane, is Deputy Customs Commissioner.


Trolleys Never Broke Any Speed Records
To the Editor:
There is a lot to be said for trolleys, old and new, but they were and are not starships.
Your May 14 article on the reopening of the trolley museum in East Haven, Conn., refers to "a green trolley that once whizzed from Chicago to Milwaukee in an hour."


Mariners' O'Brien Makes Retirement Plans
PETE O'BRIEN says the end is near for his baseball career.
He plans to retire after this season with the Seattle Mariners to spend more time with his family and perhaps enter the ministry.
The 35-year-old designated hitter said he is ready to give up his $2.5 million salary.
He is in his fourth season with Seattle after a year in Cleveland and seven in Texas.


New School Honors the Premier of a German State
The New School For Social Research conferred degrees yesterday on graduates from the Eugene Lang College, the New School, the Graduate Faculty of Political and Social Science and the Graduate School of Management and Urban Policy.
The commencements for two other divisions of the school, the Parsons School of Design and the Mannes College of Music, were held earlier this month.


1,000 Priests Told to Attend Talks on Sex
John Cardinal O'Connor, the Roman Catholic Archbishop of New York, ordered all priests active in the archdiocese's parishes -- more than 1,000 priests -- to attend meetings this week to discuss questions surrounding sexual abuse of minors by priests.
Such meetings have been rare under the Cardinal, church officials said.
The Cardinal spoke of establishing a "firm policy" and taking "painful steps," said priests who attended one of the meetings.
And Cardinal O'Connor said he wanted to hear the priests' reactions before issuing a statement, but no draft of one was distributed or summarized during the meetings.


'Hearings' on Gays in the Military Are a Sham; Pep Rally for Bigotry
To the Editor:
I listened to the Senate Armed Services Committee's May 10 hearing on public radio, and my impressions were so different from your May 11 coverage that I hardly recognized it as the same event.
The real story should be the shameful manner in which the committee allowed the hearing to degenerate into a pep rally for supporters of the ban on gays in the military.


Optical Chain Selects A New York Agency
Lenscrafters, a division of the U.S.
Shoe Corporation in Cincinnati, said yesterday that, as expected, it had selected Deutsch/Dworin in New York to handle its account, previously handled in-house.
Billings were estimated at $37 million.
David Richards, the senior vice president of marketing for the optical chain, said that Deutsch/Dworin was awarded the account after a review that also included Hal Riney &amp; Partners in Chicago and San Francisco and Jordan, McGrath, Case &amp; Taylor in New York.
Steve Dworin, the president of Deutsch/Dworin, called the assignment the agency's largest single account gain to date.


BUSINESS TECHNOLOGY: The HDTV Compromise; Some Experts Worry That an Accord By Rivals Doesn't Pick the Best System
While supporters of a broad new agreement on high-definition television say it will help unite television and computing, some experts worry that the proposed standard is too much a political compromise that could backfire.
After months of intense negotiation, the agreement announced on Monday by three rival groups in the HDTV race tries to satisfy the competing demands of television and computer companies.
But it does so in a way that is peculiar to Washington -- by trying to do something for everybody without making a firm decision on which approach will work best.


Merger Will Create a Mining Giant
Amax Inc. said yesterday that it would merge with the Cyprus Minerals Company, creating one of the world's largest mining companies.
As part of the deal, Amax will first spin off its aluminum subsidiary, which is by far its biggest operation, as well as a portion of its publicly traded gold operation.


Myopia at the White House; The F.B.I., Abused
By design or incompetence or a blend of the two, the White House has used a highly vulnerable F.B.I. for unworthy political purposes.
Though President Clinton's staff finally admitted yesterday that the process that led to the firing of the seven-member White House travel office was full of mistakes, it exonerated itself of meddling with the F.B.I.
But meddle it did.
Last Friday the F.B.I.'s public affairs director, John Collingwood, was summoned to the White House, where top staff members sought his help to get them out of a major political jam.


E-II Holdings Wins Fight For Reorganization Plan
E-II Holdings Inc., owner of Samsonite luggage, Culligan water-treatment devices and Botany 500 suits, dragged itself out of bankruptcy early yesterday morning.
At 2:45 A.M., after a hearing highlighted by heated legal arguments, Judge Cornelius Blackshear of the Federal Bankruptcy Court in Manhattan confirmed the company's plan to restructure $1.25 billion of debt and offer new shares to the public.


Consumers' Confidence Is Waning
Bill Clinton's economic program isn't playing any better on Main Street than the President's $200 haircut, according to the latest consumer confidence poll.
Virtually all the post-election surge in optimism about the new Administration's ability to turn the economy around quickly has evaporated, the Conference Board survey for May showed.


Chinese Immigrants Kept Padlocked in Warehouse
Fifty-seven undocumented immigrants from China were kept padlocked in a Jersey City warehouse for more than a month, apparently as prisoners of a smuggling ring demanding up to $30,000 from their families for their release, the police said.
The immigrants, all male and from the Fujian province who ranged in age from 14 to 43, had been confined in a former auto body shop, where they slept side by side on bamboo mats on the second floor.
They were discovered Monday morning by police officers investigating a telephone company complaint that no one had paid for about $3,000 worth of calls made to China from the warehouse since April.


DEERE &amp; CO. (N)
Deere &amp; Company reported yesterday that strong sales at its North American operations and higher prices for its products helped its fiscal second-quarter operating profit more than double.
Deere's earnings of $110.2 million in the latest quarter excluded a one-time restructuring charge of $80 million.
Per-share earnings of $1.44 were significantly above analysts' expectations of 86 cents per share.
Deere's chairman and chief executive, Hans W. Becherer, said the company was "guardedly optimistic about prospects for 1993."
Analysts shared that optimism.
Steven Colbert at Prudential Securities Research, San Francisco, said he is raising his 1993 earnings estimate for Deere to $3 a share from $1.80 a share.
His revised estimate excludes the impact of the $80 million charge Deere took in the latest quarter to revamp its European operations.
Net sales to dealers worldwide of Deere agricultural, industrial and lawn and garden equipment rose 15 percent in the second quarter and 8 percent for the first six months of the year, said the company, which is based in Moline, Ill.


Preparing Soul Food Can Now Be as Easy as Opening a Can
IMAGINE how convenient it would be, when the yearning for collard or turnip greens hits, to run to the corner supermarket and pick a few cans off the shelf.
After years of wishful thinking on the part of consumers and trial and error by the food industry, mass marketing has finally come to soul food, the ethnic cooking of black Americans.
Foods like collard greens, okra and black-eyed peas, specifically seasoned to appeal to African-American palates, are being canned and sold in supermarkets around the country.


Corrections
Because of a production error, the front page of Science Times was omitted from some copies yesterday, and a duplicate front page from Business Day appeared in its place.
Readers wishing copies of the correct page C1 may write to Production Quality Control, The New York Times, 229 West 43d Street, New York, N.Y. 10036.


AT LUNCH WITH: Herb Caen; Romancing San Francisco In 1,000 Words or Less
Herb Caen is considering his own obituary.
It will be on page 1 of The San Francisco Chronicle, if he has his way, smack in the middle of the page and bordered in black.


'Hearings' on Gays in the Military Are a Sham; 'Recruiter's Dream'
To the Editor:
I applaud "A Recruiter's Dream" (editorial, May 13) for rejecting Col.
Fred Peck's argument that homosexuals should be excluded from the military for their own protection.
I am astonished, however, that no one (including Colonel Peck's superiors) has condemned the offensive racial bias Colonel Peck showed in describing two of the attributes that make his son "a recruiter's dream": blue eyes and blond hair.
The obvious implication is that a minority recruit is less than the military's ideal.


Clinton's Math: More Gets Less
In his campaign document "Putting People First," Bill Clinton promised to create "a set of national standards for what students should know" and an examination system "to measure our students' and schools' progress in meeting the national standards."
Unfortunately, the Administration's school reform bill is not likely to fulfill that promise but would expand dramatically the scope and cost of Federal regulation of local schools.


Phillies Set for Their Medicine: the Mets
If the Mets want to see the worst team in the National League East, they need not look farther than their dugout.
If they want to see the best team, they need not look farther than across the field at Veterans Stadium Monday night.
For the Mets will finally see the Philadelphia Phillies, the bookend at the opposite end of the division, 14 1/2 games, and a seeming universe, away.


CHRONICLE
PAMELA HARRIMAN, the new United States Ambassador to France, was a student in HELEN WORTH'S cooking school in New York in 1962, but she had to miss a session.
Ms.
Worth, who attended Mrs.
Harriman's swearing-in ceremony, recalled that the class her student had missed was devoted to souffles.
"I am sending her an article about the low-calorie way to make souffles with only egg whites," Ms.
Worth said.
"It would be dastardly to go to France without it."
Not that she envisions Ambassador Harriman in the embassy kitchen whipping up souffles for the parties she will no doubt be giving.
But she needs to know how to do it, Ms.
Worth said: "You can't say to a cook, no matter how much you are paying them, that you don't like something. You must be able to say, 'I want it done this way.' "


Dell's Profit And Stock Plummet
The Dell Computer Corporation today reported a stunning setback in its notebook-computer operations and an unexpected drop of more than 48 percent in its first-quarter profits, to $10.2 million -- its first decline in profits in 14 quarters.
The news hammered Dell's share price, and it ended the day down $7.375, or 23 percent, to $24.75, in Nasdaq trading.
More than 13 million shares were traded, making it the most active stock on any exchange.


Hikind Says Threat Led to Police Guard
State Assemblyman Dov Hikind, an outspoken Jewish legislator who was critical of the acquittal of an Egyptian immigrant in the 1990 killing of Rabbi Meir Kahane, said yesterday that he has been put under police protection because of a "serious threat" against him.
Mr.
Hikind, a Brooklyn Democrat, said he has been guarded by officers from the police intelligence division since he was contacted by law-enforcement authorities on May 17 and told of a plot against him.
"Basically I was informed of a serious threat against me," he said.
"I was offered police protection and gladly accepted.


Pippen's Ejection Put Bulls on the Spot
The moment said more than any other about the current emotional state of the two-time defending National Basketball Association champions.
Throughout an emotional evening, the Chicago Bulls had been frustrated by the decisions of officials, and perhaps by their own limitations.
With 7 minutes 34 seconds to play in the second game of the Eastern Conference championship series against the Knicks, the Bulls suffered a sudden, shocking setback.


CHRONICLE
ROBERT WESTENBERG, an actor who is starring in "Arms and the Man" in Baltimore, was on the train to New York on Monday to rehearse one show, "Gay Divorce," and audition for another, "Kate's House," when he tucked his scripts and a score in the pocket of a seat -- and left them behind.
"I was walking home from the subway stop when I realized I had no scripts and there was nothing I could do but phone Amtrak and hope against hope that they had not gone to Montreal," Mr.
Westenberg said yesterday.


There Are No Accidents, Some Insist
Using the word "accident" was a finable offense at a conference of more than 1,400 injury-prevention and control specialists that ended here on Sunday.
The word was considered to mark a lapse into the dark ages before the science of epidemiology and techniques of public health were applied to demystify a host of seemingly random injuries.
"In this field we fine people a quarter every time they use the word," said Dr.
Mark Rosenberg, an injury prevention specialist with the Federal Centers for Disease Control.
"It implies 'unpredictable' and 'unpreventable,' but our message is, first, that injuries are an epidemic in this country and, second, we can prevent them."


Real Estate; Three new hotels are under way in Orlando, Fla., despite a slump.
THREE major hotel projects are under way here, but new construction is still well off the pace of a few years ago.
Orlando has one of the strongest hotel markets in the country.
Occupancy for the first quarter of 1993 stood at 74.3 percent, compared with 62.2 percent for the entire United States, according to a survey by Coopers &amp; Lybrand.


Motivation in Killing of Gay Sailor Is Left Unclear in Penalty Hearing
In a day of sometimes wrenching testimony about the murder of a gay American sailor in Japan last year, a Navy investigator said today that the shipmate who has admitted the killing mentioned the victim's homosexuality as a motive only after the investigator himself suggested the possibility, and then later recanted the comment.
Airman Apprentice Terry M. Helvey has pleaded guilty to beating a gay shipmate, Allen R. Schindler, to death last October in a public toilet outside the United States Navy base at Sasebo, in southwestern Japan.
He has never commented publicly on his motive, but Mr.
Schindler's homosexuality has led some to say that the killing was a hate crime.


Joseph Epstein, 76; Professor at Amherst
Joseph Epstein, emeritus professor of philosophy at Amherst College, died Sunday at Cooley Dickenson Hospital in Northampton, Mass.
He was 76 and lived in Amherst.
He died after a brief illness, the college said.


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt *
United Telephone Co. of Ohio, Mansfield, Ohio, a subsidiary of the SprintCorp., is offering $30 million of 5.875 percent first-mortgage bonds due in 2000 at 98.594 to yield 6.125 percent and $35 million of 6.5 percent first-mortgage bonds due in 2005 at 98.57 to yield 6.675 percent through Lehman Brothers.
All the bonds are noncallable and are rated A-2 by Moody's, A by S.&amp; P. and AA+ by Duff &amp; Phelps.


A Violent Path of Immigration


Accounts
*
Oscar Mayer Foods Corp., Madison, Wis., to J. Walter Thompson Chicago, to handle the introduction of Big &amp; Juicy, a brand of hot dogs.
Thompson Chicago, which also handles the company's other products, will begin a campaign on Monday starring the boxer George Foreman and his family. *
Tarkett A.B., Frankenthal, Germany, to BSB Europe, as the first agency to handle the flooring company's advertising throughout Europe.
BSB Europe's agency in Helsingborg, Sweden, BSB September, will be the lead agency on the account, with billings estimated at $15 million.


Salvaging of Futures: It's One Life at a Time
WHEN Rita Fecher swept into New York in the 1960's, she was ready to join the revolution.
She just didn't know where to look.
As the daughter of a rabbi and the ex-wife of another, trading her comfortable New Jersey world of frosted blond hair, swim clubs and mah-jongg for the avant-garde art and theater crowd of Greenwich Village was probably enough of a revolt.
But downtown's social ferment was a skirmish compared to where she found the real uprising -- among the street gangs of the South Bronx.


Democrats Hustle for Donations at Big Parties and Private Meetings
Shortly after dawn last Wednesday, Mickey Kantor, the United States Trade Representative, welcomed a dozen business leaders to his office for a private briefing on trade matters especially for big-ticket donors to the Democratic Party.
The meeting was arranged by the Democratic National Committee as part of a newly aggressive effort to raise millions of dollars for the party by expanding its donor base before new campaign-finance rules go into effect.
Earlier this month, the party raised more than $3 million at a fund-raising dinner at Lincoln Center.
And next month, it is hoping to bank millions more at a huge fund-raiser in Washington.


Next Inc. Shipping Its New Software
Defying predictions of his company's imminent demise, Steven P. Jobs said today that Next Inc. had begun shipping a version of its Nextstep operating system software, which was formerly for niche markets and has now been adapted for use on mainstream personal computers.
Mr.
Jobs said that eight of the leading personal computer makers had agreed to offer Nextstep on their machines for customers who request it.
He also announced a new partnership with the Hewlett-Packard Company to sell Nextstep to corporate computer users of Hewlett's powerful work stations.


Dundo Journal; In Angola Now, Death and Diamonds Go Together
Until recently, the easternmost corner of Angola was largely isolated from the factional hostilities that have shattered much of this country.
But in the last few months the woes of Africa's longest-running war appear to have focused full force on the Lunda Norte region.
In a surgical ward of a provincial hospital here is Gustavo Sozinho, a farmer whose leg was amputated after he stepped on a newly planted land mine.
In the bed next to him is Teixeira Uanji, lying motionless with both legs in crude casts.


'Hearings' on Gays in the Military Are a Sham
To the Editor:
Gays and lesbians, like most other Americans, work hard, pay their taxes and play by the rules.
We do not live only in New York City or San Francisco or Los Angeles; we live in every city and town across the United States.
We own homes, run businesses, employ people, are mothers and fathers, sons and daughters, aunts and uncles, nieces and nephews, doctors, lawyers, judges, teachers and police officers.
We are not asking for "special" rights.
We are asking only to be treated like all other full citizens of this country and be allowed to serve openly and honestly, if we so choose, in the military.


Bolden to Replace Kersee at U.C.L.A.
JEANETTE BOLDEN, who won a gold medal in 1984 as a member of the United States 400-meter relay team, is taking over the U.C.L.A.'s women's track team from BOB KERSEE.


Review Is Narrowed On Liquor Account
The Schieffelin &amp; Somerset Company in New York said yesterday that it had narrowed the review on its Tanqueray gin and vodka brands account to two New York agencies.
The account, with billings estimated at $12 million, has been handled by Smith/Greenland in New York.


New York Must Afford Good Teachers
To the Editor:
"Higher Salaries for Teachers?" (editorial, May 10) came as a shock to us.
As teachers in New York City public schools, both of us were recently honored nationwide as the outstanding teachers in our respective fields at the 1992-93 Disney American Teacher Awards.
What a contrast to the complete disrespect this city has shown for the work we do!
Sadly, you endorse that disrespect.


No Headline
I speak for a majority of the active Justices of the Court when I say that we are both surprised and disappointed by the library's decision to give unrestricted public access to Justice Thurgood Marshall's papers.
CHIEF JUSTICE WILLIAM H. REHNQUIST, in a letter to the Librarian of Congress, James H. Billington.  [ A1:1. ]


The New Fame, or, How a Nobody Can Be Somebody
In addition to nuclear weapons and a slimmed-down ozone layer, the 20th century has brought the world a new kind of fame.
It's faster, it's broader and it's shallower.
It's the kind that's responsible for Elvis sightings, the "Geraldo" show and the idea that "superstar" is a valid career goal.
As the year 2000 approaches, fame itself is becoming famous.
Who better to discuss the dynamics of fame in the 20th century than seven famous people, who gathered Monday night at the Joseph Papp Public Theater for what the panel's moderator, Clive James, promised would be "a sharply contested yet shapely symposium"?
The panel members were Anna Wintour, the editor of Vogue; Liz Smith, the gossip columnist for Newsday; Fran Lebowitz, the essayist; Harold M. Evans, the president and publisher of Random House Books; Norman Mailer, the novelist, and Ivana Trump, famous person.


Savings Estimate Lowered
The Clinton Administration announced yesterday that savings from the Treasury's decision to shift more of its borrowing to shorter-term, lower interest rate notes and bills would save less than expected.
In the President's budget, the Office and Management and Budget had assumed a savings of $16.4 billion over the five fiscal years through 1998.
But the O.M.B said in a statement that the savings were now estimated to be $10.8 billion, less than two thirds of the original goal.


Boys Predominate in a Contest, Fueling Complaint of Test Bias
Three out of five semifinalists for the National Merit Scholarships this year were boys, an advocacy group reports today, even though well over half of the high school seniors taking the qualifying test were girls.
The group, the National Center for Fair and Open Testing in Cambridge, Mass., says it has been compiling lists of semifinalists for seven years and has found little change in the ratio of boys to girls among semifinalists, despite a growing chorus of complaints that standardized tests are biased against girls.


Review/Television; The Newest Incarnation Of Norris's 'McTeague'
Frank Norris's turn-of-the-century novel "McTeague" has had its share of ambitious adaptations.
In 1924, it became a silent film titled "Greed," directed by Erich von Stroheim and ultimately cut from 10 hours to 2.
In 1992, with William Bolcom as the composer, "McTeague" was turned into an opera.
The world premiere at the Lyric Opera of Chicago was directed by Robert Altman, the longtime maverick film director, who also wrote the libretto with Arnold Weinstein.
Now, with Mr.
Altman getting credit for the concept and creative supervision, there's "The Real McTeague," an hourlong "Great Performances" presentation on Channel 13 at 9 tonight.
In a kind of synthesis of forms, scenes from the von Stroheim film are blended with corresponding scenes from the opera, directed for television by Kirk Browning.
The whole is woven together with excerpts from the novel, read by Studs Terkel with his customary feistiness.


Belgrade Reneges on Verification Of Ban on Arming Bosnian Serbs
Serbian leaders told a Russian mediator today that they were not prepared to accept international monitors on their border with Bosnia and Herzegovina to verify their assertions that they were not supplying Bosnian Serb forces with weapons or other military supplies.
President Slobodan Milosevic of Serbia, who a month ago said international observers would be welcome to confirm that his Government was enforcing an embargo on military aid to Bosnian Serbs, told Vitaly I. Churkin, the Russian Deputy Foreign Minister, that there was now "no need" for them.


Books of The Times; A Reporter at the Creation of the New Russia
Lenin's Tomb  The Last Days of the Soviet Empire  By David Remnick  Illustrated. 576 pages.
Random House. $25.


Channel One Legislation Is Likely to Be Defeated in the Assembly
Amid concerns about the commercial and news content of Channel One, legislation to allow public schools to show the current-affairs program for teen-agers appears almost certain to fail in the New York State Assembly.
The proposal took a small step forward today when the Assembly Education Committee passed the bill, which has been amended so that students will not be required to watch the daily program, and sent it the Assembly Rules Committee for further review.


Sonics Plan to Wake Up and Find the Basket
Late Monday night, half the Phoenix Suns frequented a pretentious sports bar called "Majerle's." Dan Majerle is the owner, the bartender and the Suns' starting guard, and he hopped on a stool at about midnight to say, "Shush, everyone. I'd like to announce this year's most valuable player: Charles Barkley."
Barkley, who was downing some hors d'oeuvres, accepted the raucous applause, at which point Suns center Oliver Miller rose for supposedly another poignant announcement.
Miller, a 300-pounder, was afraid to stand on a stool, but, after a dramatic pause, said, "Drinks are on Charles." The Exhaustion Excuse
The Seattle SuperSonics were uninvited, and, based on their complaints following that night's 105-91 defeat, they should have been in bed.
Half of Seattle's players claimed to be hung over from their strenuous seven-game series against Houston, and they blamed their Game 1 loss in the Western Conference finals on utter exhaustion.


U.S. ISSUES RULES ON MEDICINE CLUBS
The Food and Drug Administration today issued guidelines for clubs that buy unapproved drugs for people with AIDS, cancer and other fatal diseases.
The sale of drugs that have not been approved by the agency is generally illegal, but the agency can permit individuals to import drugs, in amounts small enough for personal use, even if they have not been approved for use in the United States.
All but a very few of the drugs are foreign-made.


Senate Begins Wrestling Over Campaign Finance
The Senate began what is expected to be a long battle over campaign finance legislation today by killing a proposal to hold individual contributions to $100 every two years, down from the current limits of $1,000 for a primary and another $1,000 for a general election.
The amendment, proposed by Senator Paul Wellstone, a freshman Democrat from Minnesota, was defeated by a vote of 84 to 13.
The amendment would have limited individual contributions to $100 every election cycle, or $50 for a primary and another $50 for a general election.


Charles Hepler, 74; The First Publisher Of Reader's Digest
Charles D. Hepler, a former publisher of Reader's Digest and of New Mexico magazine, died Monday at his home in Santa Fe, N.M.
A former resident of Stamford, Conn., he was 74.
The cause was lung cancer, said Jon Bowman, editor of New Mexico, from which Mr.
Hepler retired in January.


Sports of The Times; It's a Trend: Even Jordan's Not Enough
IT can't be this simple, can it?
Actually, maybe it can.
Scottie Pippen may not be there, and Bill Cartwright isn't going to regain his youth on the flight back to Chicago, and his replacements are not going to suddenly gain any prowess in anything more than giving fouls.
It just might be this way in these Eastern Conference finals, against a team that spent too much energy waiting to see if Toni Kukoc wanted a part of this league.


U.S. Petroleum Data
In millions of barrels except refinery utilization
May 21
May 14
May 22
1993
1993
1992
Gasoline production, daily
7.5
7.2
7.0
Distillate production, daily
3.0
3.0
2.9
Gasoline stocks
222.6
218.6
216.6
Distillate stocks
100.0
99.5
90.7
Crude imports, daily
6.7
7.2
6.7
Product imports, daily
1.4
1.9
1.4
Crude stocks
355.2
351.8
349.1
Crude production, daily
6.9
6.9
7.1
Refinery utilization (%)
89.8
89.1
88.7
Source: American Petroleum Institute


Dollar Falls to New Low Against Japanese Yen
The dollar fell to another record low against the Japanese yen today after the Treasury released a report on exchange rates that suggested the yen's rise could reduce the American trade deficit with Japan.
But at the same time, a senior Treasury official said that devaluing the dollar was not the route to increased American prosperity.


POINT MAN IN PARIS DRAWS LITTLE FIRE
In strictly political terms, Edouard Balladur became France's Prime Minister in March with the mission of preparing the ground for the leader of the neo-Gaullist party, Jacques Chirac, to win the country's presidential election in 1995.
To achieve this, it was understood that he would have to bring down unemployment, revive economic growth and restore self-confidence to France so Mr.
Chirac would have good reasons to ask French voters to choose him as President Francois Mitterrand's successor.


Inmate in Subway Stabbing Was in Work-Release Plan
Elis Zayas, the man charged in the stabbing of a man who came to the aid of a Queens woman as she was being mugged in a subway station, walked off from a work-release program that he had been admitted to less than seven months after he started serving a prison sentence.
The State Corrections Commissioner, Thomas A. Coughlin 3d, insisted yesterday that Mr.
Zayas's case was an isolated one.
But he said it showed the risks posed by a program that, driven by prison overcrowding and financial constraints, returns more than twice as many inmates to the streets as it did three years ago.


Personal Health
MYTHS about vitamin E have flourished since its birth as an essential nutrient in 1922, with the discovery that rats could not reproduce without it.
Within a decade after the discovery by Dr.
H.
M.
Evans and Dr.
K.
S.
Bishop, vitamin E acquired a mystique as an enhancer and restorer of sexual and reproductive function, an image reflected in its chemical name, tocopherol, from the Greek for "to bring forth in childbirth" or, more colloquially, "oil of fertility."


HIGH BRITISH AIDE NAMED IN IRAQ CASE
The inquiry into Britain's exports of weapons components and technology to Iraq in the years before the Persian Gulf war has broadened to include charges that a top official sought to cover up the Government's knowledge of a crucial sale.
The official, Sir Patrick Mayhew, the current Northern Ireland Secretary and a former Attorney General, said today that he would testify before the inquiry on Thursday to rebut charges made against him on Monday by Sir Hal Miller, a former Member of Parliament.
Both Sir Hal and Sir Patrick are members of the governing Conservative Party.


Knicks Head to Second City With Second Victory
It was a typical Knicks' playoff victory, with drama, sensational defense, and physical play that led to ejections and heated emotions.
The Chicago Bulls mounted a furious comeback, but New York made a game-winning stand in the final minute.
John Starks made a spectacular driving, left-handed dunk that energized the crowd and his teammates.
Charles Oakley dominated both backboards and made clutch free throws.
And the Knicks remained masters of Madison Square Garden, where they have won 27 consecutive games.


CHRONICLE
There is nothing unusual about a book tour, but two Washington writers who are married to each other and whose respective novels both have a publication date of June 2 are heading out on a his-and-hers version today.
"It's an interesting exercise in marital relations that we've set ourselves up for," KATE LEHRER said the other day.
Her second novel, "When They Took Away the Man in the Moon" is being published by Harmony Books.


RESULTS PLUS
SPORT Italian Rider Stays in the Lead  Moreno Argentin of Italy retained his lead in the Tour of Italy yesterday as Piotr Ugrumov of Latvia won the third stage of the cycling race in Scanno, Italy.
Ugrumov finished the stage in 4 hours 5 minutes 47 seconds.
He crossed the finish line two seconds ahead of Enrico Zaina of Italy and five seconds in front of Luc LeBlanc of France.
Argentin finished 12th in a group that was 19 seconds behind the leader.
The result was good enough to keep the Italian cyclist 12 seconds ahead of Ugrumov, who was second over all.
Then came Maurizio Fondreist of Italy, 36 seconds back, and Miguel Indurain of Spain, another 38 seconds back.
Andrew Hampsten was the top American yesterday, finishing 31st, 19 seconds behind the leader.
Hampsten was 32d over all, 1 minute 24 seconds behind.
Greg LeMond, a three-time winner of the Tour of France who has never won the Tour of Italy, was the 92d finisher yesterday.
The poor showing, 4 minutes 45 seconds behind Ugrumov, dropped LeMond to 112th over all, 14 minutes 1 second behind Argentin. (AP)
Ex-Olympian Wins Time Trial: Lance Armstrong, chasing a $1 million triple-crown prize, won the opening time trial of the K Mart Classic stage race in Morgantown, W.Va.
Armstrong, a former Olympian from Austin, Tex., who rides professionally for Motorola, finished the one-and-a-half-mile race in 2 minutes 48.24 seconds.
Steve Hegg, who won a gold medal in the 1984 Olympic pursuit, finished second.
The resident of Dana Point, Calif., a member of the Chevrolet-L.A.
Sheriffs team, had a time of 2:49.8.
Armstrong won the one-day Thrift Drug Classic last weekend, which was the first leg of the Thrift Drug Triple Crown.
The K Mart Classic, which ends Sunday in Charleston, W.Va., is the second leg.
The triple crown concludes with the USPro Cycling Championship on June 6 in Philadelphia. (AP)


Democrats Seek Donors
The Democratic Party is busy pampering its most reliable givers by allowing them access to top officials in the Administration.
Page D20.


Dell's Profit And Stock Plummet
The Dell Computer Corporation today reported a stunning setback in its notebook-computer operations and an unexpected drop of more than 48 percent in its first-quarter profits, to $10.2 million -- its first decline in profits in 14 quarters.
The news hammered Dell's share price, and it ended the day down $7.375, or 23 percent, to $24.75, in Nasdaq trading.
More than 13 million shares were traded, making it the most active stock on any exchange.


Presidential Race Starts in Iran
Iran's presidential election campaign officially began this week with speeches and a televised debate.
President Hashemi Rafsanjani underscored his position as the undisputed front runner by his absence.
Mr.
Rafsanjani, the only cleric among the four candidates in the June 11 election, recently said that the last four years of his term had been "so productive that I can call it unprecedented in Iranian history."


'Hearings' on Gays in the Military Are a Sham; Blueprint for Blackmail
To the Editor:
If we needed further evidence that even proponents of the ban on homosexuals in the military don't believe their own arguments, their latest suggestion for a "compromise" is surely that.
For years they argued that gays in the military -- or anywhere in the Government for that matter -- were security risks because they were subject to blackmail.
Now they've come up with this "Don't ask, don't tell" policy that's a blueprint for blackmail.
Since part of the policy is that the armed forces would not seek out homosexuals in uniform, they would certainly turn up in sensitive positions, and under this policy would be more subject to blackmail than ever.


Argentina Can't Delay in Orphans' Cases
To the Editor:
"Argentines Contend for War Orphans' Hearts," your special report on the Argentine "dirty war" of 1976-83 (front page, May 11) rekindles indelible memories.
Three years ago, while visiting Argentina and Uruguay, I had the privilege of meeting in Buenos Aires with the Grandmothers of the Plaza de Mayo and other Argentine human rights groups.
I was inspired by these victims of ideological cleansing, the brutality of which ranks with the worst forms of racial, ethnic or religious cleansing.


Weekend Guests Require a Pantry Full of Strategy
THE would-be world champions of summer are training and dreaming again.
Duffers imagine Arnold Palmer as they practice teeing off in the backyard.
Softball sluggers oil their gloves and imagine the playoffs: bottom of the ninth, two outs, bases loaded -- it's a grand slam, and the fans go wild.
Swimmers flip-turn and Rollerbladers skate fierce figure eights, Olympic visions dancing in their heads.
Summer refuels childhood dreams.
And not unlike would-be sports stars, hosts flex their conviviality muscles when days get longer and the air turns warm and sweet.
Flawless summer entertaining is, for the host, the ultimate playhouse fantasy.
One part technique, 99 parts strategy, it requires a "mental game plan," says Michael McLaughlin, author of "Cooking for the Weekend" (Simon &amp; Schuster, 1993).


Russia's Technology Tag Sale
Standing amid the largest exhibit yet of technology developed by the former Soviet Union, Sergei P. Gavrilov, the head of marketing for the Distant Radiocommunication Scientific Research Institute of Moscow, struggled to formulate a sales pitch for the radar system displayed on the wall behind him.
After intently pondering a question about the advantages his product might have over its Western counterparts, Mr.
Gavrilov finally answered.
"Basically," he said, "we're competing on price."


Bridge
Any two experts living on opposite sides of the continent used to be at a considerable disadvantage if they wished to polish their partnership methods.
Now they have a most useful option, if each owns a computer.
Early this month, Karen Allison of Jersey City and Karen Singer of Portland, Ore., wanted to practice in preparation for play in Memphis next month, in the hope of continuing to the World Championships in Chile in September.
So they stayed home and hooked into the Sierra network, to play a planned game against John Lowenthal of Manhattan and Phillip Martin of Bronxville, N.Y., who were themselves practicing for a major New York team event.
On the diagramed deal Martin was South, struggling in a two-spade contract after East had opening the bidding with one club.
West led that suit, and South captured the queen with the ace.
The heart king was led and the jack was played.
Singer correctly refused to ruff, discarding a diamond, and dummy's ace won.
South ruffed a heart, and West again discarded a diamond, noting her partner's heart queen, a signal for diamonds.


Couscous Makes a Meal
COUSCOUS has become the darling of the make-it-quick set.
Boil some water, and soak the couscous in it for three to five minutes, and you'll have a dish that is as quick as instant rice, but better.
A couple of years ago, instant whole-wheat couscous moved out of the health-food stores and into some supermarkets.
It is just as easy to prepare, and has more fiber.
As cooks have become more familiar with coucous, they've become more adventuresome.
The Golden Door spa in Escondido, Calif., has made a rather elaborate -- though easy -- dish, using couscous as a base.
I've added grilled pork.


Corrections
An article on May 16 about the selection of Victor Gotbaum to fill a vacancy on the New York City Board of Education misstated his job experience with the State Department.
Mr.
Gotbaum was a foreign affairs officer with the department in the 1950's.


Public &amp; Private; Dead Man Walking
Nobody's likely to see Gary Graham as a choirboy, not after he admitted a violent armed robbery spree that included shootings and pistol-whippings when he was only 17.
But nobody saw Gary Graham kill Bobby Lambert outside the Safeway in Houston in May 1981 either, except for a lone witness sitting almost 40 feet away in her car.
She couldn't pick Mr.
Graham's picture out of a photo lineup, but she picked him out of a police lineup the next day, perhaps because his was the only face that appeared in both.


Weicker Proposes Tax Cuts To Assist Pratt &amp; Whitney
In a bid to prevent Pratt &amp; Whitney, Connecticut's largest private employer, from closing plants here, Gov.
Lowell P. Weicker Jr. today proposed a legislative agenda of tax cuts and job-training grants.
He said that if the package were adopted, it would save Pratt &amp; Whitney $32 million a year through taxes and outright grants and go far toward resolving the state's cost disadvantage in comparison with other states.


Japan Airlines Chairman Calls U.S. Rivals Unfair
The chairman of Japan Airlines today accused United States' airlines of predatory pricing, saying their below-cost fares have undermined the financial health of his airline.
"We cannot make any profit because the fare is not enough to cover the costs to Japan Airlines," which posted a $400 million loss last year, Susumu Yamaji, the chairman, said.
"Predatory pricing must be ended."  Echoes U.S.
Car Makers' Concern
The charges of unfair business practices are similar to those made by American auto makers and electronics manufacturers against their Japanese counterparts.


MCI STARTS HIGH-SPEED PROGRAM FOR CORPORATE CLIENTS
The MCI Communications Corporation, the nation's second-biggest long-distance carrier, said yesterday it was starting a new program to arrange high-speed local links for large business customers that would allow them to avoid access charges.
Such charges, which local phone companies assess for linking callers with long-distance carriers, account for about half the cost of long-distance calls.


Chinese Dissident Released; Bow to U.S. Is Seen
The Government today freed a prominent pro-democracy campaigner who had spent the last 12 years in solitary confinement, and the move appeared to be an olive branch to President Clinton just before he decides on extending trade benefits to China.
The campaigner, Xu Wenli, a 49-year-old former editor of an underground magazine, was paroled three years before completion of his 15-year prison sentence.
The length of his sentence and the three years he spent in a tiny punishment cell had made him a symbol of those who stand up against Chinese repression.


Two TV Networks Plan Fall Promotions
Two television networks are announcing elaborate marketing and promotional programs to advertise their fall seasons.
CBS said yesterday that for the fourth time in five years, the network would team with the Kmart Corporation to present a series of promotions tied to the fall season.
The CBS/ Kmart Premiere Party will feature a contest tied to the 1993-94 prime-time schedule.
Special inserts will appear with 140 million Kmart newspaper circulars.


U.S. May Bargain With Korea on Atom Issue
In a new attempt to defuse a dispute over nuclear weapons, the United States said today that it was prepared to make some concessions to North Korea if it agreed to rejoin a treaty requiring it to open its nuclear sites to inspection.
The conciliatory statements by a senior State Department official appeared intended to signal American good will before a high-level meeting next week in New York between representatives of the two countries.


American Business Needs More Foresight; Yes, He's Kidding
To the Editor:
I was one among a good number of friends of Milt Moskowitz who called because they did not understand "Spare the Knife, Spoil the Company" (Op-Ed, May 14).
I was relieved to learn that it was intended to be satire.
Perhaps it was not recognized because it dealt with a subject not often treated by satirists.


AWAY FROM HOME WITH: Anita Roddick; Striving to Be Cosmetically Correct
ANITA RODDICK doesn't waste time with small talk.
She doesn't say hello, or how are you, or nice to meet you.
Dressed all in black, masses of dark hair framing her face, she lunges into an interview as if a bell has gone off.
"Have you ever had orange and cranberry together?" She sips her drink.
"Amazing in America. Always a new taste."
For the next 80 minutes, stopping only occasionally to pick at fruit salad and pasta primavera at the small, elegant Mark Hotel, her home when she is in Manhattan, she hurls out words and thoughts and exclamations so intensely that she makes a frenetic New Yorker seem comatose by comparison.


Anti-Violence Plan for Daly
Golfer JOHN DALY, arrested last December after he allegedly threw his wife, BETTYE DALY, against a wall and pulled her hair, has been sentenced to complete a program on domestic violence as a part of a plea bargain in the case.
Daly appeared in Douglas County (Colo.) Court Tuesday.


Woman, Stalked for Year, Is Slain by Ex-Companion, Who Also Kills Himself
Stanley King had been stalking Patricia Thomas Clay for more than a year, following her to work, calling her on the job and once, appearing at the door of her Far Rockaway apartment pointing a gun.
"I'll kill you," he shouted, before Ms.
Clay's family slammed the door on him and called the police.
Today Mr.
King appeared at the Woodmere Nursing Center, where Ms.
Clay worked, ignoring a court order of protection that relatives said Ms.
Clay had against Mr.
King, her former boyfriend.
But this time, after 15 minutes of heated discussion, Mr.
King shot the 26-year-old secretary and mother of two dead and then turned the gun on himself.


Old Tactics Shadow Ex-Florio Aide; Revolving-Door Politics Lead to Enrichment, and a Liability
Those who have followed the rise to power of Jim Florio and his longtime lieutenant, Joseph C. Salema Jr., say clues to their considerable success were evident in their Camden County origins.
There, they say, a pattern was established that the pair carried 35 miles up Interstate 295 to the capital in Trenton.
Mr.
Florio, as the governor of New Jersey, has continued to pursue the liberal agenda and calculating, tough-minded political style that served him well as the Congressman representing the Camden area.


Seagram Buys 5.7% Of Time
The Seagram Company said yesterday that it had acquired a 5.7 percent stake in Time Warner Inc. for $702 million.
Moreover, Seagram said in a filing with the Securities and Exchange Commission that it was seeking approval to buy up to a 15 percent stake in the world's largest media company.


Review/Theater; Old-Country Spirits Sowing Confusion
The title character of "Sharon," an elaborate musical melodrama set mostly in Ireland in the late 1920's, is a ghost who appears only briefly, wafting from a grave in which she has been buried for centuries to whisper advice in the ear of one of the show's more superstitious characters.
The question of whether such spirits exist runs to the heart of the musical, Geraldine Fitzgerald's adaptation of John B. Keane's play "Sharon's Grave," with music by Franklin Micare.
"Sharon," at Playhouse 91 through Sunday, enthusiastically endorses magic, mysticism and the notion that if you need one badly enough, a ghost will appear to add to your confusion.


3 Florio Foes Hold 2d G.O.P. Debate
In the last statewide forum before New Jersey's primary election in two weeks, the three major candidates for the Republican gubernatorial nomination met in a televised debate tonight, jousting over policy, campaign bickering and who is best qualified to defeat Gov.
Jim Florio in November.
The tone of the town-hall style debate -- members of the audience put questions to the candidates, Christine Todd Whitman, Cary Edwards and James L. Wallwork -- was a marked departure from the previous rancor-filled meetings involving the three Republicans.


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt  *
Barnett Banks Inc., Jacksonville, Fla., is offering $150 million of floating-rate notes due in 1996 through Goldman, Sachs &amp; Co.
The notes are priced to float quarterly at 23 basis points above the three-month London interbank offered rate.
Callable in one year, the notes are rated Baa-1 by Moody's; A- by S.&amp; P. and A by Duff &amp; Phelps.


Happy Ending for Actor
To the Home Section:
I am delighted to report that your recent article recounting the search for accommodation in New York by my wife, Pat, and myself has had a most positive outcome  [ "Apartment-Hunting in New York With Michael and Pat York," April 15 ] .
It also revealed to us some salient qualities that the citizens of this wonderful town seem to share in abundance.
Not only do large numbers read your newspaper but also, despite what others may think, New Yorkers are a caring and generous people.
Everyone, it seemed, had just the place for us, or knew of someone who did.


CHRONICLE
The New York Philharmonic was more than a minute into Charles Ives's short work "The Unanswered Question" on Tuesday evening when KURT MASUR, the conductor, suddenly signaled it to stop playing.
He turned to the astonished audience of more than 2,700 people in Avery Fisher Hall and offered some friendly but decidedly firm advice about coughing during concerts.
The advice: stop.


HOME IMPROVEMENT
OUTDOOR furniture often needs sprucing up before summer, especially if it wasn't stored carefully in the fall.
Simple cleaning is sometimes enough, but a little easy maintenance can also add years of life.
Revive aluminum lawn furniture after storage by washing it with water and any non-gritty household detergent.
Give it a good brush scrubbing to remove dirt from crevices; then, rinse by spraying with a garden hose.
After the pieces dry, apply two or three drops of light household oil to the joints.


Defying the Justices
The Librarian of Congress strongly defended his actions in making public the papers of the late Justice Thurgood Marshall.
Page A24.


A Rally. A Victory. Really. Mets Soar on Four in a Wild 9th
The baseball was roped to the left-field corner, and suddenly there were Mets sprinting everywhere, racing from first, second and third, sprinting toward a triumph and away from a season of failure.
When the racing was done, when Charlie O'Brien's two-out, two-strike double in the top of the ninth had done its dramatic damage, the last-place Mets were 5-4 victors over the Phillies.
It was wild.
It was strange.
And, mercifully, it was different.
The Mets had won.


A Ratings Hit
Tuesday night's playoff game between the Knicks and the Bulls was TNT's highest-rated game since it began telecasting National Basketball Association games in 1990.


Giuliani's Man: On Winning Side in 5 Mayoral Elections
In the seven New York City mayoral elections since 1965, only one man has sat in the navigator's seat each time, and five times his candidates have won.
He is both credited and condemned as an auteur of that minor American art form: the modern political media campaign.
Now at the age of 63, David Garth -- whose canniness and commercials helped elect both John V. Lindsay and Edward I. Koch -- is waging another crusade for City Hall, this time in the service of Rudolph W. Giuliani, the almost-was whom he is busily retooling as a might-yet-be.
He remains a force to be reckoned with.


Onetime Wizard at Honda Re-emerges in Video Games
A man who had once been considered one of the brightest executives at the Honda Motor Company will take a high position at Sega Enterprises Ltd., the video-game maker, and try to help it in its quest to catch up with Nintendo, the world leader.
Shoichiro Irimajiri, 53, will join Sega as an executive vice president in charge of research, development and manufacturing, the company announced today.
The appointment is considered something of a coup for Sega, whose managers have been stretched thin by the explosive growth of the last few years.


The Russians Are Coming! The Russians Are Coming!


Corrections
A picture in some editions of Business Day yesterday with an article on page D3 about the appointment of a chief executive at the Riggs National Bank was published in error.
It showed Lawrence H. Summers, Under Secretary of the Treasury for International Affairs, not Paul M. Homan of Riggs.
Mr.
Summers figured in the article on page D16 about the currency markets.


Farm Bank Prices $2.22 Billion Issue
The Federal Farm Credit Banks Funding Corporation yesterday priced $2.22 billion of consolidated systemwide tax-exempt bonds through various securities dealers.
The three-part financing includes $1.21 billion of three-month bonds maturing Sept. 1 with interest set at 3.19 percent; $545 million of six-month bonds maturing Dec. 1 with interest set at 3.31 percent, and $465 million of one-year bonds maturing June 1, 1994 with interest set at 3.56 percent.
Farm Credit said the spread over Treasury securities with comparable maturities was 5 basis points for the three-month bond, 1 basis point for the six-month and 2 basis points for the one-year.


Ethics Panel Examines Colon's Residency Issue
Rafael Castaneira Colon, the South Bronx legislator and the City Council's third-ranking member, stepped down as majority whip of the Council yesterday as the Council's Ethics Committee met to consider whether he had violated residency laws, said Peter F. Vallone, the Council speaker.
Mr.
Vallone said the Bronx District Attorney's office had begun an investigation to determine whether Mr.
Colon lied about his residency on his election forms.
Mr.
Vallone added that Mr.
Colon, who is also a member of the budget negotiating team and steering group, had decided to leave his post while the charges against him were pending.


Ill Wind Doesn't Worry Mansell
Nigel Mansell was remembering the pitch a good friend, golfer Greg Norman, made to him about living in Florida: the convenience built into American life and, of course, the great weather.
"And since we've come to Florida," Mansell said the other day, "we've had three hurricanes."


Fiber and textile makers try to shape an image in campaigns that emphasize fashion over function.
TELEVISION commercials featuring models in tight, bright clothing frolicking across white sand beaches to the beat of exotic music are typically pitches for lipstick or beer.
But these days, spots featuring such sinewy beauties promote Lycra, Du Pont's elastic fiber.


Clinton's Best Friends Find It a Tough Role
Harry Thomason says he and his wife are "fighting for the right to live in this country."
Linda Bloodworth-Thomason says she now empathizes with Bebe Rebozo, Bert Lance, Alfred Bloomingdale and others who have had bad experiences "being the President's best friend."


No Headline
"Given our salaries, setting our sights on the White House travel office would be the financial equivalent of us taking over someone's lemonade stand. It's ludicrous." -- LINDA BLOODWORTH-THOMASON.  [ A22:5. ]


Bulls Seem to Be Playing Without a Full Deck
Besides their being down to the Knicks, 2-0, in games, it has reached the point of asking: Just where are the Chicago Bulls?
As they left New York following Tuesday night's 96-91 Game 2 defeat in the Eastern Conference finals, the place they did not appear to be was on the same page.
Coach Phil Jackson seemed more distracted than ever by the way the games were officiated.
Scottie Pippen was frustrated by the physical Knicks to the point of being ejected in the fourth quarter.
Horace Grant's bad ankle and the inspired play of the Knicks' beefy front court had rendered Grant invisible.
Michael Jordan was left to fly solo against an inspired Knick defense and wound up missing 20 of his 32 shots on his way to a 36-point night.


Market Place; In the rush to REIT's, a case for investor caution.
A RISING tide lifts all boats, according to the common wisdom.
But just as wise are those who suggest that some boats should be left in dry dock.
The tide, in this case, is the sweep of interest in real estate investment trusts.
For the last six months or so, REIT's have been hugely popular, providing generally strong returns and drawing a powerful inflow of cash because of the widespread belief that the real estate market might be turning around after the overbuilding of the 1980's and a subsequent crash.


Arms Cuts Worry NATO
Citing a wide range of new military challenges now confronting the Western alliance, NATO defense ministers called today for a halt in the cuts in military spending that have followed the end of the cold war.
A statement issued after a two-day meeting here said, "A stabilization of defense expenditures, as well as a more effective use of our national and collective resources, are necessary to enable the alliance to respond in a timely and effective way to the challenges of the future."


Fiddlesticks Won't Play
To The Home Section:
Discussing the problem of preschoolers' use of foul language  [ "Foul Language Can Mean, 'Pay More Attention to Me!' Parent &amp; Child, May 20 ] , Lawrence Kutner suggests encouraging them to use an expression like "fiddlesticks!" instead. Heavens to Betsy, does Mr. Kutner seriously believe that an old Victorian standby like "fiddlesticks!" can be revived in this day and age? My stars and garters, where has he been? LOUIS JAY HERMAN New York City


Children's Hospital That's Almost Fun
HEATHER SIEBLER says that the Disney-like yet homey feel of the new Patient Care Pavilion at Children's Hospital and Health Center in San Diego makes it easier to handle her chemotherapy treatments for leukemia.
The color scheme recalls sugar cones with pistachio, banana or strawberry ice cream.
Children can spin the parts of interactive sculptures, laugh at their reflections in fun mirrors in the treatment rooms, change the art in their rooms or eat outside in courtyards.


4th-Grade Architects Try Building a City
THE Empire State Building now has a twin, thanks to 30 students at Public School 30 in the Bronx.
The fourth graders put an Empire Country Building into a papier-mache cityscape that includes office towers, apartment buildings, bridges, working street lights, a drive-through White Castle and a soup kitchen.
Below ground, milk-carton subways travel on tracks made of wire and ice-cream sticks.
Danielle Thompson, 9, who loves to make pizza and cookies, designed a tangerine-colored Danielle's School of Cooking.
The sculpture is part of an exhibition, "Painting the Town: Studio-in-a-School Young Artists Look at New York," which will run from June 3 to Aug. 13 at the Paine Webber Art Gallery in Manhattan.
The show will include other works by students taking classes sponsored by the Studio in a School Association, a nonprofit group that brings artists and supplies into schools.


Pakistan Chief's Dismissal Is Overturned
The Pakistan Supreme Court today overturned a presidential order of last month dismissing the Government of Prime Minister Nawaz Sharif and dissolving the National Assembly.
It marked the first time in the country's 46-year history that a civilian government had been ordered restored to power.
The court's unexpected decision was seen as representing a shift in the balance of power away from the office of the president, who is chosen by the national and provincial parliaments.
The current President, Ghulam Ishaq Khan, had been widely criticized for actions seen as an attempt to increase his own power at the expense of elected legislators.


The Deaf Learn English and Pursue Careers
To the Editor:
"Pride in a Soundless World: Deaf Oppose a Hearing Aid" (front page, May 16), on the controversy over cochlear implants, quotes an outrageously false statement that demeans the deaf child, and by implication the entire deaf community.
A professor at Gallaudet University (a school for deaf students) asserted to your reporter that "the typical deaf child can only acquire some English and that very late."
I have been profoundly deaf from birth, I am a Ph.D. research scientist at a pharmaceutical company, I have published 65 research papers and edited a book, and I don't consider myself to be exceptional.
Tens of thousands of "typical" deaf people, through appropriate training and educational approaches, have acquired spoken English skills that have allowed them to become physicians, dentists, lawyers, researchers, accountants, journalists, store clerks, office workers or otherwise productive members of society.
The majority of deaf children are able to learn English, often as well as their hearing peers, when placed in oral or oral-aural programs, which may include cued speech programs.


Sailor Gets Life for Killing Gay Shipmate
Airman Apprentice Terry M. Helvey, an American sailor who beat a gay shipmate to death in Japan last year, was sentenced today to life in prison.
A jury of eight Navy and Marine officers took three hours to arrive at its decision after three days of sometimes wrenching testimony that brushed only lightly on the issue that had given this case prominence: the homosexuality of the victim, Radioman Allen R. Schindler.


Topics of The Times; Long Island's Mighty Skaters
New York sports fans are currently transfixed by two teams of polar talents.
The Knicks -- aggressive, confident winners.
And the Mets -- passive, whiny losers.
A word, then, for the middling New York Islanders, before they fade from memory.
They were, by their own admission, a group of unexceptional hockey players who possessed enough old-fashioned virtues -- industry and unselfishness among them -- to rise further than anyone expected.
They not only reached the Stanley Cup playoffs but beat the seemingly invincible Pittsburgh Penguins, cup champions for the past two years.
Moreover, the Islanders frosted the Penguins without the services of their superstar, Pierre Turgeon, decommissioned late in the season by another of hockey's mindless acts of violence.


Deal to End Tandy's Role In Computer Manufacturing
The Tandy Corporation said today that it had scrapped plans announced in January to spin off its manufacturing subsidiary, TE Electronics Inc., and that AST Research Inc. had agreed to buy all its money-losing computer manufacturing plants.
The transaction, if completed, would end Tandy's longstanding role in the personal computer business, which is in the throes of an industry shake-out that gained force last summer with sharp price-cutting by the Compaq Computer Corporation.


Clinton to Go to Vietnam Memorial Despite Protest
The White House announced today that President Clinton would deliver remarks at the Vietnam Veterans Memorial on Monday, despite the risk that the visit could revive the debate over his draft record, which dogged his campaign.
Administration officials said the White House had received postcards from veterans as part of what the officials called an organized protest.
The veterans charged that Mr.
Clinton would "engage in hypocrisy" if he visited the memorial.


Walsh Apologizes to James
Stanford's football coach, BILL WALSH, said Tuesday he was "out of line" when he recently characterized Washington's football program as a rogue operation.
Walsh, saying he felt foolish and embarrassed, said he called Washington Coach DON JAMES and apologized during a five-minute conversation.
The Stanford coach said he also would call Washington Athletic Director BARBARA HEDGES "to restate my apology."


King Hussein of Jordan Breaks With Iraqis
King Hussein of Jordan, Iraq's closest Arab ally for more than a decade, has openly broken with Baghdad.
Charging the Iraqi Government with "practices" that had deeply harmed Jordanian interests, the King told senior editors of the Jordanian press that he now opposed the continued leadership of Iraq by President Saddam Hussein or his Baath party.


Home Video
Smaller Video Disk
In the early 1980's, the audio compact disk took hold gradually.
"When we started, no one knew what a five-inch disk was," said Emiel Petrone, who was then the chairman of the Compact Disk Group of America, a trade organization that promoted the new format.
Today the five-inch video disk, called CD-ROM, is getting ready to make strides on the television screen.
Several companies, among them 3DO of San Mateo, Calif., and Philips Consumer Electronics, part of the Dutch electronics giant, have announced that they will be selling disk machines that will play films and other programs at full motion, or at the same 30-frame-per-second rate as on a VHS tape or television broadcast.


PARENT &amp; CHILD
FROM an outsider's perspective, it would seem that the couple's children had done well.
Their 30-year-old son was a manager in a high-technology firm.
Their daughter, a 26-year-old lawyer who had recently become pregnant, had decided to take time away from practicing law until after her child was born.
Both young adults were well educated and financially successful.
But in their parents' eyes, the children were failures.
Their son had not married and was devoting his energies to his work.
Their daughter was a disappointment because she'd temporarily given up her law practice to share more time with her family.
Neither had followed the schedule or path their parents had envisioned for them.


2 Ships Glimpse Where the Sun's Realm Ends
Cruising far beyond the outermost planets, two American spacecraft have discovered the first strong physical evidence of the long-sought boundary marking the edge of the solar system, where the solar wind ebbs and the cold of interstellar space begins.
Voyager 1, now 4.9 billion miles out from Earth, began detecting intense low-frequency radio emissions last August.
Signals were received at the same time by Voyager 2, which is 3.7 billion miles away from Earth.


Entropy and the Mets: Awaiting a Big Bang
After only five games, Dallas Green had seen enough to know he had seen enough.
But something in the new Mets manager is keeping him out of character, refusing to let him charge into his team.
At times he has wanted to, like after a listless 4-2 loss to the Phillies Tuesday night.
But, said Green, the man most likely to generate the loudest sonic boom in baseball, "Being a new guy, if all I do is be a ranter and raver, a screamer and yeller, pretty soon they're going to tune me out just like they did the other guy who didn't. So there has to be a balance.


Relax! There's Still Time To Shop for a Summer Camp
EVELYN LEE, 38, a single working mother in Stamford, Conn., depends on summer camp to occupy her two children every year.
It wasn't until a few weeks ago, however, that she realized that "I had completely spaced out and forgotten to send in the camp applications."
Believing she had missed the deadline, she panicked.


Corrections
An article yesterday about budget negotiations between Congress and the White House misstated the recent history of Democratic control of the Presidency.
Bill Clinton is the party's first President in 12 years, not 16.


Women and St. Andrew's: Old Society's New Issue
For 237 years members of St.
Andrew's Society of New York contentedly nurtured their Scottish traditions, taking pride in their charitable work and enjoying each other's fellowship.
But now there are rumblings about what the society needs to continue to prosper -- specifically over the question of whether admitting women would destroy the society or insure the future of the group, which claims to be the oldest charity in New York State.


Economic Scene; An overdue change in the way living standards are compared.
IT'S official: the International Monetary Fund has decided to compare national incomes according to purchasing power rather than the exchange value of their currencies.
The resulting changes in the international pecking order -- notably the elevation of China from No. 10 to No. 2 in total output -- will not "put more food in the belly of a single hungry child," notes Robert Summers.
But the University of Pennsylvania economist who, along with his colleague, Alan Heston, pioneered national accounting based on purchasing power, thinks the decision was a long overdue victory for scholarship and common sense.
It may also spare noneconomists the puzzle of news reports that show Russians to be as poor as Haitians, or cast Japanese who live in rabbit hutches as the richest workers in the world.


Barkley Locates Knicks on Horizon
Charles Barkley can shave his head and talk at the same time.
"Go ahead and ask me questions," he said this morning, wearing knee-length orange shorts and studying his scalp in the locker room mirror.
"I can do both. I'm ambidextrous, or amphibious, or whatever."
Barkley laughed.
He was overly amenable because his team won the opener of the Western Conference finals handsomely and he is quite positive his Phoenix Suns will be taking on the Knicks for the National Basketball Association title in about 10 days.
He would rather battle the Chicago Bulls, but he had lounged in his Mediterranean-style home Tuesday night, had watched John Starks's dunk spark the Knicks to victory and today conceded the series to New York.


Hill, Holliday Post
Hill, Holliday, Connors, Cosmopulos Inc. of Boston said yesterday that Fred Bertino, its executive vice president and chief creative officer, had been named to the additional position of president, effective immediatly.
Mr.
Bertino, 35, succeeds Jack Connors, 50, who will continue as the agency's chief executive.


Tornado Veterans Wait for Next One
The tornado that people in Union City talk about the most twisted in from the northwest 20 years ago this week, killing two people and demolishing half the downtown buildings.
It blew the cross atop St.
Joseph's Roman Catholic Church into a field six miles away.
Another tornado destroyed the same church in 1896, and another flattened 15 farmhouses in 1927.
Yet another reduced two barns on the edge of Union City to kindling and seemed hell-bent on roaring toward town until it hit the South Canadian River nearby, spun away to the east and died out.


Critic's Notebook; On Waffling at Cannes And Its Aftereffects
The woman with the most familiar face in France, possibly in Europe, walked onto the stage of the Festival Palace here on Monday night, assuming her duties as host of the awards ceremonies at this year's Cannes International Film Festival.
She stood at the podium, unsmiling but modest: "Je m'appelle Jeanne Moreau. Je suis une comedienne." ("My name is Jeanne Moreau. I am an actress.")
You don't learn how to make entrances as grand, self-assured and funny as that overnight.
It takes time, brains and wit, all of which Madame Moreau has, and all of which she needed to give shape to the curious evening that ended the curious festival.


Mussina Outpitches Unlucky Perez
The story line is getting tired and annoying to innocent bystanders.
Just imagine how frustrating it feels for Melido Perez.
It usually proceeds like this: See Perez pitch commendably.
See the Yankees score a run or maybe two.
Complete nine innings and see them both lose.
There were some new twists added to the unpleasant script last night because shoddy defense by a replacement right fielder, Jim Leyritz, helped solidify the verdict and because Mike Mussina outpitched Perez, anyway.
But there was no disguising or disputing how pivotal Leyritz's misplay of Cal Ripken's fly ball in the eighth inning was in helping the Orioles snap a 1-1 tie and cruise to a 6-2 victory at Yankee Stadium.


2 More Aggie Players Ineligible
R.
C.
SLOCUM, Texas A&amp;M's football coach, said yesterday that two more of his players, linebacker JESSE COX and wide receiver BRIAN MITCHELL, have been declared ineligible for accepting improper payments from a prominent Dallas booster.
Slocum said the two players worked summer jobs at a Dallas company owned by WARREN GILBERT and were paid salaries of $200 a week.
An investigation by the university and the National Collegiate Athletics Association showed they were paid for some hours they did not work, Slocum said.


U.S. Blacks and Africans Seek Stronger Ties
"Africa is open for business," Mohammed Fall Ainina, the Mauritanian Ambassador to the United States, told a group of black Americans meeting here this week, "and the first people we're going to seek business from are you."
Mr.
Ainina's remarks summed up an important goal of the second African/ African-American Summit: to encourage business between blacks on both continents.
And increasingly, sponsors of the conference say, black Americans are beginning to compete with businesses from the former colonial powers of Europe.


Send a Telegram Next Time
Cincinnati Reds General Manager JIM BOWDEN said yesterday he made the right decision when he fired Manager TONY PEREZ, but regrets he did it by telephone rather than in person.
"I feel I made the right decision on the timing," Bowden said.
Bowden, 32 years old, said he saw firings handled by telephone while he worked for the Pittsburgh Pirates from 1984 to 1988.
He said he was later fired by telephone from the New York Yankees' front office, when the owner GEORGE STEINBRENNER, called the office and told General Manager BOB QUINN to tell Bowden he was fired.


From Gates, a Cheer for I.B.M.
Good news for I.B.M. shareholders, and it comes from an unlikely source -- Big Blue's sometimes nemesis William H. Gates.
"With all I.B.M.'s technical assets, which are considerable, the company should be worth twice as much as it is today," said Mr.
Gates, the chairman of the Microsoft Corporation.


American Business Needs More Foresight; Yes, He's Kidding
To the Editor:
I was one among a good number of friends of Milt Moskowitz who called because they did not understand "Spare the Knife, Spoil the Company" (Op-Ed, May 14).
I was relieved to learn that it was intended to be satire.
Perhaps it was not recognized because it dealt with a subject not often treated by satirists.


OUSTED CHAIRMAN RETURNS TO LEHMAN BROTHERS
Howard L. Clark Jr. is returning to Lehman Brothers, the firm he headed as chairman from 1990 to 1993 before being deposed earlier this year, people within the company said yesterday.
Mr.
Clark, who is 49, returns as vice chairman and an assignment to develop client relationships worldwide.
An announcement is expected today.


Dow, Up 23.53 Points, Sets Another Record
A dip in interest rates helped the stock market surge yesterday, establishing a record high for the Dow Jones industrial average in heavy trading.
Analysts said stocks became a more attractive investment as prices for long-term Treasury bonds rose and their yields fell below 7 percent.


Joseph Pulitzer Jr. Is Dead at 80; Publisher Was Avid Art Collector
Joseph Pulitzer Jr., chairman of the Pulitzer Publishing Company and owner of one of the world's finest collections of modern art, died yesterday at his home in the Central West End of St.
Louis.
He was 80.
Mr. Pulitzer died of colon cancer, the publishing company said in a news release.


A Jaguar? Now You're Talking
Top British track stars do not seem impressed by the prospect of winning a Mercedes instead of cash at this year's world championships.
Olympic 100-meter champion LINFORD CHRISTIE, hurdler COLIN JACKSON, and 400-meter runners JOHN REGIS and DEREK REDMOND say they each have one.


Guatemalans Protest the President's Power Grab
President Jorge Serrano Elias's seizure of authoritarian powers came under widening attack today by opposition politicians and former military leaders and was declared null by the country's Constitutional Court.
Little of the outcry was heard in Guatemala.
Early this morning, the police surrounded the offices of leading newspapers and told their editors that any material critical of the Government would be censored.
None of the papers circulated, and television news broadcasts were prohibited.
Radio stations, taken over by the Government, played mostly marimba music.


The Deaf Learn English and Pursue Careers; Deep-Rooted Distrust
To the Editor:
To understand the deaf community's anguish over the cochlear implant (front page, May 16), it is crucial to understand the history of repression of deaf culture.
Otherwise, the opposition of many deaf people to an operation that can sometimes restore hearing seems, at best, odd or idiosyncratic.
At worst, especially in the case of denying the operation to a child, it seems cruel.
In my research for a book on the history of the disability rights movement, I found that fear of the cochlear implant comes out of the deaf community's well-founded sense of oppression.
It is a reaction to more than a century of belief that deafness is a sickness, to be pitied, cured and eradicated.
Americans born deaf have their own language, a sign language with its own grammar and sentence structure that is quite different from English.
Using it, they built a vibrant 19th-century culture.


Teledyne and Chilean Indicted in Iraq Bomb Sales
A Chilean arms dealer who says he supplied bombs to the Iraqi Air Force for more than eight years with the knowledge of the United States Government was indicted here today along with a California military contractor on charges that they violated American laws controlling the export of munitions.
In a 21-count criminal indictment approved today by a Federal grand jury, the United States Attorney's office here accuses Carlos Cardoen Cornejo, an owner of corporations in Miami and Chile, of illegally obtaining and exporting more than 100 tons of zirconium, a metallic chemical used to make weapons like cluster bombs, in connivance with Teledyne Inc. of Los Angeles.
Mr.
Cardoen, 55, was charged with manufacturing at least 24,000 of the bombs in Chile and selling them to Iraq.


Can the Democrats Govern?
A lot will be on the line when the House votes on President Clinton's budget, possibly as early as today.
The fight is nominally over such economic issues as deficit reduction, tax hikes, Medicare cuts, subsidies for low-paid workers and investment in a high-tech future.
But what's really at issue is the credibility of the Democrats as a governing party.
If, after regaining the White House from 12 years of Republican rule, the Democrats now split apart and let the new President's budget tumble, they will be portraying themselves as too disorganized to govern.
In 1992 voters delivered a verdict on divided government.
They put Democrats in charge of the White House and Congress to end gridlock and deliver action.


A Photo Center With a Huge Job Vacancy
Although not wholly unexpected, Cornell Capa's announcement last week that he intended to step down as the director of the International Center of Photography in June 1994 took many people by surprise.
The ebullient Mr.
Capa, who founded the center in 1974 and has been as closely identified with it as Joseph Papp was with the New York Shakespeare Festival, recently turned 75, and he remains a seemingly tireless advocate for photography.
In an interview shortly before his announcement, though, Mr.
Capa said he had grown weary of the administrative and fund-raising aspects of his job and was resigning to spend more time with his wife, Edie.


Sarajevo Sets Conditions on Latest Peace Proposal
President Alija Izetbegovic told a United Nations negotiator today that the Muslim-led Government would not accept an allied proposal for containing the war here unless the United Nations sets a deadline for Serbian nationalist forces to return Bosnian territory they have captured over the last 14 months.
The proposal, announced on Saturday in Washington after meetings between Secretary of State Warren Christopher and the Foreign Ministers of Russia, Britain, France and Spain, provides for deployment of international military forces to guard Muslims in six "safe havens" in Bosnia.
No Comment From Negotiator
President Izetbegovic also told the negotiator, Thorvald Stoltenberg, that the Government would reject the plan unless the United Nations clearly indicated that it would intervene militarily if the Serbs continued to attack and would guarantee that aids get to the besieged Muslim enclaves.


American Business Needs More Foresight
To the Editor:
At first, I thought Milton Moskowitz was kidding in "Spare the Knife, Spoil the Company" (Op-Ed, May 14).
After a second time through, however, I concluded he was serious.
He really believes that the solution to our corporate woes is firing people!
He deplores that "Our leading business schools are not supplying us with managers who can breathe vitality into corporations," and I agree.
But firing people is exactly the wrong way to do this.
Firing people as a group destroys, rather than builds vitality.
No one questions the need to fire individuals for poor performance; to do otherwise destroys corporate vitality by disheartening competent workers.
Even large Japanese companies, with their tradition of lifetime employment, fire incompetents.


NATO Talks Fail to Reach Accord on Bosnia Plan
Amid sharp differences over policy toward Bosnia, NATO defense ministers failed today to endorse a plan to create six safe enclaves for Bosnian Muslims that was announced by the United States, Russia, Britain, France and Spain last Saturday.
A statement issued after what participants described as a sometimes stormy two-day meeting said merely that the alliance had "discussed" the plan, which was intended to shore up rifts over Bosnia between the United States and Europe by shifting the focus of peace efforts from finding a lasting political solution to the more limited goal of containing the fighting.


Fiddlesticks Won't Play
To The Home Section:
Discussing the problem of preschoolers' use of foul language  [ "Foul Language Can Mean, 'Pay More Attention to Me!' Parent &amp; Child, May 20 ] , Lawrence Kutner suggests encouraging them to use an expression like "fiddlesticks!" instead. Heavens to Betsy, does Mr. Kutner seriously believe that an old Victorian standby like "fiddlesticks!" can be revived in this day and age? My stars and garters, where has he been? LOUIS JAY HERMAN New York City


Yanks Put Tartabull on Disabled List
Make room in the trainer's room for Danny Tartabull.
The Yankees declined to delay the inevitable yesterday and placed their cleanup hitter on the 15-day disabled list with a bruised right kidney.
Hensley Meulens was recalled from Class AAA Columbus to take Tartabull's roster spot.
In the moments after Tartabull collided with center fielder Gerald Williams while pursuing Brady Anderson's liner in Monday night's game with Baltimore, it was obvious the Yankee right fielder would probably have to go on the d.l.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-15  GERMANY ACTS ON ASYLUM LAW  The lower house of Germany's Parliament agreed to tighten the nation's asylum law, barring entry to thousands of foreigners who arrive each week to seek asylum.
Approval in the upper house of the Parliament is considered certain.
A1  U.S.
SEEKS TO ISOLATE IRAN  The Clinton Administration is seeking to weaken Iran by persuading reluctant allies to cut off loans, investment and arms sales to what American officials regard as a permanently hostile Government.
A1  King Hussein of Jordan has openly broken with Iraq.
A15


Sports of The Times; Jordan's Atlantic City Caper
MICHAEL JORDAN turned the Knicks' home-court advantage into the Knicks' home-casino advantage.
Monday evening and early Tuesday morning, in the hours when Jordan's time might have been better spent resting for the second game of the Eastern Conference final between the Bulls and the Knicks, he was sighted by hotel guests in the baccarat pit in Bally's Grand casino in Atlantic City.


Cuomo Calls for Early Vote On Constitutional Convention
Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo turned up the volume today in his call for a constitutional convention, saying it may be the only way to break legislative gridlock on issues like public campaign financing and the merit selection of judges.
But critics in both parties dismissed the Governor's increasing emphasis on a constitutional convention as the early politics of a 1994 re-election campaign.


Corrections
An article in Business Day on Tuesday about Monday's stock trading referred incorrectly to securities of the Andrea Electronics Corporation.
The only publicly traded Andrea securities are common shares and the shares that will be outstanding after the company completes a five-for-one stock split; there are no warrants.


Bridge
The tradition of the Eastern States Regional Championships stretches back to 1929, when the great Oswald Jacoby won the first Goldman Pairs.
The 65th tournament, organized by the Greater New York Bridge Association, begins tomorrow in a new location, the Sheraton New York Hotel at Seventh Avenue and 53d Street, with the following schedule:
Tomorrow, Flighted Pairs, Stratified Women's Pairs, and Green Point Pairs (cash prizes), 1:30 P.M. and 7:30 P.M.; Bracketed Knockout Teams, 7:30 P.M. and continues; Knockout Teams, midnight and continues.


CLINTON AND ALLIES TWIST ARMS IN BID FOR BUDGET VOTES
On the eve of the most crucial Congressional vote of his Presidency so far, President Clinton, members of his Cabinet and loyalists in Congress spent Wednesday twisting the arms of dozens of Democratic lawmakers who were still not committed to voting for his budget.
By nightfall, vote-counters said they still did not have enough pledges of support to forge a majority in the House of Representatives, but they expressed optimism that a majority would be in hand by the time the vote was taken on this afternoon.


Corrections
An article in Business Day yesterday about the proposed merger of Amax Inc. and the Cyprus Minerals Company misidentified the chief executive of Cyprus.
He is Milton H. Ward.
The article also overstated the amount of debt that will stay with Alumax, the aluminum subsidiary that Amax is spinning off before merging with Cyprus.
As noted in the adjoining chart, Alumax will have about $750 million of debt after the spinoff, not $1.2 billion.


Tax-Exempt Yields Jump But Taxables Are Lower
Average yields on tax-exempt money market funds were substantially higher in the latest period after a jump in all short-term interest rates, while the yields on taxable funds were down, according to the latest survey by IBC's Money Fund Report.
Analysts at the Money Fund Report said investors probably believed that the Federal Reserve might be ready to raise short-term rates to stall inflation.
The concern was strong enough last week to lower prices and consequently raise interest rates on the short end.


Macy's Plan Would Cut Costs Deeply
R.
H.
Macy &amp; Company, the department store retailer operating under bankruptcy-law protection, began taking the wraps off its revised business plan yesterday, disclosing a slightly lowered outlook for profit margins that it expects to offset by dramatic cost and expense reductions.
The new plan, which was presented to analysts and industry consultants yesterday afternoon, indicates that Macy plans to step up several key initiatives to cut costs and capitalize on its most profitable businesses.


Dinkins Seeks Financial Help From Albany


Prisoner Dies in Custody
The Manhattan District Attorney's office is investigating the death of a man in custody early Tuesday morning at New York Downtown Hospital.
The prisoner, Johnnie Cromartie, 40, died two days after he was brought to the hospital with an epileptic seizure and an hour after struggling with officers while trying to escape, the police said.
Nancy Ryan, chief of the District Attorney's trial division, said that an autopsy report was awaited but that investigators planned to talk with a witness who said two officers had beaten Mr.
Cromartie after the escape attempt.
Mr.
Cromartie of 60 East 135th Street was arrested for possession of a revolver.


Guatemala's Do-It-Yourself Coup
It's the latest fashion in Latin American authoritarianism, and it seems to be catching.
Following the path marked out by President Alberto Fujimori of Peru 13 months ago, President Jorge Serrano of Guatemala enlisted the army Tuesday to help him abolish Congress, the courts and the Constitution.
His purpose was to stifle criticism of his economic austerity policies.
Unless the hemisphere's democratic governments respond more effectively this time than they have in the past, Latin America's recent political gains could begin slipping away.


Florio Replaces Aide Who Left Amid Inquiry
Gov.
Jim Florio appointed a new chief of staff who has both governmental and political credentials today to replace the longtime confidante who left the post in the midst of an investigation into possible improper steering of state bond business.
Richard L. Wright, an associate state treasurer, will preside over an administration buffeted by the resignation Tuesday of Joseph C. Salema, who has been subpoenaed in a multistate Federal investigation involving New Jersey Turnpike bonds.


Fiddlesticks Won't Play
To The Home Section:
Discussing the problem of preschoolers' use of foul language  [ "Foul Language Can Mean, 'Pay More Attention to Me!' Parent &amp; Child, May 20 ] , Lawrence Kutner suggests encouraging them to use an expression like "fiddlesticks!" instead. Heavens to Betsy, does Mr. Kutner seriously believe that an old Victorian standby like "fiddlesticks!" can be revived in this day and age? My stars and garters, where has he been? LOUIS JAY HERMAN New York City


Review/City Ballet; By Balanchine, Somber and Cheery
The New York City Ballet has created some enjoyably strange bedfellows in an attempt to present the oeuvre of George Balanchine chronologically in its "Balanchine Celebration." A case in point was Friday night's program at the New York State Theater, which paired the dark, sere 1959 "Episodes" with some of Balanchine's most lighthearted ballets, including his 1956 "Allegro Brillante."
"Allegro Brillante" rides exhilaratingly on the crest of the Tchaikovsky Piano Concerto to which it is danced.
Propulsive, melodic and romantic, this outpouring of music sweeps the dancers along with it in continuous releves and releases, soaring lifts and small spurting jumps made lyrical by their slight off-centeredness.
But that sweep demands an exactitude and sharpness of attack that was epitomized in the dancing of Kyra Nichols, with the understated partnering of Jock Soto providing the necessary grounding.


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY BRONX COUNCILMAN FACES INQUIRIES
The City Council's Ethics Committee has begun hearings on whether Rafael Castaneira Colon, the South Bronx legislator and the Council's third-ranking member, had violated residency laws.
The hearings come as prosecutors have also begun an investigation.
B3.
STEIN MAY QUIT MAYORAL RACE
Several political figures said Andrew J. Stein, the City Council President, will end his campaign to be mayor, but Mr.
Stein emphatically denied the reports.
B3.


Hiring a Home Contractor
YOU can't afford to buy a new home, so you decide to improve the house you live in with a new roof, an extra bedroom or a rebuilt kitchen.
You're not Tim Allen of "Home Improvement" or Bob Vila, leaving you with the difficult task of finding a reputable home contractor.
Reputation is the key word, for the number of consumer complaints about home contractors are among the highest of all businesses.
These grievances include the exceeding of estimates, performing substandard work, persuading people to commit to more improvements than they can afford and leaving jobs incomplete.
So do your homework before having someone work on your home.


Review/Television; World Money Lenders And the Third-World Poor
"The Money Lenders" is one of those documentaries in which pictures of establishment spokesmen are set against pictures of women and children whom the establishment is said to have consigned to hunger and sickness.
The organizations before the bar tonight are the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund, the West's major providers of investment money to developing countries.
Critics say they have consorted with corrupt dictators to carry out policies that enrich the few at the expense of the downbeaten many.
The 90-minute program draws attention to Bolivia, where mines have been closed; Ghana, where social services have been cut; Brazil, where industrial projects threaten the environment; Thailand, where the building of a dam has meant relocating thousands of peasants, and the Philippines, which is burdened by such a heavy debt to international lenders that the Government can no longer subsidize medical care for the needy.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Companies
Seagram acquired 5.7 percent of Time Warner for $702 million and will seek approval to buy up to 15 percent.
The giant Canadian liquor and wine company said it wanted a friendly investment in the world's largest media company.  [ Page D1. ]
Tandy scrapped plans to spin off TE Electronics and AST Research agreed to buy its money-losing computer manufacturing plants, ending Tandy's personal-computer business.  [ D1. ]


Essay; The Lemonade Stand
Here's the good news: they're learning.
George Stephanopoulos, 32 going on 50, is no longer cockily expressing amazement that anyone could be interested in a minor shakeup in the White House travel office.
On the contrary, he is admitting mistakes, showing contrition, learning.
What he needs most is a good synonym for "inappropriate."


Becker Continues His French Open Failures
Boris Becker's forehand was flimsy, his backhand oblique, and his serve failed to stun Rodolphe Gilbert, an emotive French sprite whose tenacious spirit superseded his No. 92 world ranking.
So what else could Becker do but attribute his second-round loss at the French Open today to the sorry fact that he does not, contrary to the demands of the slippery clay surface on which he was playing, have a mind like a steel trap.
Becker's mind, worn thin in his opinion by bad advice from the latest coach he has fired, and frayed by his fruitless attempts to make sense of clay, on which he has never won a tournament, shut down altogether on the stadium court today.
Child-Like Behavior
It was children's day at Roland Garros, and despite sharing Gilbert's national patrimony, many of the chatterers in the stands couldn't help but holler for "Boom Boom" as he lumbered around the court like a golden-haired fairy tale bear, all bluster and no bite.
Further humoring them, Becker sometimes behaved like a child himself, tossing his racquet into the hazy sky like a bouquet and denting the enemy clay by bouncing the racquet around like a basketball.


Durable-Goods Orders Were Flat Last Month
Too much inventory and too little enthusiasm for new investment spending seem to be taking some steam out of the nation's factories, a Government survey shows.
Orders for machinery, transportation equipment and other durable goods were flat in April, failing to recover from a sharp 3.7 percent drop in March, the Commerce Department reported yesterday.
And shipments of durable goods actually fell 1.9 percent last month, a big drop.


Colon Cancer Test
To the Editor:
Kudos for publicizing the most important study to support annual testing for occult fecal blood (front page, May 13).
However, vitamin C does not produce a false positive test result, but may cause a false negative one.
When taken in large quantities, as vitamin supplement or in citrus fruits and juices, it may mask a positive result.
JONATHAN DAVID, M.D.
LAWRENCE J. BRANDT, M.D.
Bronx, May 14, 1993


Choice for Top F.C.C. Job Withdraws
In another setback to the Clinton Administration's agenda for high technology, the White House's first choice to lead the Federal Communications Commission has withdrawn from consideration, Congressional officials said today.
The withdrawal of Antoinette D. Cook, who is currently senior counsel to the Senate Commerce Subcommittee on Communications, caught many in the Administration and in the telecommunications field by surprise because for months she had been considered certain to get the job.


INSIDE
Mandela Group Undeterred
The African National Congress said it would continue talks on ending white rule in South Africa, despite the arrest of 73 nationalists.
Page A11.
Pakistan Restores Premier
Pakistan's Supreme Court overturned a presidential order dismissing the Government, and restored Nawaz Sharif to power.
Page A3.
What Goes With the Flow
New York City is taking on a new environmental challenge: "manure management" on farms within the city reservoirs' watersheds.
Page B1.
Inquiry Into Business Empire
A powerful business empire that has close links to the Clinton White House is under investigation by the Federal Reserve.
Page D1.
Life Term for Sailor
A jury of Navy and Marine officers sentenced a sailor to the maximum term of life in prison for killing a gay shipmate in Japan.
Page A16.


An Upbeat Young Gets Out of Montana's Shadow
Steve Young, 49ers quarterback, was in a most agreeable mood today at the Cadillac-National Football League Golf Classic at the Upper Monclair Country Club.
How about signing a few hundred autographs?
Sure, no big deal.
And how about wearing these funny looking white knickers and gold and maroon socks?
No problem.


Fiat Seeks Financing to Pay Idled Workers
One day after Italy's corruption scandal gnawed deeper into the top management of Fiat S.p.A., the company acknowledged further troubles today, saying it had applied to the Government for special financing to pay for layoffs in its big auto subsidiary.
The chairman of Fiat, Gianni Agnelli, said earlier this month that the group -- Italy's biggest private company -- expected to report sharply lower profits of about $340 million for 1992 when annual results are announced next week.
Profits in 1991 were 1.114 trillion lira, or about $750 million at current exchange rates.


Justices Guard Mystique; Anger in High Court Over Marshall Papers Is Fueled by More Than Pomp and Privacy
Of course judges are human.
Of course they change their minds, say things they later regret, enter into tactical alliances, make timely compromises.
What is notable about Justice Thurgood Marshall's papers, released by the Library of Congress and spread before the public in newspaper accounts this week, is not that his Supreme Court files reveal all this, as other Justices' papers have documented before.
The most striking and, at least on the surface, puzzling aspect of the affair is the evident anger and anguish of the Court itself over the disclosures.
Obsessed With Secrecy
The material that has come to light -- the Justices' memorandums and working papers, drafts of opinions, even churlish passages that were edited out of final versions -- includes little if anything to embarrass the Court.
To the contrary, what comes through most clearly is the collective seriousness of purpose the Justices bring to their work, in addition to an almost ritual politeness, a solicitude for one another's feelings extending even to whether anyone would object to the gift shop stocking copies of the Chief Justice's book about the Court.


Charles Harrison; Advertising Executive, 76
Charles Harrison, a retired Manhattan advertising executive, died yesterday at the Southwest Florida Hospice in Sarasota.
He was 76 and lived in Sarasota.
He died of lung cancer, said Paul V. Higgins, his business partner.


Treasury Issues Rally on Note Sale
Prices of Treasury bonds and notes shot higher yesterday afternoon after a surprisingly strong auction of five-year notes.
Traders said the rally, which sent the price of the 30-year bond up a point, was prompted by the strong demand for the 5-year note in the auction and in the trading that followed the announcement of the auction results around 2 P.M.


Fernandez Severance Pay to Total $475,000
As a result of lucrative benefits offered to Joseph A. Fernandez in 1989 when New York City was seeking his services as Schools Chancellor, the central Board of Education will pay Mr.
Fernandez a severance package totaling about $475,000 when his contract expires June 30, the spokesman for the Chancellor said.
The severance payments are in addition to the $195,000 annual salary that Mr.
Fernandez has been paid during the three and a half years he has been Chancellor.
And while Chancellor, he has lived in a town house the board bought for his use for $1 million plus $250,000 in renovations.


Librarian Vows to Continue Public Access to Marshall's Papers
The Librarian of Congress today strongly defended his actions in opening to the public the private papers of the late Justice Thurgood Marshall, saying that he had acted on the explicit instructions of Justice Marshall and that the papers would continue to be available.
"We remain confident that we are carrying out his exact intentions in opening access to his papers after his death on Jan. 24," the Librarian, James H. Billington, said in a statement.


Old Labor Foes Dog Lorenzo's Return to the Skies
When Frank A. Lorenzo, the former chief of Eastern and Continental airlines got the itch several months ago to start a small airline, he thought it would be a cinch to get clearance from Washington.
After all, Washington is in a mood to foster entrepreneurship, and all the signs in the beleaguered airline industry have not looked this inviting in years.
So without lawyer, lobbyist or public relations help -- the standard battle group for doing just about anything in Washington these days -- Mr.
Lorenzo made his move and sat back to await takeoff.


Apple Aims for Ex-Soviet States
Apple Computer Inc. said today that it would begin a new effort to compete head-on with the International Business Machines Corporation in Russia and the other former Soviet republics.
The lifting of cold war restrictions on exports of technology to the former Soviet Union has provided Apple and other personal computer companies with a potentially enormous market.


Perkins's Basket Sends The Sonics Home Even
The Seattle SuperSonics, who usually do not fare well on the road, are even with the Phoenix Suns.
Sam Perkins's brave 3-point shot with 9.8 seconds earned them a rare lead and left Charles Barkley stomping his size 18 sneakers.
The final score was 103-99, but the Suns had a chance to tie the game after Perkins's shot put Seattle ahead, 103-101.


Calendar: A Talk on Wildlife
Urban Sanctuary  Metropolitan Life Insurance Building, One Madison Avenue (23d Street); (212) 691-7483.
The New York City Audubon Society and the Trust for Public Land are sponsoring an illustrated talk about the Jamaica Bay Wildlife Refuge in Queens, tonight at 7.
No charge.
Architectural Competitions  Urban Center Galleries, 457 Madison Avenue (51st Street); (212) 753-1722.
Designs from a competition for the Police Training Facility to be built in the Bronx, on an eight-acre site at 153d Street off the Grand Concourse, will be on display through June 9.


Three-Game Ban for Johnson
Bill White, the National League president, announced today that Howard Johnson would be suspended for three games for his altercation with an umpire last Friday night at Shea Stadium.
Johnson appealed the suspension, and a hearing on the penalty will be heard in New York after the club returns next week from its road trip, which continues in Chicago and Houston.
By appealing, he remained eligible to play and was in his usual fifth spot in the batting order tonight against the Phillies.
He went 0 for 4, as he had the previous night when Manager Dallas Green blasted the heart of the Mets' batting order for not hitting.


Preakness Stars Sharp for Belmont
By the dawn's early light, the two top horses from the Preakness Stakes were sharing the main track at Belmont Park yesterday morning as they staged major workouts for their next confrontation: one week from Saturday in the $500,000 Belmont Stakes, the final race in the Triple Crown series.
Prairie Bayou, who ran second in the Kentucky Derby and two weeks later won the Preakness by half a length, went five furlongs in an easy 1:02 seconds with Mike Smith riding, just as he did two weeks ago at Pimlico.
The colt's trainer, Tom Bohannan, said they were right on target for the big reunion of the 3-year-old class.


Hats Off for a Mission Accomplished


BONN PARLIAMENT VOTES SHARP CURB ON ASYLUM SEEKERS
In a landmark vote held while 10,000 opponents demonstrated in the streets outside, the lower house of Germany's Parliament agreed today to tighten the nation's asylum law, barring entry to thousands of foreigners who arrive in Germany each week to seek asylum.
The new law, which was approved in the lower house by 521 votes to 132, will make it far more difficult for foreigners who say they suffer persecution in their home country to be admitted to Germany.
Germany now accepts more than twice as many foreigners seeking asylum as any other country in Western Europe, and rightists have used their presence to foment nationalistic feelings that have led to violence.


Review/Ballet; The Debut of a Swan Queen
As American Ballet Theater's newest swan queen, 23-year-old Julie Kent is definitely a young woman most likely to succeed.
Her debut as Odette-Odile in "Swan Lake" on Monday night at the Metropolitan Opera House was, despite some weak spots, hardly that of a novice in the role.
She will perform again with Guillaume Graffin's Prince Siegfried tonight.
At this point, her Odette has a spectacular originality, less concerned with flow than with clarity of attack, making for a silvery luminosity that stems from beauty of shape and silhouette.
She might tone down her galloping entrance in Act II, but even this startling image instantly defines her agitated swan queen.
Metaphors of flight emanate from her strongly held arabesques, every one of which is poised on the point of a foot that has rolled up especially smoothly on toe.


France Is Selling 21 Big Companies
Making good on a campaign pledge, France's new conservative Government today announced a sweeping privatization program involving 21 big state-controlled companies, including Air France, Renault and the Elf Aquitaine oil giant.
The selloff is to begin on a company-by-company basis this fall, with the Government hoping to raise about $7.25 billion this year alone.
In contrast to a similar program carried out between 1986 and 1988, no limit will be placed on the acquisition of shares by foreigners.


U.S. Grants Permit for Dredging of Newark Bay Berths
The three-year-old request by port officials to dredge shipping berths in Newark Bay, a vital New York harbor project that became mired in debate over environmental concerns, was approved today by the Army Corps of Engineers.
For the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey, it resolves a major concern: maintaining waterfront commerce worth $20 billion a year and saving 180,000 jobs endangered by the potential loss of shipping business.
For environmentalists, it means continued frustration over disposal of dioxin, a potent industrial poison in the sediment.
The material will be dumped six miles off the New Jersey coast amid some of the area's richest fishing grounds.


Shrubs to Show Off in the Summer Doldrums
THE giddy hues that dazzle a gardener's spring are now mostly a memory.
So where are the blossoms when the mercury hits 90 degrees?
Those in the know make sure they have at least one summer flowering shrub.
The pros call them "garden bones" or "living furniture." Whatever the label, these shrubs add structure and textured accents to the garden's year-round design, as the country's experts know.
And these are the late bloomers that they use to brighten their own summer space.


CHRONICLE
JEFF RICHARDSON, 42, secretary of the Indiana State Family and Social Services Administration, has been named executive director and chief executive officer of the Gay Men's Health Crisis, the organization announced yesterday.
He was selected by a unanimous vote of the G.M.H.C. board on Monday to succeed Timothy J. Sweeney, who will step down in July.
Mr.
Richardson, whose activist roots go back to the antiwar protests of the 1960's, is no newcomer either to social problems or to issues related to AIDS.
In his present position, he oversees a $4 billion agency with responsibility for Medicaid, food stamps, mental health and developmental disability programs, in-home health care and community services.
Before taking over in 1992, he was commissioner of a predecessor agency, the Indiana Department of Human Services, where he led efforts to establish state-funded AIDS-service programs.


Ruling Seen To Weaken Layoff Law
A Federal judge has ruled that the General Dynamics Corporation did not violate a Federal law requiring most employers to notify workers in advance of a mass layoff when it furloughed 3,000 workers in 1991 after the Navy canceled the $57 billion A-12 Avenger warplane program.
The ruling appears to reduce the protection for workers and widen a legal loophole that employers, particularly military contractors, may use to avoid issuing warning notices, legal and industry experts said yesterday.


Reviews/Television; A Querulous Barrister Comes Back to the Bar
John Mortimer's "Rumpole of the Bailey," currently in its sixth season on "Mystery" (Channel 13, Thursdays at 9 P.M.), has reached that stage in television programming where a diverting trifle becomes a familiar piffle.
Mr.
Mortimer and Leo McKern, the 72-year-old actor embodying Horace Rumpole, are now on automatic pilot with perfunctory plots and set-in-concrete character shticks. (Retirement annuities seem to be irresistible.) Still, the old war horse has its endearing moments.
Last week's installment, the first of six this time around, was little more than a Rumpole sketch, as the barrister went, much against his better judgment, on a sea cruise as a sort of second honeymoon with his wife, Hilda (Marion Mathie).
Hilda: "We need to look at ourselves." Rumpole: "Do you think that's altogether wise?"


Agency Withdraws From Audi Review
Just days after Audi of America Inc. announced that it had narrowed the review on its $23 million to $28 million account to three finalists, one agency withdrew and was replaced by an agency that was initially passed over.
Ammirati &amp; Puris of New York said yesterday that it had decided to withdraw from the auto maker's review because of a need to focus on clients like Mastercard and Compaq.


U.S. Widens Charges in Trade Center Bombing
Ramsey Ahmed Yousef, a fugitive sought in the World Trade Center bombing, was named yesterday in a broadened Federal indictment as the man who ordered chemicals to be delivered to a New Jersey storage locker where prosecutors say the bomb-making materials were stored.
Mr.
Yousef placed the order on Nov. 30, 1992, the same day that his roommate, Mohammed A. Salameh, rented the locker, according to the indictment.
He used the name Kamal Ibraham to place the order, the same alias that Mr.
Salameh used in renting the locker, the indictment said.


Overstepped Bounds: An Empire Under Scrutiny -- A special report; Fed Inquiry: An Arkansas Family
A powerful business empire with close links to the Clinton White House is under investigation by the Federal Reserve, an inquiry that has opened the fiercely private business group to unusual scrutiny.
The civil inquiry into holdings of the Stephens family of Arkansas has already uncovered information that could prove embarrassing to the family's companies, a White House lawyer and government regulators.


2 New England Appellate Judges Are Finalists for High Court Spot
White House aides have narrowed their search for a new Supreme Court Justice to two Federal appellate judges from New England, Administration officials said today.
The two are Judge Stephen G. Breyer of Boston, who sits on the United States Court of Appeals for the First Circuit, and Judge Jon O. Newman of Hartford, of the Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit.


Spectradyne and E.D.S. Join In Video Network for Hotels
Spectradyne Inc., a leading provider of pay television programming to the lodging industry, said today that it and the Electronic Data Systems Corporation would develop a digital video network offering hotels greater flexibility in changing movies and a wider selection of video entertainment and information programs.
The new system would provide access to hundreds of entertainment selections at any time and vastly improve picture quality, the companies said.
Eventually they expect to market the system to other customers as well, including hospitals, large apartment complexes, military bases and schools.


First Lady Sets Aggressive Tone For Debate on Health-Care Plan
Hillary Rodham Clinton gave a preview today of the bare-knuckles political strategy she will use in seeking a revolution in American health care, as she attacked "price gouging, cost shifting and unconscionable profiteering" in the industry.
In a campaign-style speech to members of the Service Employees International Union, which represents 400,000 hospital and nursing-home workers, she declared that "too many people have made too much money" providing health care and health insurance.


Transactions
Baseball  American League
NEW YORK YANKEES -- Placed Danny Tartabull, outfielder, on the 15-day disabled list.
Recalled Hensley Meulens, outfielder, from Columbus of the International League.
National League
NL -- Suspended Howard Johnson, New York Mets third baseman, for three games and fined him an undisclosed amount for bumping umpire Jerry Lane and grabbing his arm in an argument during a game on May 21.


Paul S. Roller, 91, Chemist and Expert In Purifying Water
Dr.
Paul S. Roller, an inventor and research chemist in the fields of water purification, waste-water treatment and particle-size analysis, died on Friday at a nursing home in Huntington, L.I.
A resident of Manhattan, he was 91.
He had a brief illness, his family said.


Knicks Build Wall Around Basket
Thus far in the Eastern Conference championship series, the Knicks have simply been the better team.
And the Chicago Bulls must be wondering if they can change that.
The Knicks have shown superior depth, better offensive balance and more muscle in building a 2-0 lead in the four-of-seven-game series.
It is too early to write off Chicago, a proud championship team that has Michael Jordan, the game's premier player.
But as the Knicks and Bulls regroup for Game 3 on Saturday afternoon at Chicago Stadium, the Knicks' confidence is bolstered by these facts:


Louis A. Grant, 52, AIDS Relief Leader And a Former Dean
Louis A. Grant, vice president of the board of Gay Men's Health Crisis and a former assistant dean at Columbia College, died on Saturday at his home in Hillburn, N.Y.
He was 52.
He died of AIDS-related complications, said Jeff Soref, board president of the AIDS service organization.
Mr.
Soref said Mr.
Grant had lived for more than 11 years after developing AIDS symptoms.


The Deaf Learn English and Pursue Careers; A Matter of Choice
To the Editor:
Your May 16 front-page article addresses many important issues in deaf education, principally the use of cochlear implants.
Our results at St.
Joseph, the school with the greatest wealth of experience in educating implanted students, defy the position of immutable opposition to this learning tool.
More important, we believe there should be no immutable position on the issue at all.
It is a matter of choice.


Chief Judge Names Administrator for Courts
Chief Judge Judith S. Kaye yesterday named E. Leo Milonas, a veteran appellate justice in Manhattan, to be the Chief Administrator of New York State's sprawling court system.
Justice Milonas, 56, said he would like to modernize and streamline a court system frequently derided as antiquated, overburdened and physically decrepit.
He also proposed that the election of judges be eliminated.


The Romance of the Most American of Structures
GRAIN elevators are the architectural equivalents of apple pie or baseball as symbols of America, and their purity and simplicity have long captured the imaginations of architects and photographers.
In much of the country, silos dot the landscape, towering over small towns and dominating ports and rail sites in urban areas.
While many have been abandoned, some are still functioning, perhaps with modifications.
A few have been converted into apartment buildings, restaurants and hotels, like the Akron (Ohio) Hilton Inn at Quaker Square (at right).


Revisions Urged for Judges
Saying that New York State's system of electing judges shuts out women and members of minority groups, the New York State Bar Association today proposed a new system in which judges would be nominated by screening committees around the state and then appointed by the Governor or local elected leaders.
But the proposal was met with little enthusiasm in the Republican-controlled State Senate, which has long favored the current system, in which judges who have been endorsed by political parties run for election.


What Israel Can Realistically Expect in Peace Talks With Arabs
To the Editor:
A.
M.
Rosenthal, in his interpretation of "A Place Among Nations," Binyamin Netanyahu's book (column, May 11), states, "journalism and diplomacy seem unable to consider the arguments of the present opposition that exchanges of land for promises of Arab good conduct is neither to the interests of peace nor Israel nor the West." "And," he concludes, presumably on Mr.
Netanyahu's say-so, "no gulf about the goal of Israel's destruction divides the P.L.O. and various fundamentalists -- mostly tactics. Should Israel be eliminated in one phase, or two?"
As a research psychologist at the Hebrew University of Jerusalem on leave in the United States, I am constantly struck by the consistency with which journalism sympathetic to Israel may also be incapable of understanding the peace process and the nature of the changes in Israeli and Palestinian thinking in recent years.
Israel is certainly not negotiating for "promises of Arab good conduct."


Mandela Group Says Arrests Won't Halt Talks
The African National Congress declared tonight that despite its outrage at the widespread arrests of black nationalists on Tuesday it would press ahead with negotiations aimed at ending white rule by early next year.
The decision by the congress's 26-member working committee seemed to assure that the surprise crackdown on the militants of the Pan Africanist Congress will not seriously slow the juggernaut of reform.


Review/Film: Children of Fate; The Tenacious Hold Of Grinding Poverty On an Italian Family
The documentary "Children of Fate" follows in the footsteps of "Cortile Cascino," which was made for NBC-TV in 1961 but never shown.
The earlier film, which has been incorporated into this new work, was co-directed by Robert M. Young and Michael Roemer, who assembled a vivid, devastatingly sad portrait of a Sicilian slum.
Now Mr.
Young's son, Andrew, and his wife, Susan Todd, have created a follow-up film by revisiting Angela, seen as a long-suffering young mother in the first film and now the grandmother of nine.
Thus the sad, unflinching "Children of Fate" can be seen as a family affair in every way.


Herbert B. Callen, 73, Theoretical Physicist
Dr.
Herbert B. Callen, a theoretical physicist who wrote a standard work on thermodynamics and taught at the University of Pennsylvania for more than three decades, died on Saturday in Merion, Pa.
He was 73 years old and lived in Sarasota, Fla., and Loveladies, N.J.
He died after an 11-year struggle with Alzheimer's disease, said his son, Jed Callen.


Topics of The Times; Mr. Kantor's Mystery Guests
Mickey Kantor, the United States Trade Representative, is a busy man.
He's in charge of the nation's effort to reduce foreign trade barriers and increase opportunities for American businesses to expand abroad.
He sees nothing wrong with helping the Democratic Party in his off hours to raise money by providing private briefings in his office for big-ticket contributors.
Gwen Ifill of The Times reports that last week Mr.
Kantor welcomed a dozen business leaders for a meeting on trade matters arranged especially for big donors by the Democratic National Committee.
Who was there?
That, alas, remains a mystery.
Mr.
Kantor and the D.N.C. refuse to say.
"No one asked him to do anything and he did not do anything," Mr.
Kantor's spokeswoman, Anne Lazzutto, explains.
But if nothing inappropriate happened, why the secrecy?
The public surely has an interest in knowing who's getting access.


London Symphony Changes
Michael Tilson Thomas has announced that he will step down as principal conductor of the London Symphony Orchestra in 1995 in order to devote more time to the New World Symphony, a training orchestra in Miami, and to composing and guest conducting.
Mr.
Thomas, who has held the post since 1988, is to be succeeded by Sir Colin Davis, who has had a close relationship with the orchestra since the mid-1960's.
Mr.
Thomas is to become the orchestra's principal guest conductor.


Man Rapes and Robs 2 Women in Chelsea
A man raped, sodomized, beat and robbed two women yesterday after following them into their apartment building in Chelsea in Manhattan, said Detective Joseph McConville, a spokesman for the Police Department.
The man approached the two women from behind as they entered the vestibule, put a knife to the throat of one woman and ordered them inside the building on West 16th Street between Fifth and Seventh Avenues, the detective said.
The two 25-year-old roommates, one a waitress and the other a student, were forced into an elevator and then into a stairwell of the 10th floor of the building.
He tied them up with their own clothes, gagged and attacked them for about two hours, said Lieut.
Ellen Hale.


Wheels and Deals in New Jersey
The resignation of Gov.
Jim Florio's chief of staff, Joseph Salema, won't dispel the odor rising from the markets for New Jersey bonds.
Federal investigators have not brought charges against Mr.
Salema or anyone else, but there are signs that cozy political contacts have played too big a role in the selection of underwriters for bonds issued by state agencies and local governments.
Mr.
Salema figures in this wheeling and dealing as half-owner of a small New Jersey investment firm, Armacon Securities Ltd., that handles a disproportionate share of public bond business in the state.
Merrill Lynch cast suspicion on little Armacon three weeks ago when it suspended three high-level executives, citing "apparent irregularities" in its relations with Armacon.


Fallon McElligott Takes Top Honors
For the second consecutive year, Fallon McElligott of Minneapolis took top honors at the One Show awards for creative excellence in advertising, presented by the One Club for Art and Copy.
At the organization's 17th annual presentation in New York last night, Fallon won 10 medals -- a gold, 4 silver, 5 bronze -- for its work on accounts like Jim Beam Brands, the Lee Company and Porsche Cars North America.


Queens Leader Says Stein Will End Mayoral Bid
The Queens County Democratic leader, who two weeks ago withdrew his support for Andrew J. Stein's candidacy for mayor, said last night that Mr.
Stein had told him that he would drop out of the race tomorrow.
But Mr.
Stein, the City Council President, emphatically denied that he was withdrawing his challenge to Mayor David N. Dinkins for the Democratic nomination.


COMPANY BRIEFS
BANC ONE CORP., Columbus, Ohio, said it had agreed to merge with Mid States Bancshares Inc., the holding company that operates the First National Bank of Moline, Ill., in a transaction valued at $32.5 million.
NETWORK SYSTEMS CORP., Minneapolis, has completed the acquisition of Bus-Tech Inc., a maker of interconnect controllers based in Burlington, Mass., in a deal valued at $24.5 million.


SIHANOUK OPPOSES KHMER ROUGE ROLE
Prince Norodom Sihanouk, Cambodia's head of state, announced today that he had abandoned plans to set up a coalition government that included the Khmer Rouge.
He said internationally supervised elections this week proved that the Maoist rebels had no place in Cambodia's future.
Only weeks after suggesting that the Khmer Rouge should be incorporated into a new postwar government, the Prince told a group of visiting European lawmakers that the vast and enthusiastic voter turnout amounted to a final public repudiation of the guerrilla group.
The Khmer Rouge boycotted the elections and had threatened to disrupt them with violence.


Furniture With Feel Of Summer
FOR some people, nothing can beat relaxing in a hammock on a summer day.
Pascal Mourgue has come up with a sleek alternative, a furniture line called Siesta.
His outdoor furniture includes an armchair, an ottoman and a chaise longue (right).
Curves make them look like unfurling magic carpets about to take flight.
The contours were meant to evoke peace, tranquillity and romance, said the French designer, who has turned his hand to everything from wine labels to yachts and whose work is in the permanent collections of the Louvre and the Cooper-Hewitt Museum.


3 Sailors Die as a Bus Plunges off a New Jersey Pier


Pop and Jazz in Review
Travis Shook  Blue Note
Though it's no fault of his own, the young pianist Travis Shook wasn't prepared for his first real show in New York City, on Monday night.
Mr.
Shook has recently signed with Columbia Records and released his first album, "Travis Shook." Very few 24-year-olds would have the fortitude to resist these temptations to overreach themselves.
Mr.
Shook, from Olympia, Wash., should have waited a few years because at this stage in his development he sounds like a decent enough student pianist.
He'd occasionally break up a line with a percussive chord or two, letting silence accentuate the improvisation.
But for the most part, his playing seemed flabby, his lines perilously close to falling apart, the improvisations unclear in their intent.
Mr.
Shook doesn't swing much, and his weakness for pastiche -- a bit of Erroll Garner, a bit of Oscar Peterson, a bit of Herbie Hancock tossed around -- advertised his unreadiness.


Review/Music; Bang on a Can Festival Seeks Political Relevance
As the seventh annual Bang on a Can Festival began at the Kitchen on Tuesday night, three figures were writhing and groaning onstage; like dangerous political prisoners, they were gagged, straitjacketed and bound with heavy rope.
One figure snaked its way to the front of the stage area and grunted a plea for help.
A member of the audience quickly got the idea and leaped up to untie the bodies.
The victims finally wriggled out of their constraints and took their places: they were the musicians for the evening's concert, the Bermuda Triangle.
They had just completed the first theater piece on the program, by Aaron Jay Kernis.
The prisoners, though, did not learn their lesson.
After liberation, they became even more political: the entire concert was titled "A Political Songbook" and was devoted to the premieres of two dozen songs and performance pieces on political subjects.


Clinton Budget Strains At House's Short Leash
Spring is here, the budget is on the House floor, and elected representatives are pontificating, cutting back-room deals, plying and being plied by lobbyists and angling for their hometowns.
Simply put, they are conducting the political equivalent of what any hog farmer would immediately identify as a good warm-weather roll in the slop.


Books of The Times; Handling the 'Sudden Silence' of Retirement
The First Year  A Retirement Journal  By John Mosedale  244 pages.
Crown Publishers. $22.
Late in "The First Year: A Retirement Journal," John Mosedale recalls a story that Harry Reasoner, his colleague at CBS News, once told him about a man who lived on an island in the South Pacific.
Mr.
Mosedale writes: "Life was effortless. Each day the sun rose in splendor. One morning the man emerged from his hut, looked at the rising sun and said, 'Another perfect goddamned day' and shot himself."


Toy Banks That Tell Stories of America
IN the 19th century, mechanical toy banks, like songs and political cartoons, were barometers of popular culture.
With their small, jerky movements and miniature people and animals, the banks told little stories about America's pastimes and foibles.
At "The Original Cash Machines: Mechanical Coin Banks From the Citibank Collection, 1865-1915," an exhibition of 98 banks at the South Street Seaport Museum in Manhattan, there are images of innocence (a girl jumping rope) and of evil (a politician stealing money).


Exemption for Colt Is Weighed As Weapons-Ban Vote Nears
The name Colt still carries weight in Connecticut: as a symbol of manufacturing prowess, and more recently as a maker of guns that sometimes turn up in the hands of drug dealers.
Both facts have come clanging together as the State Senate prepares to vote on a bill that would ban the sale of military-style rifles -- including the Colt Sporter semiautomatic .223-caliber rifle.
Supporters of the ban, scrambling to find the last one or two votes they need in the Senate before the measure comes up on Thursday, said today that they were weighing a proposal to exempt Hartford-based Colt's Manufacturing Company from the bill as perhaps the only hope of passage.
The issue, they say, is preserving jobs.


U.S. Seeks Ways to Isolate Iran; Describes Leaders as Dangerous
The Clinton Administration is preparing a broad new effort to weaken Iran by persuading reluctant allies to cut off loans, investment and arms sales to what American officials regard as a permanently hostile Government.
The plan, drafted as part of an intensive policy review, reflects a conclusion that Iran must be isolated if it is to be prevented from emerging as a substantial threat to Western interests.
Thus, the plan rejects Reagan and Bush Administration policies that offered to reward Teheran for good behavior.
Abandoning a Balance
Administration officials said the new approach aimed at denying Iran access to the money and weapons needed to complete a military resurgence.
They said it was based on a decision that the United States and its allies should now treat Iran as harshly as it treats Iraq.


Brazil Answers Inflation With Cabinet Shuffle
With Brazil's Army discreetly flexing its political muscles, President Itamar Franco is gambling on a Cabinet shuffle that one newsweekly here called "Itamar's last chance."
Unable to cut back inflation from its current level of 30 percent a month, Mr.
Franco has pinned his hopes on Fernando Henrique Cardoso, 61, a former Sao Paulo senator who enjoys wide respect, from company boardrooms here in Brazil's industrial heartland to the headquarters of multilateral banks in Washington.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
6.50
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
3.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.38
3.21
3.78
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.02
3.05
3.69
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.17
3.20
3.81
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
5.71
5.79
7.08
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
6.92
7.00
7.89
TELEPHONE BONDS
7.85
7.93
8.84
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
5.90
5.91
6.64
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Garden Q. &amp; A.
Gaps and Fillers
Q.
I have a stone path in my backyard and would like to fill the gaps and edges with plants.
What do you suggest for a partly sunny area? -- Barbara Eagleton, Fredericksburg, Va.
A.
Planting the gaps between stones is a practical way to expand your horticultural cache while softening your landscape.
If the path is a well-traveled route, the plants to use are those willing to take abuse and not sulk when their leaves are stepped on.


Armenia and Azerbaijan Agree on a Peace Plan
Armenia and Azerbaijan agreed today to a peace plan negotiated by the United States, Russia and Turkey that would end five years of fighting over Nagorno-Karabakh, an Armenian-populated enclave in Azerbaijan.
If it holds, the plan would end a war that has killed more than 3,000 and confounded negotiators for years.


Tokyo Journal; A Stickler for History, Even if It's Not Very Pretty
Saburo Ienaga is 80 now, frail and a bit unsteady as he moves around the narrow library of his house, but seemingly unfazed that the Japanese Government finally routed him in the lawsuit to which he devoted a third of his life.
Twenty-eight years ago, he first went to court to challenge the way the deeply conservative Education Ministry recounts wartime history.


Farms Asked To Safeguard City's Water
Trucks come daily to William J. Murphy's farm to take the milk from his cows to the markets of New York City.
From other dairy farms, the cows' manure takes the same trip, city officials say, but by a different route: the municipal water system.
So New York City, which has budgets that won't balance, subway trains that are stolen, traffic jams and crime, is about to take on a new challenge, what the Commissioner of Environmental Protection, Albert F. Appleton, calls "manure management."


At CUNY, Exiled Leader Calls For New Sanctions on Haiti
The Rev.
Jean-Bertrand Aristide, the exiled President of Haiti, spoke yesterday at the eighth commencement exercises of the City University School of Law at Queens College.
Father Aristide, who was deposed in a 1991 coup, told the graduates that the United States and the United Nations should impose new sanctions on Haiti.
He urged the United States to block ships from delivering fuel to Haiti.
"Then we will see the coup leaders and their allies finally realize that the sanctions are not a joke," he said.


On Stage, and Off
Shakespeare, Unfinished
Michael Langham, the English director who has served the National Actors Theater as artistic adviser for the past year, is to direct the company's first two Broadway productions of next season: they are a rarely produced Shakespeare, "Timon of Athens," and Gogol's "Government Inspector."
"I'm being given my head for the season coming up and hopefully will be able to show what I mean by advice," Mr.
Langham said from London.
He added that part of his agenda was to assist in finding a replacement for Tony Randall, the company's founder and artistic director.


South Africa Frees 43 Blacks Seized in Crackdown
The police today released 43 black militants arrested two days ago in a crackdown on the Pan Africanist Congress, conceding that they did not have evidence linking them to specific crimes.
Thirty-two other members of the black nationalist organization remained in custody, but although the police billed their sweep as an exhaustively researched campaign against murder and other terrorist acts, only four have been formally charged so far, all with possession of ammunition.


G.O.P. Rivals Fight on Debate's Morning-After
Turning from the forum of a spirited televised debate watched all over New Jersey, the three candidates for the Republican gubernatorial nomination continued their sparring today before a variety of other audiences.
Pushing issues raised Wednesday night during the last of the two debates televised statewide, Christine Todd Whitman pressed an attack against Cary Edwards, accusing him of sexist bias, while Mr.
Edwards continued to accuse Mrs.
Whitman of flip-flopping on issues.


Diner's Journal
Southern Italian in Queens
Fans of old-fashioned, sauce-slathered, eat-till-you-can't-stand-up southern Italian food may want to head for Corona, Queens, to pay homage to a remarkable institution called Park Side.
The difference between Park Side and so many other red-sauce Italian restaurants is that the kitchen pays attention to textures and flavors, not just volume.
Thirteen-year-old Park Side is owned by Richard DeAngelo, a young second-generation restaurateur.
The expansive, fern-festooned establishment has the familiar brick arches, smoky glass panels and photos of prominent Italians.


Art in Review
'James Brooks' 'The 1950's'
Joan T. Washburn  20 West 57th Street  Manhattan  Through June 18
James Brooks, who died last year at the age of 86, was a member of the first-generation New York School.
He came up through the W.P.A., was a friend of Jackson Pollock and Philip Guston, and participated in some key early group exhibitions.
Yet he is seldom included in the constellation of painters from the 1940's and 50's who made the history books.


Public Advocate Battle Is Thrown Into Turmoil
With his entry yesterday into the race for his current job, Andrew J. Stein has suddenly taken a crowded and complicated race to become New York City's public advocate and made it even more crowded and complicated.
Mr.
Stein's decision to try to extend his incumbency left the packed field of hopefuls wrestling with how to revise their strategies.
In the process of reducing the Democratic race for mayor to a contest between Mayor David N. Dinkins and Roy E. Innis, the chairman of the Congress of Racial Equality, the contest for public advocate -- the new name for Mr.
Stein's current job, City Council President -- has suddenly become the major heated political battle of the primary season, notwithstanding the race for city comptroller.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
6.50
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
3.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.13
3.26
3.87
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.04
3.02
3.66
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.21
3.17
3.82
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
5.74
5.71
6.99
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
6.92
6.92
7.85
TELEPHONE BONDS
7.85
7.85
8.80
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
5.89
5.90
6.64
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Review/Film; Turning a Gloomy World Into a Sunny One
In a heavy soaking rain, the camera inches along a dingy, soot-blackened stairwell in Liverpool, England.
As it creeps up the steps like an exhausted, shivering creature seeking shelter from the deluge, the soundtrack soars with Nat (King) Cole's radiant 1957 recording of "Star Dust." Cole's voice, awash in heavenly violins, conjures up a mood of romantic nostalgia that seems almost grotesquely inappropriate given the grimness of the setting.
Terence Davies's film "The Long Day Closes" revels in such juxtapositions of sound and image.
Much later in the film, its central character, Bud (Leigh McCormack), a dreamy-eyed 11-year-old boy, aimlessly swings from a rusted metal bar to the wistful strains of Debbie Reynolds singing "Tammy."


Polish Premier Faces Test in Parliament Today
Prime Minister Hanna Suchocka, a 46-year-old constitutional lawyer who has turned out to be Poland's most popular post-Communist politician, was fighting for her political life today as she faced a no-confidence vote in Parliament on Friday.
Mrs.
Suchocka has won widespread public support for her no-nonsense personal demeanor in her 10 months in office, but her minority coalition has recently been opposed by the Solidarity trade union.


Nelson Wins Loose Ball as Coach for '94 Team USA
Don Nelson received a major boost yesterday in his quest for the Olympic basketball coaching job in 1996 when he was appointed head coach of the United States national team that will compete in the world championships at Toronto in August 1994.
Rod Thorn, the vice president of operations for the National Basketball Association and chairman of the USA Basketball senior men's team committee, insisted that Nelson's new position would not necessarily help him attain the Olympic job.
But clearly, it would not hurt.


Art in Review
'Master European Paintings from the National Gallery of Ireland'
The I.B.M.
Gallery of Science and Art  590 Madison Avenue (at 56th Street)  Through June 26
This quietly stunning exhibition brings to the United States the cream of the European paintings in the National Gallery of Ireland, which is approaching its 150th anniversary.


Chevron Plans Cuts in U.S. To Finance Growth Abroad
The Chevron Corporation, currently the nation's largest oil refiner, said yesterday that it would sell two refineries accounting for about 25 percent of its capacity.
The move is a strategy to free and raise capital for expansion overseas.
The company, based in San Francisco, is also pulling out of several markets in the Middle Atlantic, Southeast and Midwest, disposing of hundreds of gasoline stations.


Corrections
An article on May 17 about a suicide in the presence of Dr.
Jack Kevorkian referred incorrectly to the Hemlock Society, which advocates a right to suicide among the gravely ill.
Dr.
Kevorkian is not a member of the society, according to its founder, Derek Humphry.


Unintended 'Header' Earns Canseco an Offer
When the Indians' CARLOS MARTINEZ bounced a fly ball off JOSE CANSECO's head and over the fence for a home run Wednesday night in Cleveland's one-run victory over the Rangers in Cleveland Stadium, it didn't go unnoticed.
The Harrisburg Heat of the National Professional Soccer League yesterday offered him a contract.
"I haven't had the opportunity to fully evaluate his foot skills," Heat Coach JIM POLLIHAN said, "but he certainly possesses great potential for the head ball. In these days of the two-sport star, we think Jose could help us tremendously."


Scenic and Smelly, a Park Opens Atop a Sewage Treatment Plant in Harlem


Books of The Times; American Dream Shrinks to a Nap
Declining Fortunes
The Withering of  the American Dream
By Katherine S. Newman
257 pages. Basic Books. $23.
The message of "Declining Fortunes: The Withering of the American Dream," a new book by the anthropologist Katherine S. Newman, is a familiar one: namely that the middle class has been squeezed in recent years by the national economy and by Reagan-Bush economic policies; that a shrinking job market, rising housing costs, higher taxes and growing cost-of-living expenses have imperiled some of the most basic, optimistic assumptions of the American Dream.
It's a message that was debated at length in last year's Presidential campaign, and a message examined in detail by Kevin Phillips's recent book, "Boiling Point: Republicans, Democrats and the Decline of Middle-Class Prosperity."


To the Beach: A Baedeker for Baskers; Compo Beach
When I was a child, my idea of going to the beach was playing under the boardwalk.
I was frightened by the ocean waves, hated the sun (I burn easily), and lived in fear of getting lost in the crowds.
If the ocean or the sun didn't get me, I figured, I'd end up going home with the wrong family.
My favorite beach as an adult is far from the overwhelming ocean beaches of my youth.
I like to bring my children to the rocky Connecticut beaches of Long Island Sound, in particular a little strip in Westport called Compo Beach.


Holiday Weekend
Memorial Day will be observed on Monday.
Here are holiday schedules.
NEW YORK  GOVERNMENT OFFICES: Closed.
POST OFFICE: Express Mail and special delivery only; main post office open at 33d Street and Eighth Avenue.
BANKS: Closed.
PARKING: Sunday rules in effect.
SANITATION: No pickups, recycling or street cleanings.
SCHOOLS: Closed.
FINANCIAL MARKETS: Closed.
TRANSPORTATION: Buses and subways on Sunday schedule.
Long Island Rail Road on weekend schedule, with extra trains this afternoon.
Metro-North on weekend schedule.
NEW JERSEY  GOVERNMENT OFFICES: Closed.
POST OFFICES: Express Mail and special delivery only.
BANKS: Closed.
SCHOOLS: Local option.
TRANSPORTATION: N.J.
Transit on Sunday schedule.
CONNECTICUT  GOVERNMENT OFFICES: Closed.
POST OFFICES: Express Mail and special delivery only.
BANKS: Closed.
SCHOOLS: Closed.
TRANSPORTATION: Metro-North on weekend schedule.
Traffic Alert MONDAY  MEMORIAL DAY PARADE, Manhattan.
Broadway between 72d and 86th Streets; 86th Street between Broadway and Riverside Drive; and Riverside Drive between 86th and 90th Streets will be closed from 8 A.M. to early afternoon  MEMORIAL DAY PARADE, Staten Island.
Forest Avenue from Victory Boulevard to Decker Avenue from 11 A.M. to 4 P.M.
ASTORIA-BROADWAY FESTIVAL, Queens.
Broadway between Steinway and Crescent Streets from 10 A.M. to 7 P.M.


Bomb Outside Uffizi in Florence Kills 6 and Damages Many Works
A powerful car bomb exploded early today on a street behind the Uffizi Gallery, killing 6 people and wounding 26, and destroying or damaging dozens of works in the gallery's priceless art collection.
The gallery's director, Annamaria Petrioli Tofani, said three works -- one by the 17th-century Dutch painter Gerrit van Honthorst and two by the Italian Bartolomeo Manfredi -- were destroyed.
Thirty others, including "The Death of Adonis," by Sebastiano del Piombo, were badly damaged, she added.


Sounds Around Town
Byard's Family Affair
Jaki Byard Trio, Yardbird Suite, 35 Cooper Square, East Village, (212) 228-5800.
Jaki Byard, a jazz pianist who draws on a wide swath of jazz tradition from ragtime to be-bop, puts special emphasis on his own style tonight and Saturday night at this recently opened club, named for one of Charlie Parker's most popular works, "Yardbird Suite." Mr.
Byard is playing portions of his composition "Family Suite," inspired by the family trees of both his wife and himself .
He is also featuring what he calls "a Duke Ellington montage" and is introducing himself as a tenor saxophonist to complement his customary secondary instrument, the alto saxophone.
The trio, with Ralph Hamperian on bass and Richard Allen at the drums, plays both nights at 9, 10:30 and midnight.
There is a $10 music charge and a $10 minimum.
Banjo Jazz
Cynthia Sayer and Crazy Rhythm, upstairs at Mamma Leone's, 261 West 44th Street, at Eighth Avenue, Manhattan, (212) 586-6151.
Cynthia Sayer is a rarity: a woman who plays jazz banjo with the drive and virtuosity of banjo stars from the early 20th century, the heyday of this instrument.
Her group, Crazy Rhythm, is made up of the stylish cornetist Peter Ecklund; the clarinetist Joe Muranyi, who was a member of Louis Armstrong's All-Stars in the 1950's and 60's; the bassist Bill Crow, a longtime colleague of Gerry Mulligan; and the drummer Chuck Spies, a knowledgeable veteran of the pit bands of Broadway musicals.
Her repertory, drawn from the 1920's and 30's, includes tunes like "My Honey's Lovin' Arms," "Kansas City Kitty" and "Doin' the New Lowdown." The group plays from noon until 4 P.M. on Sunday.
There is no cover charge but a buffet brunch is offered for $16.95 for adults and $8.95 for children.


Review/Ballet Theater; A New Team, Already Stars, In 'Swan Lake'
Yes, you could call it a circus when Julio Bocca and Nina Ananiashvili pulled out all the stops as a new superstar team in American Ballet Theater's "Swan Lake" on Wednesday night at the Metropolitan Opera House.
Everything was proceeding more or less along conventional lines until the coda of Act III, when this Odile and her Prince Siegfried suddenly set a new speed record at the end of the "Black Swan" pas de deux.
First, Miss Ananiashvili whipped around with incredible velocity into the 32 fouette turns that are Odile's celebrated signature.
Then Mr.
Bocca whirled like mad in his pirouettes a la seconde, revolving beyond the norm into multiple spins at an accelerated tempo.


Killer Gets Life as Navy Says He Hunted Down Gay Sailor
After months of hearings that left the motive unclear in the death of a gay sailor, the Navy released documents today describing how Airman Apprentice Terry M. Helvey, who was sentenced hours earlier to life in prison for the killing, had stalked the victim, then punched and kicked him furiously, at least in part because he hated homosexuals.
Testimony here over the last week had frequently depicted the homosexuality of the victim, Radioman Allen R. Schindler, as peripheral to the crime.
But the documents turned out to provide the real drama today, explaining fully for the first time the events leading to Mr.
Schindler's death just outside the Navy base at Sasebo, in southwestern Japan.


E.D.S. Gives Boost To a Small Agency
Electronic Data Systems, in a big boost to a small agency, is moving its corporate advertising account, with billings estimated at $7 million to $10 million, to Goldsmith/Jeffrey in New York from Ogilvy &amp; Mather Houston.
The Dallas-based data-processing and telecommunications division of the General Motors Corporation said last month that it had been discussing its nearly three-year relationship with Ogilvy Houston.
Bruce Odza, E.D.S.'s advertising director, said yesterday that Ogilvy Houston would remain an E.D.S. agency, working on an undisclosed project.


Bowman Will Coach. Question Is Where.
SCOTTY BOWMAN is almost sure he'll be coaching a National Hockey League team next season.
He just doesn't know if it will be the Pittsburgh Penguins.
Bowman, who will meet in Pittsburgh today with General Manager CRAIG PATRICK to discuss the 1993-94 season, yesterday said: "I'll probably stay in town through the end of the week, to see if something can be done."


Dance at Hunter
Peter Sparling and Janet Eilber, former members of the Martha Graham Dance Company, are to perform as guest artists with the Doris Humphrey Repertory Dance Company tonight at 8 at the Sylvia and Danny Kaye Playhouse of Hunter College, Lexington Avenue at 68th Street.
The program includes revivals of works by Humphrey, Anna Sokolow and Eleanor King.
Tickets are $18 to $25.
Information: (212) 772-4448.
Ticketron: (212) 307-7171.


Clorox Completes Account Shifts
The Clorox Company has completed a series of account realignments that began when one of the household product company's agencies took on assignments from another household products company.
While Clorox would not disclose billings involved in the shifts, which take effect Aug. 30, they were estimated to exceed $40 million.
Foote, Cone &amp; Belding in San Francisco, which already handles Clorox laundry brands like Clorox Liquid Bleach and Clorox II, was named to handle all Clorox home cleaning brands.
Those brands, like Clorox Clean-Up and Soft Scrub Cleanser, were at DDB Needham Chicago until last month when that agency resigned them to assume a large assignment from S. C. Johnson &amp; Son Inc.





INSIDE
Advance on AIDS Vaccine
Researchers have shown that a vaccine and a booster can prevent the heterosexual spread of an AIDS-like virus in monkeys.
Page A11.  'Safe Haven' Plan in Doubt
The "safe haven" plan for Bosnia may lack the votes in the U.N.
Security Council for adoption.
Page A6.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
The House approved the heart of President Clinton's budget plan by a 219-to-213 vote, giving him the most crucial legislative and political victory of his Presidency.
The measure would raise the taxes of most Americans except the poor, and new steps would be taken to restrain spending to lower the budget deficit.  [ Page A1. ]
The harrowingly narrow budget victory was desperately needed by the President after months of adversity.
Although not decisive, it gave the Administration time to prepare for harder battles ahead.
News Analysis.  [ A1. ]


To the Beach: A Baedeker for Baskers; East River
My favorite beach has no sand.
My favorite beach is noisy, crowded and made of concrete.
It has a boardwalk, but it currently has no boards.
A sign says it's under repair.
The sign has been there for a while.
Maybe one day the wood will return.
Maybe not.
Regardless, I can live with my local beach.
The beach is situated on the East River in Manhattan, just south of 34th Street, and between a helicopter shuttle landing strip and the Water Club restaurant.
Some might argue about it being a beach at all.
That's their problem.
This is New York, a place famous for taking your pleasures where you can.


Carter Is No Longer Just an Interim Coach
It's no longer interim coach FRED CARTER.
The Philadelphia 76ers yesterday gave Carter, 48, a two-year contract to revive the franchise, which missed the playoffs for the second straight season and finished with a 26-56 record, third worst in club history. (AP)


Last Chance
Here is a sampling of shows in New York City that are to close soon: Closing This Weekend  "I AM A MAN," Working Theater at Classic Stage Company, 136 East 13th Street, East Village.
A drama by C. F. Oyamo Gordon about the 1968 Memphis sanitation strike and the worker who tried to establish the first recognized black union in the South.
Through Sunday.
Performances: Today and tomorrow at 8 P.M.; Sunday at 3 P.M.
Tickets: $20.
Information: (212) 564-8038.
"ON A CLEAR DAY YOU CAN SEE FOREVER," Harold Clurman Theater, 412 West 42d Street, Clinton.
A revival of the 1965 musical by Alan Jay Lerner and Burton Lane.
Through Saturday.
Performances: Tonight at 8; tomorrow at 2 and 8 P.M.; Sunday at 3 P.M.
Tickets: $25.
Information: (212) 279-4200.


U.N. Outlook Bleak for U.S.-Led Bosnia Plan
A plan for creating well-guarded Muslim safe havens in Bosnia approved by the United States, Russia, Britain, France and Spain last weekend has been skeptically received by other Security Council members and still appeared today to lack the nine votes needed for adoption by its 15 members.
As a result, Secretary General Boutros Boutros-Ghali has proposed reconvening the London peace conference on Yugoslavia, an unwieldy group of more than 30 nations, in an effort to define a new and more comprehensive approach to ending the conflict in Bosnia and Herzegovina.


Prisons Run Out of Cells, Money and Choices
After more than a decade of tougher sentences and costly prison construction that still cannot cope with the largest convict population in American history, hundreds of frustrated criminal justice specialists gathered here expectantly this week to heed Gov.
Lawton Chiles's call for fostering alternatives to prison.
Instead, they found a Governor uncertain about how to deal with a deepening prison crisis that faces not just Florida but most other states.
Or rather, they did not find Mr.
Chiles at all: he ended up skipping the conference because he was calling an emergency legislative session to seek fresh taxes for adding at least 21,000 spaces to the jammed Florida prison system.


Jordan Drove the Fast Lane After Casino Visit
Agitated by what he described as an attack on his private life, Michael Jordan acknowledged today that he traveled to Atlantic City Monday evening, the night before Chicago's Game 2 loss to the Knicks in the Eastern Conference finals.
Jordan characterized his trip as a quick escape from the hostile environment of New York and the disappointing loss in Game 1, and as a chance to spend some leisure time with his father and friends that did not affect his preparation for the game Tuesday night.
But he disputed reports that he had been at Bally's Grand casino as late as 2:30 A.M. on Tuesday and that he had lost $5,000 playing blackjack.


Park, However It Smells, Blossoms on the River
Majorettes marched on the new bright-red 400-meter track twirling and tossing their gold batons.
The springy Astroturf bounced under the pounding feet of teen-age boys playing football.
An ice-hockey team, liberated from the seasons, scrambled and checked on Roller Blades in the spring air.
But along the railing overlooking the lordly Hudson River, it simply stunk.


Joyful Noises In the Bronx
"Something Within Me," opening today at the Cinema Village, is an uncomplicatedly sunny testimonial to St.
Augustine's, a parochial school in the South Bronx that has stirred its students with a lively, creative curriculum.
As filmed by Jerret Engle and Emma Joan Morris, the students and teachers of St.
Augustine's warmly testify to the beneficial effects of learning to play music, especially jazz.
The students have been encouraged to improvise, in part as a way of building their self-confidence.
One after another, these smiling schoolchildren describe their enjoyment of learning, and the ways in which St.
Augustine's has heightened that experience in the face of adversity.
Problems in the surrounding community, like drugs and random violence, are also mentioned.
But this film's clear purpose is to accentuate the positive, and that's what it does.


N.B.A. Fines Anthony $5,000
The National Basketball Association announced today that Knicks guard Greg Anthony has been fined $5,000 for his flagrant foul against Michael Jordan on Tuesday night in Game 2 of the Eastern Conference finals.
Anthony collided with Jordan under the basket as the Chicago star drove the left side of the lane in the fourth quarter of the Knicks' 96-91 victory at Madison Square Garden.
Anthony was ejected, which carries an automatic $250 fine.


Money Fund Assets Down
The total assets of the nation's 632 retail money market mutual funds decreased $1.47 billion, to $388.59 billion, in the week ended Wednesday, the Investment Company Institute said yesterday.
The assets of the 396 taxable retail money market funds were down $462.4 million, to $308.50 billion, while the assets of the 236 retail tax-exempt funds decreased $1.01 billion, to $80.09 billion.


Short-Term Treasury Prices Fall
Short-term Treasury prices were hit hard yesterday amid more reports that the Federal Reserve had decided to set a policy biased toward raising short-term interest rates.
But the price of the 30-year Treasury bond was down only slightly and the yield was unchanged at 6.92 percent.
Combined with the sharp rise in shorter-term yields, the gap between short- and long-term yields narrowed to its smallest spread of the year.


Mayoral Poll Gives Asian-Americans the Invisible Treatment
To the Editor:
In the last decade, the number of Asian-Americans in New York City more than doubled.
As the fastest growing racial group in the city, Asian-Americans amount to nearly 10 percent of its population, affecting every segment of society and bringing new cultural and economic vitality to its neighborhoods.


Mexico Wins, U.S. Workers Lose in Trade Pact
To the Editor:
Ross Perot is dead right on the North American Free Trade Agreement.
If Congress approves it, we will be deafened by the "giant sucking sound" of jobs moving from the United States to Mexico.


12 Held in Trucking of Untaxed and Contaminated Oil
A scheme that saw millions of gallons of contaminated oil burned in New York City's commercial and public buildings, schools and hospitals was broken up yesterday with the arrest of 12 people and the execution of 40 search warrants in New York, New Jersey and Philadelphia.
Law-enforcement officials also said the investigation had turned up possible links between the conspiracy and three organized-crime families that the officials say extracted a penny-a-gallon kickback from the plan.


Excerpts From Clinton's Question-and-Answer Session in the Rose Garden
Following are excerpts from President Clinton's meeting today in the White House Rose Garden as transcribed by Federal News Service.
The moderators were Harry Smith and Paula Zahn of "CBS This Morning."
PRESIDENT CLINTON There was an agreement made last night that I had been supporting for a good long while, sponsored by the conservative Democrats, essentially to put a mechanism in the budget to force us every year to make the budget cuts that we say we're making in this five-year budget; that is, it's obviously very hard to predict what will happen in every year for the next five years.


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY  STEIN BOWS OUT OF MAYORAL RACE
City Council President Andrew J. Stein withdrew from the mayoral race to run for re-election instead, leaving Mayor Dinkins a clear path to the Democratic nomination and instantly reshaping the fight for City Hall into a duel between the Mayor and his Republican-Liberal challenger, Rudolph W. Giuliani.
A1.
With his entry into the race for his current job, Mr.
Stein has made a crowded and complicated race to become New York City's public advocate even more crowded and complicated.
B4.


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt  *
Acme Holdings Inc., Irvine, Calif., is offering $78 million of 11 3/4 percent senior notes due in 2000 at 99.416 to yield 11.875 percent through Citicorp Securities.
Nonredeemable for three years, the notes are rated B-3 by Moody's Investors Service Inc. and B by Standard &amp; Poor's Corp. *
Bristol-Myers Squibb Co., New York, is offering $350 million of 7.15 percent debentures due in 2023 at 98.5 to yield 7.273 percent through Salomon Brothers.
The noncallable debentures are rated triple-A by Moody's, S.&amp; P., and Duff &amp; Phelps.


Dinkins Drops Late Penalties For Tickets
The Dinkins administration yesterday announced an unprecedented one-month amnesty on late penalties for delinquent parking tickets, but it will be only a temporary respite before fines are increased later this summer.
The amnesty was part of a compromise that Mayor David N. Dinkins reached with the City Council two months ago.
Under that deal, the Council agreed to approve sharp increases in late penalties for summonses, on the condition that motorists be given a month to settle their old tickets by paying only the original fine, without additional charges.


THE CLINTON BUDGET: Behind the Budget; Without Being Asked, House Votes Extra $1.2 Billion for Pentagon
While most of its time this week was spent complaining that the deficit was too big, the House found a moment to vote the Pentagon $1.2 billion that it had not asked for.
The ingredients for this extravaganza of inconsistency lie in the ornate customs of the House, especially the power of Appropriations Committee members over Federal spending that matters to their colleagues, but the Pentagon is smiling all the way to the bank.


Johnson Can't Hold Candle to Past Power
Howard Johnson insists he is not finished as a home run threat.
He calls talk of his demise as a prolific run producer "nonsense." He declares that his stature is so secure that whatever kind of season he has in 1993 won't damage his trade value or his marketplace appeal should he file for free agency this fall.
Not everyone is quite so sure.
Johnson, after the greatest power season of his career in 1991, when he led the National League in home runs (38) and runs batted in (117), hit only 7 home runs in a 1992 campaign cut short by injury.


THE CLINTON BUDGET: The Overview; HOUSE GIVES NARROW APPROVAL TO CLINTON BUDGET PROPOSALS
The House of Representatives approved the heart of President Clinton's budget plan today, giving him the most crucial legislative and political victory of his young Presidency.
The vote, 219 to 213, was solidly along party lines, with 218 Democrats and an independent voting for the measure and only 38 Democrats defecting to join the 175 Republicans in opposition.  [ Roll-call, page A12. ]


I.B.M. AND E-SYSTEMS TEAM UP ON MASS DATA STORAGE
I.B.M. and E-Systems Inc., a Dallas maker of sophisticated military electronics, announced a joint agreement aimed at broadening the market for mass data storage devices.


Braves Take Action Against Pendleton
Atlanta third baseman TERRY PENDLETON was disciplined by the Braves, but not suspended, for walking off the field during Wednesday night's game with the Reds in Cincinnati.
Pendleton surprised his teammates by leaving the field in the seventh inning with reliever MARVIN FREEMAN pitching to Reds starter TIM BELCHER.
Pendleton, who was followed down a dugout runway by Manager BOBBY COX, was replaced by BILL PECOTA.


Stein, Trailing Badly in the Polls, Quits New York Race for Mayor
City Council President Andrew J. Stein withdrew from the New York City mayoral race yesterday to run for re-election instead, leaving Mayor David N. Dinkins a clear path to the Democratic nomination and instantly reshaping the fight for City Hall into a five-month duel between the Mayor and his Republican-Liberal challenger, Rudolph W. Giuliani.
Mr.
Stein, who has trailed Mr.
Dinkins badly in all the polls for months, said in an interview that he was abandoning his effort at the urging "of so many people whom I respect" -- including Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo -- who told him that the Democrats needed to put all their focus on beating Mr.
Giuliani in November.
He said he would support Mr.
Dinkins wholeheartedly but did not necessarily expect the Mayor's backing in return.


Review/City Ballet; Balanchine Unlike Himself
The physical and emotional drain of the New York City Ballet's eight-week Balanchine Celebration took an apparent toll on "Divertimento No. 15," a 1956 work presented on Sunday night at the New York State Theater.
There is nothing obvious about the suite of solos, duets and ensemble dances set to Mozart.
They are unemphatically pure classical ballet.
They have little sense of direction as a whole.
Like delicate candied flowers, the dances must be made just right, small and controlled, for full effect.
The corps dancers occasionally looked as if they were enjoying themselves.
Stephanie Saland had some moments of melting lyricism and Ben Huys danced with a welcome vigor that cut a sharp path.
But for the most part the dancing looked rushed, out of touch and a little ragged.
Russell Kaiser and Nilas Martins danced the theme.
The six variations were danced by Nichol Hlinka, Yvonne Borree, Ms.
Saland, Kathleen Tracey, Mr.
Huys and Darci Kistler.


Vulnerability of Art
The car bombing at the Uffizi Gallery may not have destroyed any of the works for which it is especially beloved and prized.
Yet it clearly came frighteningly close, and only chance seems to have prevented an even greater catastrophe.


Juilliard Names Winners
The Juilliard School has named four students in its college division as winners of the 1993 Gina Bachauer International Piano Competition.
They are Jennifer Hayghe, 23, of Fort Worth; Avner Arad, 25, of Haifa, Israel; Shu-Ching Chen, 25, of Taipei, Taiwan, and Stella Simakova, 25, of St.
Petersburg, Russia.
Each will receive a scholarship and will take part in a concert that is to be broadcast live on WQXR-FM on Sept. 29 at 9 P.M.


To the Beach: A Baedeker for Baskers; Manor Beach
It has been a long time now since Larchmont in Westchester County was a summer community, but if you stand on Manor Beach and look out over the rocks to the green flank of Long Island, it is still possible to imagine Jay Gatsby gazing back.
With its winding paths and its jaunty gazebos and its wooden bath house pitched over the waves, Manor Beach has managed to retain its Jazz Age feel even as the sorry effects of late 20th-century life lap at the shore.
Other beaches may aspire to the natural look; Manor Beach evokes a time when Nature was something to be improved upon, trussed and manicured and, if need be, rearranged.
By now, of course, it is impossible to figure out where the waves' work ended and civilization's began, and even the lifeguards' chairs seem an essential part of the landscape.


Demonstrators Demand 1,000 More Housing Police Officers


Long Island's Feathered Symbol Reopens


Corrections
A table in Business Day yesterday headed "The Favorite Stocks," listing the 15 issues with the most shareholders, misstated the 1993 percentage change for Southwestern Bell.
On Wednesday, Southwestern Bell's shares were up 2.7 percent so far this year.


Nearly $1 Million for Byrd Book
The inspirational story of DENNIS BYRD, the 26-year-old former defensive end for the Jets who has staged a remarkable recovery from paralysis, was acquired yesterday by HarperCollins for an amount estimated at close to $1 million.


Paris Journal; The Barricades of '68: Now That Was Very Heaven
It was a time of student unrest and student dreams around the world, yet somehow the revolt that shook Paris in May 1968 stood out, perhaps because it seemed more romantic than others, perhaps because it came so close to forcing none other than General de Gaulle out of office.
"Not all generations have a chance to live such a moment of freedom and joy," said Marc Kravetz, then a 25-year-old student leader, now the 50-year-old news editor at Liberation.
"It was a huge collective fiesta. It was a very happy moment for me."


The Mets' Last, Best Manager: Davey Johnson's Back in Town
For Cincinnati, there will be no need for a scouting report on the opposing pitcher tonight at Shea Stadium.
Dwight Gooden will be the starter for the Mets, and his full and complete history is stored in the memory of the Reds' manager.
"I know they are not going to make it easy on me, throwing Doc and Saberhagen at us the first two games," said Davey Johnson, who returns to New York tonight with a .588 winning percentage that is the best of any former manager of the Mets.
"But you can tell Doc I'm not going to let him use his bat. We're going to knock him down on the first pitch."


Art in Review
'Robert Mapplethorpe'  'Black-and-White Polaroids, 1971-75'
Robert Miller Gallery  41 East 57th Street  Manhattan  Through June 25
Even in the tiny black-and-white Polaroid pictures shown here, made between 1971 and 1975, Robert Mapplethorpe pursued many of the themes that would later make him famous, and infamous.
Here are impossibly elegant images of flowers, as well as theatrical depictions of sexual obsessions, including a photograph of a man with clips on his nipples and others of men dressed in leather harnesses and masks.


Art in Review
'Andrea Modica' 'Minor League'  Julie Saul Gallery 560 Broadway (at Prince Street) SoHo Through July 2
Baseball is back, and throughout the land can be heard the roar of the crowd as the millionaires round the bases.
Most of the ballplayers Andrea Modica portrays in her moody black-and-white photographs belong to a distinctly different class, playing as they do for minor-league clubs like the Oneonta Yankees, Bakersfield Dodgers and Greensboro Hornets.


Democratic Chief Says Donors Merit Red Carpet
The chairman of the Democratic Party said today that he would not halt the party's practice of arranging meetings for big contributors with Administration officials.
The chairman, David C. Wilhelm, said the practice was innocent as long as no special favors were offered.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
6.50
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
3.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.00
3.11
3.62
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.05
3.04
3.68
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.20
3.21
3.82
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
5.78
5.74
6.95
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
6.98
6.92
7.83
TELEPHONE BONDS
7.92
7.85
8.76
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
5.89
5.89
6.63
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Art in Review
'Hello Steve' 'Works From the 1940's by Steve Wheeler'
Snyder Fine Art  588 Broadway (near Prince Street)  SoHo  Through tomorrow
In the 1940's, Steve Wheeler (1912-1992) was associated with the group of American modernists called the Indian Space painters, who made extensive use of Pre-Columbian and Northwest Indian pictographic forms in their work.
He later disavowed the connection, in part because he was temperamentally cranky and independent, but also because his work really does resist easy labels.


Poor Would Tax the Rich In Texas Plan for Schools
Racing to avert a court threat to cut off money for the state's public schools on Tuesday, legislative leaders in Texas agreed today on a novel plan that would allow poor school districts to levy taxes on property in wealthier districts elsewhere in the state.
The new approach represents a sharp twist in a legal battle over school aid that has run for 25 years in Texas and has bedeviled legislatures in many other states as well.
In essence, the proposal would force wealthy districts to choose from a range of options for helping out poorer schools, like shifting part of their tax base to poorer schools, providing teachers and other help for them or even merging with nearby poor school districts.


30% Stake in Northwest Offered to Its Workers
The parent company of Northwest Airlines said yesterday that it had agreed to give its workers a 30 percent stake in the beleaguered carrier and a fifth of the seats on its board in return for $886 million worth of concessions.
The deal, which has the support of the two largest of six unions representing Northwest employees, represents an important step toward restructuring the finances of Wings Holdings Inc., Northwest's parent.


Review/Pop; Cyndi Lauper in Grown-Up Mode
Cyndi Lauper mused, during her set at Irving Plaza on Wednesday night, on whether the Beach Boys sometimes wake up now and think they're the Beach Men.
Aging and longevity in the pop business are clearly on Ms.
Lauper's mind, 10 years after she ruled MTV as a bopping, squeaky-voiced, fun-loving girl and three years after her lackluster third album, "A Night to Remember." The 39-year-old singer needs to prove herself as an adult performer without losing the spunk of her first hits, and she now has the material and confidence to do just that.
At Irving Plaza, her set consisted of all the songs, in order, from her coming album, "Hat Full of Stars" (Epic, due June 15).
With exuberant performances by Ms.
Lauper and a first-rate band, the concert promised that even in the fragmented pop market of the 1990's there's still a place for an eclectic performer who wants her songs to have both private resonances and hit potential.


Francis Van Dusen, 81 Ex-U.S. Appeals Judge
Francis Lund Van Dusen, a retired Federal appellate judge, died Wednesday at his home in Bryn Mawr, Pa., a suburb of Philadelphia.
He was 81.
He died after a long illness, his family said.


Vie de Price
For months, Vie de France, a restaurant and specialty bakery company with a rocky sales and earnings record, has traded at around 3.
But on Monday, an outside group of investors said it bought 6.5 percent of Vie de France after the announcement of a break-even quarter versus a year-earlier loss.
Yesterday, Vie de France hit a 52-week high in intraday trading.


Media Watch; Sticking to the Rose Garden To Avoid Thorns in the Side
It almost looked as if the networks, in another cost-cutting move, had decided to show reruns of the Presidential campaign.
There on "CBS This Morning" yesterday was the President, sitting in the Rose Garden with the program's hosts, Harry Smith and Paula Zahn, answering questions from a crowd of people who had been plucked from a tour of the White House.
A few channels away, on "Today" on NBC, Ross Perot was jousting with Bryant Gumbel and condemning the party in power as incompetent.


Weapons Ban Is Approved by Connecticut Senate
The Connecticut Senate tonight broke through a decades-old roadblock to gun control legislation with a vote to ban the sale of at least 30 different models of semiautomatic military-style assault rifles.
The 18-to-18 tie, broken by the Lieutenant Governor, Eunice S. Groark, was considered a major victory by gun control forces.
Lawmakers said it was the first time that the generally conservative Senate had acted to prohibit the sale of a whole class of weapons.
The bill now goes to the House for action.


THE CLINTON BUDGET: Families;
Despite a debate that led to a freeze on most automatic spending programs, the budget approved today by the House of Representatives includes a big new cash program for states to help them keep children out of foster care.
Under the program, state child-welfare agencies would get Federal aid to help them keep families intact rather than placing children in foster care.


Let's Shut Our School For Salvadoran Killers
To the Editor:
As a Roman Catholic priest and missionary with the Maryknoll Order, I have been an outspoken critic of United States military aid to El Salvador since 1989, when Salvadoran soldiers raped and murdered three nuns and a lay missionary.
Two of the slain nuns were Maryknoll sisters.


Mentally Ill Woman Is Convicted of Slaying 2
After a year in jail and more than six years in mental institutions, a mentally ill woman was convicted yesterday of the 1985 slaying of the chairman of the Deak-Perera foreign exchange firm and a receptionist.
A State Supreme Court justice in Manhattan found the woman, Lois Lang, guilty of two counts of second-degree murder and two weapons charges despite agreeing with the defendant's lawyer and psychiatrists who examined her that Miss Lang was badly out of touch with reality.


Sudden Death of a Wife Of New Interest to Police
As the police continued their search yesterday for a sanitation enforcement agent who lived with the 4-year-old boy whose body was found in a Brooklyn trash compactor, homicide detectives began reviewing the circumstances of the 1989 death of the man's first wife in Queens.
Stephan Poole, 31, married Michelle Jenkins in February 1989, but his wife, who was 5 feet 5 and weighed 350 pounds, was found dead three months later in the laundry room of their Far Rockaway apartment, the authorities said.


Market Place; Nutri-System's shrinking may put Jenny Craig on a gravy train.
FOR more than a month, as banks and investors have tried reorganizing Nutri-System Inc., the company's 283 diet centers have remained closed, leaving thousands of clients available to competitors like Jenny Craig Inc.
Michael E. Heisley, head of the investment company that controls Nutri-System, said he expected no more than 200 centers to be reopened.
Even franchise-owned centers, which are not affected by the bankruptcy, are suffering because they depend on the company for food supplies.
David Skolnik, who owned 61 centers in New Jersey and Illinois, said that he had closed 17 of 23 in the Chicago area and that over all, up to 10 percent of the 857 franchise-run centers have closed.


Diversity but Conflict Under Wider AIDS Umbrella; At the Gay Men's Health Crisis, a Struggle to Serve Competing Groups of Clients
Not long ago, a 29-year-old homosexual man struck up a conversation with another man and, finding him attractive, winked at him.
Insulted, the second man, cursed the gay man and called him a "faggot."
Of the two, it was the gay man who said he was the one most surprised.
After all, the confrontation took place at Gay Men's Health Crisis, the pioneering AIDS organization in New York City.


Just Call College Sports Show Business
To the Editor:
I find it discouraging that "Cheating in College Athletics" (editorial, May 15) seems to miss the point in discussing National Collegiate Athletic Association policies.
The N.C.A.A. is fundamentally a fair-trade organization that is designed to prevent unfair competition between colleges in the sports exhibition business.


PEROT VS. CLINTON: WAR OF THE WORDS
Ross Perot asserts that President Clinton does not have enough executive experience to handle "the toughest job in the world."
The President dismisses Mr.
Perot as a political malcontent who "doesn't like my state." White House aides go even further, asserting that Mr.
Perot, a Texan who made billions as a computer entrepreneur, is a man "desperate for attention."


Christian Coalition Only Guided Voters
To the Editor:
Jerome Kurtz suggests (letter, May 17) that the Roman Catholic Church and other churches that distributed nonpartisan voter guides may have violated the requirements imposed upon them by the Internal Revenue Code.
That allegation is absolutely false.


Review/Architecture; The Unconventional as a Convention
The small, wedge-shaped gallery at Storefront for Art and Architecture, which can resemble a nightmare torture chamber with sadistically contracting walls, is a poignant metaphor for the perennially pinched economic circumstances of this "alternative" downtown space.
If the walls contracted one more inch, Storefront would be out on the street, and architecture would move another step closer to homelessness in the imperial city of real estate.
No other New York gallery or museum has provided new architectural ideas with such stalwart shelter.
But the 90's have challenged the identity of alternative galleries.
With the loosening of post-modernism's grip on the mainstream, and the weakening of the economy that supported it, the question arises: alternative to what?
No one movement dominates architecture today.
Theoretical "paper architecture," which once offered an alternative to conventional practice, has itself become a convention.
Everything is an alternative on architecture's fragmented terrain.


Ondieki Is Favored in Mini Marathon
If she's a quarter as good in June as she was last November, LISA ONDIEKI should have no trouble in the Advil Mini Marathon.
Ondieki, who set a course record in winning the women's division of the 1992 New York City Marathon, has entered the all-female race in Central Park on June 12.
The 10-kilometer mini marathon requires more speed than endurance, but Ondieki has both.


For Children
The urge to break away from the city starts about now, especially with a three-day weekend beckoning.
How about a hike through woods and meadows to brush away the cobwebs?
The following preserves and estate grounds, all in Nassau County, are free and open on Memorial Day.
Some offer picnic tables, others provide a beach where you can put your toes in the water.
Of course, there are also such things as ticks and poison ivy, which means you should wear boots or covered shoes and long pants.
Going with friends is a good idea for those children who balk at walking an inch when they're on their own but have no trouble keeping up when there's peer pressure.
Garvies Point Museum and Preserve
Barry Drive  Glen Cove, L.I.  (516) 571-8010
Most of the trails at Garvies Point lead to the beach, which isn't such a bad place to end up at this time of year.


Jury Gets Retrial of Policeman as Miami Girds for Racial Trouble
As National Guard units and the police in Miami braced for a verdict, the racially charged retrial of a Miami police officer accused of killing two young black men was sent to a jury here today, after four years of judicial controversy and five hours of impassioned final arguments by lawyers in the case.
After admonitions from both sides that the jury disregard the social or political consequences of whatever decision they make, Judge W. Thomas Spencer of Dade County Circuit Court placed the fate of William Lozano, a 33-year-old Colombian-born policeman, in the hands of the six-member panel late this afternoon.
The jury deliberated for almost three hours without reaching a verdict in the manslaughter case, then retired for the night.


18 Indicted in Fraud Scheme After an Undercover Inquiry
Eighteen people, including the son of a reputed Mafia boss, have been indicted in a scheme to defraud the Government of $34 million in gasoline excise taxes, Federal officials said today.
The indictments, which were handed up on Wednesday, stem from a three-year undercover operation on Long Island that involved the Federal Bureau of Investigation and the Internal Revenue Service, said Mary Jo White, the United States Attorney for the Eastern District of New York.


Jury Hears Final Arguments in Analyst's Libel Suit
Did Jeffrey M. Masson really say those awful things about himself or did Janet Malcolm invent quotations and thus make a fool of him in a two-part profile in The New Yorker magazine?
That is what an eight-member jury must decide here after nearly three weeks of testimony, which has filled a Federal courtroom and captivated the literary, journalistic, legal and psychoanalytic communities on both coasts.


When Football Brawn Meets Mature Finesse
It seems an odd marriage, the youthful purveyors of strength and violence and the elder artisans of finesse and grace.
But at this week's Cadillac N.F.L.
Classic, throwing 56 pro football players together with 78 members of the Senior Tour has created a stimulating synergy.
There are scenes like 280-pound offensive lineman Chris Hinton of the Atlanta Falcons seeking swing pointers from the diminutive 58-year-old Bob Brue.
Or Lee Trevino trying to improve his betting acumen by picking the brain of Buffalo Bills quarterback Jim Kelly.


Review/Film; High Anxiety Amid the Vistas
"CLIFFHANGER," the new high-altitude thriller starring Sylvester Stallone, wastes no time in establishing its first priority, that of sending its audience into a cold sweat.
This effect is achieved spectacularly well with a long, death-defying credit sequence set somewhere near the ozone layer.
Mr.
Stallone, playing a pumped-up Rocky Mountain rescue worker with an incongruously Presidential haircut, does his best to save a young woman who hangs precariously from a rope across a terrifyingly deep abyss.
You will be in no hurry to mountain-climb after watching this scene.
At such moments, and "Cliffhanger" has many of them, thoughts about life insurance come to mind.
Was Sylvester Stallone really filmed atop the dizzyingly high, needle-shaped peak that figures prominently in the film's opening?
Did he really scale the kinds of cliffs and mountainsides that are seen here?
Did he hang in midair from a fraying rope, cross great chasms via rickety bridges or battle over a helicopter about to plunge into oblivion?
Obviously, a great deal of credit goes to stunt doubles and optical tricks, but the illusion is still astonishingly effective.
"Cliffhanger" really seems to be set somewhere up in the sky.


Clorox Completes Account Shifts
The Clorox Company has completed a series of account realignments that began when one of the household product company's agencies took on assignments from another household products company.
While Clorox would not disclose billings involved in the shifts, which take effect Aug. 30, they were estimated to exceed $40 million.
Foote, Cone &amp; Belding in San Francisco, which already handles Clorox laundry brands like Clorox Liquid Bleach and Clorox II, was named to handle all Clorox home cleaning brands.
Those brands, like Clorox Clean-Up and Soft Scrub Cleanser, were at DDB Needham Chicago until last month when that agency resigned them to assume a large assignment from S. C. Johnson &amp; Son Inc.


The Spoken Word
RADIO DISCUSSION, WNYC (820-AM).
A series of recorded interviews and discussions sponsored by the New York Public Library and WNYC continues with "The Law of Nature and the Dream of Man: Ruminations on the Art of Fiction," with the author Wallace Stegner.
Sunday at 4 P.M.
"THE ALBUM THAT CHANGED MY LIFE," St.
Mark's Church, Second Avenue at 10th Street, East Village.
Poetry by Richard Rhetta, Emily XYZ, Neil Strauss and others.
Tonight at 10:30.
Admission: $5.
Information: (212) 674-0910.


A Military Court in Egypt Gives Death Sentences to Six Militants
An Egyptian military court sentenced six Muslim militants to death today and two others to life imprisonment in a trial of 14 men charged with carrying out attacks against foreign tourists and trying to assassinate Information Minister Safwat al-Sherif.
The sentencing, bringing the number of death sentences given to militants to 23 in the last six months, has followed the deadliest bombing rampage in more than a year of clashes.
Hours before the verdict was delivered, five people were wounded, some seriously, in a blast at a police checkpoint.
An explosion last Friday outside a police station in central Cairo killed six people.


To the Beach: A Baedeker for Baskers; Sagaponack
I've never quite understood how it happens that a beach gets turned into a commercial enterprise, or why such a thing is appealing to people who go there.
But it is true, isn't it, that the more stuff you can buy at the beach, the bigger the crowds?
Which came first, do you think?
The crowds or the stuff?
Which is the attraction?
Anyway, what is appealing about Sagaponack beach, midway between Easthampton and Southampton, L.I., along the South Fork's gold coast, is that in a place where you would expect a lot of amenities, there are none.
All right, there's a weatherbeaten bike rack.
But there's nothing for purchase.
And there aren't any gazebos or benches or places to rent umbrellas; there's no boardwalk.


THE CLINTON BUDGET: Capitol Scene; It's Western Democracy (As in the Wild West)
The House of Representatives spent 10 hours today giving President Clinton's budget the full benefit of the deliberative process.
It may have been democracy at its best, but it was not pretty.
On the contrary, the flocked and brass-trimmed House chamber was less a legislative arena than a movie-set bar room, a place where one cowboy makes a sneering remark, a second throws a punch and suddenly everyone is firing six-guns and hitting friend and foe alike over the head with liquor bottles and chairs.


Newborn Boy Is Found on a Queens Street
A newborn boy with his umbilical cord attached was found yesterday morning tucked into two brown paper bags a block away from the boardwalk at Rockaway Beach in Far Rockaway, Queens, the police said.
The baby was between two hours and three days old and was suffering from hypothermia when he was discovered by a woman who was walking by and noticed the bag moving on a sidewalk, said Detective Darren Lane of the 101st Precinct.


Why Does a Fire Horn Have to Be So Loud?
AFTER the City Council presented awards recognizing the sensitive renovation of several landmark buildings, and before it passed a resolution thanking garden club members for hanging flowering baskets downtown, the debate at last week's meeting turned to an issue that Mayor Warren Ross said he hoped could be settled amicably.
Everybody laughed.
"Look around," Paula Tommins said, reading from a prepared statement on behalf of a newly formed community group, the Concerned Citizens of Rye.
"Most of us have never before participated in local government. This issue brought people to City Hall."


U.S. Will Press Japan On Broadening Imports
In an attempt to end criticism that it is selfishly trying to help only American companies, the Clinton Administration plans to take a new tack in trade talks and press Japan more than ever to increase imports from all countries and not just the United States, Administration officials said today.
The officials, who spoke on the condition that they would not be identified, said the change would be part of a new trade strategy toward Japan that is scheduled to be announced next week.
They said they would try to enlist European countries in the effort.


Abroad at Home; The Clinton Mystery
What has gone wrong with the Clinton Presidency?
Can it be fixed?
Or are we headed for another failure that will further erode public faith in the political system?
The questions are being asked -- astonishingly so, if you think how early it is.
Four months into a new Administration, people who voted for it are wondering whether it can be saved.


Abandoned Car Is Seized in Bomb Inquiry
An automobile found abandoned on Manhattan's East Side yesterday was seized by the F.B.I. as part of the agency's investigation into the World Trade Center bombing, the police said.
The car, a tan 1983 Datsun, was found about 4 P.M. parked in front of 326 East 25th Street after a woman called 911 saying that she believed the vehicle had been abandoned, said Sgt.
John McCluskey, a police spokesman.


Sounds Around Town
Steel Pole Paranoia  Steel Pole Bath Tub.
Grand, 76 East 13th Street, Greenwich Village, (212) 777-0600.
It's common practice for grungy, punkish bands to pilfer the past and rehash it with a heavy dose of irony.
Steel Pole Bath Tub, from Montana via San Francisco, revives late-1960's paranoia.
While bass and drums chug out a grinding, post-industrialist rhythm and the guitars sputter and shriek feedback and distortion, Michael Morasky, one of the band's three singers, spins grim tales that read like James Ellroy on acid.
In "594," from the band's latest album, "The Miracle of Sound in Motion" (Boner Records), a psycho sits in the window of his room with a gun pointed at the street; in "Bozeman," a staticky voice whispers, "They got your mind controlled." Steel Pole Bath Tub's malice is just understated enough not to seem silly, and the grooves are deep and tight.
Tomorrow night at 8; tickets are $10 in advance, $12 day of show.
Also Sunday night at Maxwell's, 1039 Washington Street, Hoboken, N.J., (201) 798-4064.
Show is at 9 P.M.; tickets are $6.
Electric Romanticism
Springhouse, Maxwell's, 1039 Washington Street, Hoboken, N.J., (201) 798-4064.
Ever since the late 1970's, British bands from the Buzzcocks to Felt to Jesus and Mary Chain have toyed with the process of doctoring pop hooks with thick layers of electric guitar.
Springhouse, from New York City, updates the formula with a new romanticism.
On "Postcards From the Arctic" (Caroline), the band's latest album, the vocalist Mitch Friedland sings with supreme detachment, as if he wants to look down on his angst from above.
The melodies are pretty and wistful, the sentiments dizzying and sad; at its best, as in "Asphalt Angels," Springhouse captures and holds onto a fleeting sense of melancholy.
Tonight at 10.
Admission is $6.
Brooklyn Blues
The Senders, Sideshows by the Seashore, Boardwalk at West 12th Street, Coney Island, Brooklyn, (718) 372-5159.
One of the few New York bands to have survived the rigors of the 1970's and 80's, the Senders still bash out a classic blend of blues, rhythm-and-blues and ornery attitude that long ago crystallized into the first wave of punk rock.
The brawny, no-nonsense approach and dedication to tradition seems almost innocent when compared with today's young punks, the way 60's soul seems innocent compared to hip-hop; it's a style that lingers outside the mainstream, a little bit tougher than time and trends.
Tonight at 10.
Admission is $6.


Grumman in Talks on Magnetic Trains
The Grumman Corporation of Long Island and a company affiliated with Japan Airlines are discussing a cooperative venture that could pave the way for magnetically levitated Japanese trains to be introduced to the United States, the companies said today.
While talks are still in the early stages, one idea being discussed is that Grumman and the Japanese company, the HSST Development Corporation, exchange their respective technologies for such "maglev" trains, which float above the tracks like a surfer riding a magnetic wave.


Dollar Sinks Against Yen Despite Fed's Moves
The American dollar, falling all week against the Japanese yen, took a sharp plunge yesterday -- to the lowest level since World War II -- because the traders who buy and sell currencies seem convinced that the Clinton Administration wants a weak dollar to reduce the nation's trade deficit with Japan.
As the dollar fell to 107.20 yen in late New York trading from 108.50 on Wednesday, the Government tried to reverse this impression and stop the slide in the dollar's value.
The Federal Reserve, for the second time this year, sold yen and bought dollars -- hoping that traders would follow its lead and that the demand for dollars would increase the dollar's value.
A Treasury official helped that cause by denying the existence of a Clinton policy favoring a strong yen.


Former Pitt Assistant Under Scrutiny
Former Pittsburgh assistant basketball coach JOHN SARANDREA has emerged as the central figure in an National Collegiate Athletic Association investigation into allegations a middleman helped the school recruit former New York City high school star JAMAL FAULKNER in 1989.
The N.C.A.A. charged that Sarandrea, now the basketball coach at New Castle (Pa.) High School, used a friend, SAM ALBANO, to help sign Faulkner. (AP)


TV Weekend; What Might Have Been: Robert F. Kennedy
"Robert F. Kennedy: The Man and the Memories" is an affectionate review of a career that was ended by assassination almost 25 years ago.
Relatives, friends and associates look back warmly on the brother who might have been President.
For them the years have not dimmed the glow of his promise, and the old criticisms of cold-bloodedness in pursuit of victory or vengeance, briefly alluded to here, give way to recollections of his soft-heartedness, particularly in his commitment to civil rights.
Criticism is muted of a man whose political career began in the service of Senator Joseph R. McCarthy and ended in a race against Senator Eugene McCarthy, but this is not meant to be a stringent analysis.
Tom Brokaw, the evening's host, is in the spirit of the enterprise when he uses the commercial breaks for commercials of his own: "Bobby Kennedy's legacy cannot be denied."


Joseph M. Waters, 89, Food Industry Official
Joseph Michael Waters, a retired food industry executive who started as a 14-year-old errand boy for the A.&amp;P. in Jersey City, died on Wednesday at his home in the Village at Manor Park, a retirement community in Boynton Beach, Fla.
He was 89.
He died of natural causes in his sleep, his family said.


Review/Photography; 2 Germans on a Bridge From Then to Now
The central role of photography in contemporary German art has been amply demonstrated in several recent shows in Manhattan, most notably the survey of artists working with the medium that was presented this spring at the Guggenheim SoHo.
Now, an intriguing show at the Sander Gallery highlights an earlier, less widely known chapter in the history of German photography since World War II.
Featuring work by Peter Keetman and Otto Steinert, the exhibition focuses on German photography in the 1950's, before Joseph Beuys, Bernd and Hilla Becher, and others legitimized photography as a medium for making art.
The exhibition shows that Mr.
Keetman, now 87, and Steinert, who died in 1978, tried with mixed success to extend the rich heritage of German photography from before the war.


Groups Push for Abortion Coverage in Health Plan
A coalition of 84 organizations -- including labor unions, civil rights groups and a variety of supporters of abortion rights -- began a campaign today to push for coverage of abortion services in any national health care package.
The announcement came as President Clinton gave a tepid statement on the issue in a televised town hall meeting.
"I don't think a decision has been made about that," Mr.
Clinton said, although he went on to say the health care task force would try to insure that "we shouldn't take away from people some right they now have in their health insurance plans."


Costs of Incarceration
To the Editor:
"The Killer Who Wants to Die" (editorial, May 8) advocates that Thomas Grasso be extradited from Oklahoma to New York to serve 20 years in jail before being returned to Oklahoma for execution.
You state that the criminal, who prefers to be executed as soon as possible, cannot choose his fate.
That's fine, but what of the waste and cost to taxpayers for incarcerating him for 20 years, maintaining his health and paying for all the legal manipulations likely to surround his existence, only to have him executed 20 years from now.
And all this for a vicious murderer, convicted in both states.


Reviews/ Film; Sprucing Up Hoboken, Ready or Not
"Delivered Vacant" was shown as part of the 1992 New York Film Festival.
Following are excerpts from Vincent Canby's review, which appeared in The New York Times on Oct. 10, 1992.
The film opens today at the Cinema Village, 22 East 12th Street, Greenwich Village.
Nora Jacobson's "Delivered Vacant" is a big, long, ungainly documentary about the gentrification of Hoboken.
Though not neat, it is a fine, rich film, a large lode of raw material accumulated by Ms.
Jacobson over an eight-year period beginning in 1984.


Restaurants
Rosa Mexicano
Since it opened in 1985, Rosa Mexicano has remained far above the lackluster pack of Mexican restaurants in New York City.
A few other authentic spots can be found -- Zarela on Second Avenue and Mi Cocina on Jane Street in the West Village, for example -- but for the most part Mexican food here is considered a cheap, low-octane fill-up by struggling post-collegiates who ameliorate the experience with buckets of margaritas.
Josephina Howard, the chef and co-owner, is an enthusiastic proponent of regional Mexican cuisine, and her diverse menu reflects that.
You will not encounter any jalapeno Alamos at Rosa Mexicano.
Dishes are highly seasoned but rarely fiery.
If one criticism can be made about the menu, it is that dishes rarely change.
Daily specials aside, the lineup today is for the most part the same as when the restaurant was reviewed in 1990.
And that review remarked: "The menu has not changed much since my last review in 1986." Sticking to a winning formula makes sense, to be sure, but at the same time one expects innovation from a restaurant of this caliber.


Corrections
An article on Wednesday about fund-raising efforts by the Democratic Party named the Assistant Trade Representative for public affairs incorrectly.
She is Anne Luzzatto.


Ruined Works Stand as Symbols of Vulnerability
The car bomb that exploded yesterday in Florence wreaked havoc on the Uffizi Gallery, the greatest repository of Italian art, and on the surrounding area, damaging more than a dozen works of art, including paintings by Giotto, Sebastiano del Piombo and Rubens.
Major works by the lesser masters Gerrit van Honthorst and Bartolomeo Manfredi were completely destroyed.
The cherished galleries on the side of the building housing the museum's great Botticellis, Fra Angelicos and Mantegnas, and the rooms containing the supreme collection of drawings in all of Italy, fortunately suffered little.
These galleries will reopen within weeks, according to the museum's director, Annamaria Petrioli Tofani.


Ex-Loose Cannon Karl Aims for N.B.A. Finals
The Seattle SuperSonics are interrupting their spat to go for the championship.
Their players often treat Coach George Karl like a substitute teacher, talking back to him and not playing nice with others, but a buzzer sounded Wednesday night in Phoenix with him deliriously wrapped in their arms.
Thanks to Sam Perkins's late 3-point heave, a shot he practiced again today 200 times, the Sonics defeated the Phoenix Suns, 103-99, to even this four-of-seven-game Western Conference final at one victory apiece.
Karl, who had done his best not to tackle the referees that night, sought out Perkins for a hug, and Perkins, feeling something tugging at his waist, inadvertently elbowed Karl on his bald spot.


Doctor's Orders: Take a Bench by the Ocean With Wheels and No Shoes


NEWS SUMMARY
International A2-8  6 DIE IN BLAST AT ITALY GALLERY  A car bomb exploded in Florence behind the Uffizi Gallery, killing 6 people and wounding 26, and destroying or damaging dozens of works in its priceless art collection.
A1  The bombing was a reminder of the vulnerability of art in public.
A8


MORGAN STANLEY GROUP INC. (N)
The Morgan Stanley Group announced record quarterly profits yesterday, sharing fully in Wall Street's boom times.
The net income of $198.8 million was nearly 40 percent higher than analysts' estimates, and helped raise Morgan Stanley's stock sharply.


Modest Proposals From Immodest Fans
"I will accept the job," said Bill Murray, who is also part-owner of the St.
Paul Saints of the Northern League, "if you give me unlimited powers."
"Get serious," I told the comic actor.
"If the job came with unlimited powers, I would take it myself."


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  American League
TEXAS RANGERS -- Activated Jeff Huson and Bill Ripken, infielders, from the 15-day disabled list.
Optioned Jon Shave, infielder, to Oklahoma City of the American Association and Benji Gil, shortstop, to Tulsa of the Texas League.
National League
CHICAGO CUBS -- Signed Brent Woodall, pitcher; Dwon Knighton, outfielder; and Anthony King and Ariel Martin, infielders, to minor-league contracts.
COLORADO ROCKIES -- Announced the retirement of Dale Murphy, outfielder.
Signed Kevin Ward, outfielder, and assigned him to Colorado Springs of the Pacific Coast League.
Placed Jim Olander, Colorado Springs outfielder, on the 7-day disabled list.
MONTREAL EXPOS -- Claimed Cliff Brantley, pitcher, off waivers from the Philadelphia Phillies.
Designated Jonathan Hurst, pitcher, for assignment.


THE CLINTON BUDGET: A Victory Most Precious; Breathlessly Narrow, Desperately Needed, Clinton's Triumph in the House Buys Time
Standing on the burning deck, President Clinton sailed his ship to victory in the House of Representatives tonight.
It was a harrowingly narrow victory, desperately needed after months of adversity, hard won.
It was not decisive, but the Administration gained time to prepare itself for other, harder battles ahead.


Elementary School in Brooklyn Is Named in Honor of Slain Principal


Right Now, It's Take Me Out to the Basketball Game
Major league baseball need only look at the National Basketball Association for a television model to emulate.
The N.B.A.'s intelligent blend of network (NBC) and cable (TNT) exposure feeds, rather than cannibalizes, itself.
The ratings and advertising successes of the national packages have made wise investments of the $875 million that NBC and TNT will have paid in total for four years of league rights through next season.
NBC's new deal to continue will pay $750 million.
TNT's upcoming deal will also carry an increase.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article in Business Day yesterday about the Tandy Corporation's agreement to sell some computer operations to AST Research Inc. misstated the price of AST's stock on Wednesday.
It rose $1, to $16.125, in Nasdaq trading.


To the Beach: A Baedeker for Baskers; Fire Island
I am the day-tripper triumphant as I step onto the dirt road that leads to Kismet.
I have beaten the crowds on Long Island's parkways to Robert Moses State Park, left my car in the last lot before the Fire Island lighthouse, and now have my choice of beaches.
How far do I want to walk?
Is this a day for solitude?
For the shouts and grunts of volleyball behind me?
For the domestic normalcy of Saltaire, where children build sand castles while fathers wrestle with Sunday papers flapping in the breeze?
I walk on among dragonflies and red-winged blackbirds and an occasional deer.


No Vim and No Victory For Bull Inthe Heather
While star horses from all over North America were priming for the clusters of major races scheduled at Belmont Park in the next week, Bull Inthe Heather was probably running himself out of the Belmont Stakes when he ran fourth in a prep race yesterday with no style or spirit.
This was the horse who dashed into prominence by winning the Florida Derby at odds of 29-1 in March, and was the second choice to win the Kentucky Derby four weeks ago.
But he ran a distant 11th that day, and he ran a distant fourth yesterday in his debut on grass in an allowance race for 3-year-olds while the French-raced colt Namaqualand was winning by nearly three lengths over Palashall.


To the Beach: A Baedeker for Baskers; Robert Moses
A child growing up in Nassau County has his pick of beaches.
There were the gentle beaches of the North Shore, acceptable for dipping toes the first hot day of spring, but as exciting as a flag drooping on a windless day.
Jones Beach State Park was better, with its choice of sites: West End 2 and its long expanse of shell-flecked sand for the rowdy set, Field 6 for quieter types who appreciated the short walk to the rolling waves.
The Hamptons were a distant abstraction.
But the best beach of all was Robert Moses State Park.
As a Long Island boy who was not born to be wild, but did his best imitation, I exulted in the freedom of skimming east on Ocean Parkway, arm bare to the sun, past Jones Beach, breathing in the salt brine and exhaling memories of parents too fearful of the dread Atlantic undertow to go anywhere but placid Zach's Bay.


U.S. Takes Retaliation On Europe
Following through on a public pledge last month, the Clinton Administration released regulations yesterday that would ban companies from nine European countries from bidding for Federal Government contracts for legal services, certain telephone service and other services.
The ban, which takes effect today, covers $29 billion a year worth of contracts andis in retaliation for new European Community rules that discourage sales of American telecommunications equipment there, said an American official who insisted on anonymity.
But the actual effect of the sanctions is likely to be tiny because many of the services are highly local, like operating airport concessions.


Editorial Notebook: Ending Apartheid at College; First, Dismantle Segregated Housing
Hillary Rodham Clinton missed an opportunity in her commencement address at the University of Pennsylvania.
Responding to recent racial incidents there, Mrs.
Clinton urged students to respect free speech, even in the face of hateful utterances.
That's sound advice, as far as it goes.
But the deeper problem is a pattern of racial alienation that Penn and other colleges accept and perpetuate.
Many campuses today look like America during its Jim Crow period.
In some places, blacks have segregated living arrangements, segregated counselors, segregated pages in the newspaper -- even segregated graduation ceremonies.
Brunetta Wolfman, who teaches at George Washington University, describes this as "the warm, dark cocoon of resegregation" where "black students live, socialize and interact primarily with one another, remaining at the margins of campus life."


Khmer Rouge Puzzle: Softer Strategy
One after another, Khmer Rouge trucks have rumbled down the unpaved streets of this rebel-held town this week, carrying hundreds of Cambodians who had been brought here on the order of the Maoist guerrillas with a single mission: to vote.
"We agree with the elections now because Prince Sihanouk has come back," said a 29-year-old farmer, her back curved after years spent hunched over rice paddies that are now the territory of the Khmer Rouge.
She referred to Prince Norodom Sihanouk, the former Cambodian monarch.
Another voter explained, "We come now because the Khmer Rouge allow us to come. There is no problem with voting now."


CHRONICLE
Forty musicians from Russia and Belarus and 40 musicians from the United States, all between 17 and 25, will gather at Yale University on June 15 to become, for a five-week stint, the American Russian Youth Orchestra.
Behind their odyssey -- they will give 14 concerts, from the United Nations in New York to Cathedral Square inside the Kremlin -- is a tale of international negotiations with two governments in significant transition.


How Did Dell Computer Stumble?
The price wars that have produced a mass market for personal computers, saving American companies and individuals billions of dollars in the last year, can be traced to the stone-and-mirrored-glass headquarters of the Dell Computer Corporation in Austin, Tex.
The upstart Dell, more than any other company, set the standards for price and customer service that by last year could no longer be ignored by larger rivals like the Compaq Computer Corporation and the International Business Machines Corporation.
First Compaq, then I.B.M., were forced to cut prices sharply and change the way they do business -- and both have made the transformation with remarkable success.


Holy Gut-Wrencher! Batman the Ride!
IT lasts only two minutes: a 30-second climb and then a diving, looping, veering, tilting descent.
That descent, on the well-hyped new Batman the Ride, at Six Flags Great Adventure theme park here, is a thrill-rider's delight.
Smooth but sudden twists, unlikely curves and 360-degree rotations both vertical and horizontal wreak havoc not with something as prosaic as the stomach, but as delicate as the ear's semicircular canals: it leaves your head spinning.
But Batman the Ride seeks to be something more than a highly evolved roller coaster.
It orchestrates its inevitable waiting time -- likely to be considerably more than an hour on a weekend afternoon -- toward two goals.
Beyond its vertiginous thrills, the Batman ride aims for psychological effects.


Florida Seeks to Block Insurers' Cuts in Coverage
The Florida Legislature moved yesterday to prevent insurance companies from dropping hundreds of thousands of property insurance policies in the state until the end of the hurricane season in November.
The effort came after an increasing public outcry against plans by Allstate to reduce its customers in the state by 300,000.


Reid Is Leaving McCaffrey &amp; McCall
Daniel S. Reid, who joined McCaffrey &amp; McCall in New York less than 14 months ago as president and chief operating officer, said yesterday that he would leave the agency.
He said that he and Michael B. Robertson, chairman, chief executive and creative director, were at odds on strategies for attracting new business.
"The bottom line is that Mike and I just have a different point of view," said Mr.
Reid, who came to McCaffrey in April 1992 from Leo Burnett U.S.A. in Chicago, where he was executive vice president of client services and new-business director.
Mr.
Reid said that he preferred to pursue accounts with $10 million or more in billings, while Mr.
Robertson sought smaller accounts.


British Finance Minister Is Ousted in Cabinet Shuffle
In a bid to restore public confidence in his Government, Prime Minister John Major shuffled his Cabinet today, dumping Norman Lamont, the embattled Chancellor of the Exchequer who has presided over Britain's longest recession since the 1930's.
As finance minister, Mr.
Lamont, 51 years old, had become the chief target of the Prime Minister's critics, and a national symbol of the Government's political decline, as unemployment rolls topped more than three million in the first year of Mr.
Major's Government.


Ex-East German Leader Convicted Of Vote Fraud but Not Punished
A former East German Prime Minister, Hans Modrow, was found guilty today of election fraud, but a judge declined to sentence him to prison or fine him.
Although Mr.
Modrow had not directly denied the charge, he insisted that the court had no right to try him or anyone else for crimes committed in East Germany.
He asserted that he was the victim of a plot to eliminate him and his Democratic Socialist Party from German political life.


A Brand X Foreign Policy
From Secretary of State Warren Christopher to White House Press Secretary Dee Dee Myers, Administration officials have been rushing to distance themselves from background remarks that Under Secretary of State Peter Tarnoff made at a reporters' lunch Tuesday.
Persisting in the strange conventions of government doublespeak even after Mr.
Tarnoff's identity became widely known, Ms.
Myers yesterday referred to the State Department's third-ranking official only as "Brand X."
Mr.
Tarnoff's argument is less foolish than the charade it provoked.
He insisted that the Administration's decision to defer to European preferences over Bosnia was not the amateurish stumble many perceived it as, but a considered choice based on a new approach to the post-cold-war world.


RENEWAL BACKED FOR CHINA TRADE
President Clinton said today that he would renew China's favorable trade status for one year to help its modernization efforts, but he suggested that any future renewal would depend on China's making progress on human rights.
Administration officials had recommended Monday that Mr.
Clinton steer such a middle course between groups pressing for trade sanctions as a lever to force change in China and business's demands not to encumber trade with this huge, fast-growing country.


Chang and Korda Wilt Against Late Bloomers
Two late-blooming German upset artists, one of whom goes involuntarily by the name of "Baby Boom-Boom" back in the homeland where Boris Becker remains an unavoidable icon, commandeered the French Open this afternoon and not only chased off former champion Michael Chang, but disposed of last year's runner-up, Petr Korda, as well.
In both cases, experience bowed to exuberance.
First Chang, in a match suspended by rain and gloom Wednesday night, succumbed, 1-6, 6-3, 6-4, 6-2, to the error-free ballistics of 25-year-old Bernd Karbacher.
Then Korda, with vexation in every blown backhand, was outplayed, 6-3, 7-6 (7-4), 7-6 (10-8), by a well-traveled young man in a white rally cap, 22-year-old Marc Gollner, a German diplomat's son and Becker's heir apparent.


At the Bar; On Abraham Ribicoff, the wise man behind two finalists for a Supreme Court seat.
Nearly 40 years have passed since he was elected governor of Connecticut.
Three decades have passed since he joined the Kennedy Administration, a quarter century since he jousted with Mayor Richard J. Daley at the 1968 Democratic National Convention, and 13 years since he left the Senate.
But when Abraham Ribicoff considers the current Supreme Court contenders, he sees his handiwork.
It is more than arguable that but for Mr.
Ribicoff, neither of the two Federal judges said to be on President Clinton's short short list -- Judge Jon O. Newman of the United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit, in New York, or Chief Judge Stephen G. Breyer of the First Circuit, in Boston -- would be judges at all.
To put it bluntly, Mr.
Ribicoff made the first and saved the second.


To the Beach: A Baedeker For Baskers
THE sun is high, the sky clear, the sand smooth and warm.
The waves, steel blue, white-capped, seem to roll in right off the horizon and stretch out asymmetrically as far as the eye can see.
What a canvas on which to paint a good time!
A day at the beach always begins the same way: hopeful.
So why is it inevitable that bodies that glisten and do their bathing suits proud in the morning seem to sag a little and dry out by the end of the afternoon?
Why is it that the sand you can't wait to have warm the bottoms of your feet ends up ruining a good Eskimo Pie?
What is the law that says you must ache with sunburn?
And what about that feeling of salt drying on your shoulders that makes your skin feel as if it's stretched too tight?


Guatemalan's Power Grab Brings Street Protests
Demonstrators took to the streets for the first time today to protest President Jorge Serrano Elias's use of dictatorial powers, and the United States cut off most of its aid to Guatemala.
The protests were tentative and relatively small, but they seemed to raise tensions quickly after two days in which it was often difficult to tell from the city's movements that anything had changed.
The appearance of hundreds of demonstrators outside the Supreme Court building that Mr.
Serrano shut down on Tuesday was enough to draw scores of military policemen and several armored vehicles.


Memorial Day Weekend Events
Here is a sampling of Memorial Day Weekend events in the New York metropolitan region: NEW YORK CITY Today  FLEET WEEK, Intrepid Sea-Air-Space Museum, Pier 86, 46th Street at the Hudson River, Manhattan.
Demonstrations of helicopter sea-air rescue missions begin on the Intrepid's flight deck at 1 P.M.
Public boardings of the aircraft carrier John F. Kennedy and other vessels, including a Russian destroyer, 1 to 4:30 P.M.
Visitors can also board four Coast Guard ships.
Free.
Today through Monday.
The museum's exhibit is "The Battle of the Atlantic." Hours: 10 A.M. to 5 P.M.
Admission: $7; $6 for the elderly; $4 for children 6 to 12; under 6 free.
Information: (212) 245-0072.
BASEBALL: METS VS.
REDS, Shea Stadium, Flushing, Queens.
Tonight at 7:40; tomorrow and Sunday at 1:40 P.M.
Tickets: $6.50 to $15.
Information: (718) 507-8499.


U.S. Calls 15 Waste Sites in Stratford Hazardous
Federal officials declared today that widespread hazardous waste contamination from a former brake manufacturer constituted an urgent public health threat here.
The decision may cause the 15 contaminated properties here to be added to the nation's Superfund list of the worst cases of industrial pollution.


Mexico Wins, U.S. Workers Lose in Trade Pact; Smith Corona's Move
To the Editor:
I would like to make clear in response to "Free Trade's Huge Costs" by Edmund G. Brown Jr. (Op-Ed, May 2), that Smith Corona's decision to move some of its manufacturing to Mexico had nothing to do with the proposed North American Free Trade Agreement.
Our decision to relocate was due primarily to our frustrating experience with the lax, inefficient and ineffective United States enforcement of United States trade laws.
We realized that the Government would not use the trade laws to restore a competitive market soon.


Strike One For Reggie?
Owner George Steinbrenner sent a memo to his special assistant, Reggie Jackson, admonishing him for attending the Knicks-Bulls playoff game Tuesday night at Madison Square Garden while the Yankees were playing the Orioles at Yankee Stadium.
Although Jackson would only speak generally about the memo, one person who saw it said the Hall of Fame outfielder was criticized for embarrassing the organization by choosing the Knicks over the Yankees.


Step on It If You're Fixin' To Pass
The 33 drivers who will start the Indianapolis 500 took their last practice laps on the reconfigured Indianapolis Motor Speedway today, and the picture that emerged from the final session, called Carburetion Day, is the possibility of a confusing, unpredictable race on Sunday.
Although many drivers have said passing will be more difficult because the turns have been narrowed 12 feet, at least one, Roberto Guerrero, said today that it shouldn't result in a boring race.


Riley Happy With Knicks' Manic Ballet
As the Knicks worked out today in preparation for Game 3 of the Eastern Conference finals Saturday against the Chicago Bulls, workmen repairing an adjoining court behind a partition hammered away full blast.
No one thought it a particularly good idea to send an audio tape of the workout to Phil Jackson.
The Bulls' coach already thinks the Knicks got away with using their arms and hands as unregistered weapons in the first two games of the series, won by the Knicks.


Guy Scull Hayes; Public Health Specialist, 81
Dr.
Guy Scull Hayes, an international public health specialist and former associate director of the health sciences division of the Rockefeller Foundation, died on May 19 at his home in North Brooklin, Me.
He was 81.
Dr.
Hayes, a graduate of Harvard Medical School, joined the Rockefeller Foundation in 1943 and worked in Brazil, Iran, Iraq and Colombia.
He returned to New York in 1968 to become the foundation's associate director of health sciences, and retired in 1977.


To the Beach: A Baedeker for Baskers; Orchard Beach
In a blue-collar borough, it's only appropriate that the beach is man-made.
Orchard Beach, a 1.1-mile sliver of surf and sand, has been the working person's urban oasis for more than half a century, ever since Robert Moses dumped bargeloads of sand from the Rockaways and carved it out of the sprawl of Pelham Bay Park in the Bronx.


Macy's Move to Speed Cost-Cutting Aids Its Bond Prices
Wall Street traders said that R. H. Macy &amp; Company's junk bonds were nearly impossible to buy yesterday after the retailer said on Wednesday that it was accelerating plans to reduce costs and expenses over the next two years.
Macy, which is operating the Macy's, Bullock's and I. Magnin chains as well as a chain of specialty stores under bankruptcy court protection, released a revised five-year business plan on Wednesday that projected a quicker recovery for the $6.5 billion business than it had initially anticipated.


Dow Hits New High but Other Indexes Lag
The Dow Jones industrial average rose to another record yesterday, gaining 14.67 points to 3,554.83, but in contrast to Wednesday's record session, the rest of the market failed to follow.
Analysts said the market might have lacked direction because of the House of Representatives' scheduled vote on President Clinton's economic program.
The budget plan passed, some five hours after the market closed, by a vote of 219 to 213.


Jack Allen Kapland; Orthopedic Surgeon, 79
Jack Allen Kapland, an orthopedic surgeon in New York City for more than 45 years, died on Wednesday at St.
Luke's-Roosevelt Hospital Center.
He was 79 and lived in Manhattan and Palm Beach, Fla.
The cause was pneumonia, said his daughter, Bonnie Postel.


Japan Has Strict Trade Plan
Japan will propose strict ground rules for its crucial trade talks with the United States next month that would exclude certain topics, including the setting of numerical targets, from discussion, Japanese officials said today.
The proposed rules, which would pre-empt certain key American demands at the outset, would also allow Japan to suspend the talks if it was threatened with sanctions by the United States, according to a document of six "underlying principles" that the Government of Japan has drawn up to guide it in the negotiations.
The talks are aimed at developing a new framework for trade between the world's two largest economies.


On My Mind; Clinton Voter Stays Glad!
She swooped at me across the banquet room like a lovely bird of passion, glistening with the joy and fulfillment of vengeance.
"Now," she cried in high Republican ecstasy.
"Now aren't you sorry you voted for Clinton?"


A Deficit-Cutting Scorecard
To Republicans, President Clinton's economic package is the largest tax increase in history.
Democrats insist it is the biggest deficit cut.
Inevitably, both sides are wrong. And right.


What Price Beauty? Oh, Say $2,000 or So
The continuing investigation into that pressing political question -- What price beauty? -- widened today, with the disclosure that the White House at least twice recently arranged for Cristophe of Beverly Hills and a makeup artist to fly from Los Angeles to Washington to coif and colorize Hillary Rodham Clinton for magazine cover photographs.
For the warm and friendly photograph of Mrs.
Clinton that adorned the cover of the May issue of Family Circle, which is owned by The New York Times Company, the magazine paid fees and airplane travel costs for Cristophe and the makeup stylist that amounted to $2,000, said Jacqueline Leo, the editor in chief of Family Circle.


To the Beach: A Baedeker for Baskers; Long Beach Island
You can lead a child to water but you can't make him swim in it.
Or sail on it.
Or even look at it.
When I was young, my parents had a summer house on Long Beach Island, on the Jersey Shore between Seaside Heights and Atlantic City.
The house was right on the dunes and had a terrific view of the ocean.
The only thing that spoiled the view was me.
I was a spoiled suburban child who failed to see the point of driving two hours just to exchange a view of green lawns for one of green water swilling around outside the window.
I spent my summers hunting for bits of a city I hadn't discovered yet.
Dropped off for a sailing lesson, I would loiter a while at the door of the yacht club, then dash to the miniature golf course next door.
Learning to ride a bike was a pleasure because I could pedal away from the beach and find some stray bits of city thrown up on the island like jetsam.
The shop that sold amber jewelry.
The Chinese gift store, a miniature Chinatown, with lanterns, chopsticks and the clam shells that you plunged into water, releasing paper flowers.
I had a particular passion for the exterminator jeep that tore about the streets at night, releasing great Tiepolo clouds of poison.


Suit Filed Over Executive's Pay
Four shareholders have sued the directors of the Citizens Utilities Company in a complaint over the chief executive's pay package.
The complaints, filed on Wednesday in Chancery Court in Wilmington, Del., accused the directors of wasting corporate assets by awarding Leonard Tow, Citizens' chief executive, $21.6 million last year, and for agreeing to give him annual retirement benefits equal to two-thirds of his final year's compensation.


RJR Hires Chairman of Conagra as New Chief
At a time when its stock has crested and senior executives seem to be heading for the exits, RJR Nabisco announced yesterday that it had coaxed Charles M. Harper away from Conagra Inc., where he is the chairman, to be its new chief executive.
The appointment, which takes effect on Monday, means that the man who started Healthy Choice foods after having recovered from a heart attack will soon be running a company that gets more than half its $15.7 billion in sales from cigarettes.


Thurgood Marshall Is Heard Again
The Supreme Court papers of the late Justice Thurgood Marshall have landed in the public domain, where they belong.
Chief Justice William Rehnquist, seeking to preserve the confidentiality of Court deliberations, has upbraided the Library of Congress for making the papers available so soon after the Justice's 1991 retirement and only four months after his death.
But James Billington, the Librarian of Congress, responds that he acted faithfully to the wishes of the donor.
In any case, Dr.
Billington clearly acted in the best interests of the public, which has a right to information that will help it determine how well its institutions, the Court included, are functioning.


Christopher Reaffirms Leading U.S. Role in World
Secretary of State Warren Christopher said today that despite the Government's fiscal difficulties, the United States would continue to take the lead in international affairs.
Mr.
Christopher made his comments in the wake of questions that arose when Peter Tarnoff, the Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs, told reporters on Tuesday that the Federal budget deficit would force the United States to be more judicious in deciding when to assume a leadership role in international crises.


FIRST LADY ANGERS DOCTORS ON COSTS
Declaring that the President "may need us more than we need him," a top official of the American Medical Association today rejected Hillary Rodham Clinton's accusations of price gouging and said her attacks had grossly oversimplified the problems of the health-care system.
Leaders of the association said they were alarmed and dismayed by Mrs.
Clinton's speech on Wednesday that took the health-care industry to task.
While she did not identify any offenders, she denounced special interests and said that "too many people have made too much money" providing health care and health insurance.


Louis O. Coxe, 75; His Poems Reflected New England Roots
Louis O. Coxe, a professor, playwright and poet whose works reflect the spirit and nature of New England, died on Tuesday at the Maine Veterans Home in Augusta.
He was 75 and lived in Brunswick, Me.
His wife, Edith, said the cause was cardiopulmonary arrest and that he had had Alzheimer's disease for 11 years.


Vaccine Shields Monkeys From Vaginal Infection With AIDS, Study Finds
In an advance along the demanding road to development of an AIDS vaccine, researchers have shown that a vaccine derived from an AIDS-like monkey virus can prevent vaginal infection in the animals, as might occur in human heterosexual sex.
While experimental vaccines had previously been shown to give protection to monkeys, none had worked for heterosexual transmission.
Experts praised the new study, which is being published today in the journal Science.
But they warned that it would take years of more research to develop a human AIDS vaccine, if one can be devised.


Another Setback For Clio Awards
In another setback to efforts to revive the Clio Awards, the awards' new owner, James M. Smyth, said yesterday that he would postpone the 1993 Clios to September from June 30.
To try infusing new prestige into what had been advertising's best-known prize, Mr.
Smyth has formed a Clio executive committee composed of three leading industry executives: Jay Chiat, chairman and chief executive of Chiat/Day; Richard B. (Rick) Fizdale, chairman and chief creative officer at the Leo Burnett Company, and Keith Reinhard, chairman and chief executive at DDB Needham Worldwide.
Also, Mr.
Symth said that he was working on a prime-time television special on the 1993 awards.


Art in Review
'Two Painters/Two Decades' 'Jan Muller and Bob Thompson'
Vanderwoude Tananbaum  24 East 81st Street  Manhattan  Through June 11
This is an astute pairing of two good and little-seen artists.
Jan Muller and Bob Thompson had much in common, although they came from very different backgrounds: Muller was born in Germany and settled in the United States in 1941, while Thompson was a black American who gravitated toward Europe.
Both were figurative painters whose work was out of sync with the vanguard styles of their time, and both died young.
Muller succumbed to heart disease in 1958, when he was 36; Thompson died of complications from heroin addiction in 1966, at 28.


Batboy Is Called Out By Labor Officials, Who Vow a Review
Facing accusations that insensitive bureaucrats were trampling on the national pastime, the United States Department of Labor says it is reconsidering the case of a 14-year-old Georgia batboy who was sacked after his employment was found to run afoul of child-labor laws.
Shortly after a local newspaper published an article about the Class A Savannah Cardinals' new 14-year-old batboy early this month, a Labor Department official told the team that their employment of Tommy McCoy violated child-labor laws, which state that 14- and 15-year-olds must not work past 7 on school nights or 9 during the summer.


Floored in 4, On Feet in 9, Stopped in 10
At least the Yankees made it exciting.
Satisfying?
No.
Exhilarating?
No.
An extra-inning loss never is and last night's was particularly galling to the Yankees because Steve Farr thought he had struck out Mike Devereaux on the pitch before Devereaux delivered the single that carried the Orioles to a 4-3 victory in 10 innings at Yankee Stadium.
With runners on first and second, two out and an 0-2 count on Devereaux, Farr fired a fastball that he thought was on the outside corner and began shuffling toward the dugout.
Umpire Mark Johnson called it a ball and Farr looked on in disbelief.


Sports of The Times; Barkley Says Something Important
AT last, some reality in sports advertising.
Charles Barkley directs his laser-like glare at the camera and announces he is a basketball player, not a role model.
Parents are role models.
He is not raising the world's children, and thank goodness for that.
We have seen Barkley spit at the crowd, leap over tables to go after officials, and elbow unwary Angolan Olympians because, as he put it, he couldn't be sure the bloke was not carrying a spear.
Beautiful.
Now the burden is off.
Charles Barkley has renounced his role as surrogate father-big brother to lonely sports fans seeking a hero.


To the Beach: A Baedeker for Baskers; Asbury Park
In a 1973 song, Bruce Springsteen called Asbury Park "little Eden." Twenty years later, the boardwalk is littered with reminders of its past glories.
The grand Convention Hall, with its painted brick facade and oceanic architectural detail, stands like an empty sunlit cavern, its box- office windows shuttered and its floor invaded by sand (Asbury suffered a great deal of beach erosion from last winter's storms).
At the other end of the boardwalk, the once mighty Casino plays host to flea markets where postcards that read "Greetings From Asbury Park, N.J." go for 50 cents or three for $1.
The walls and vaulted ceilings still bear faded letters announcing scooter games and roller-rink skating.
But summer brings plenty of signs of new life to Asbury Park.
Candy shops, their interiors as pretty and delicate as doll's houses, sell homemade fudge and salt-water taffy.
The fortuneteller Madam Marie, her lips painted and her hair curled, sits in a little white shack with an all-seeing eye drawn on the side.
She gossips with her friends and looks a trifle disappointed when a customer shows up.
At night, clubs like the Fast Lane, with its bleacher seats and seaside wall decor, present bluesy bar bands and alternative rockers; people drink beer and spill out into the street to touch the salty night air.


Thomas F. Galvin, 66, Developer, Architect and Builder, Is a Suicide
Thomas F. Galvin, an architect, builder and real-estate developer who was called in 10 years ago by Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo to complete the delayed construction of the Jacob K. Javits Convention Center in Manhattan, died yesterday in Manhattan.
He was 66 years old and lived in Forest Hills, Queens.
The police said Mr.
Galvin jumped to his death from his 12th-floor office at 10 Rockefeller Center.
He left several notes, but the police will not disclose their contents, said Lieut.
Raymond O'Donnell, a police spokesman.


Departure Is Expected At M-G-M
A year and a half after being appointed to breathe new financial life into ailing Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer Inc., Dennis Stanfill is expected to resign as co-chief executive because of a disagreement with the studio's owner, Credit Lyonnais.
M-G-M officials, who spoke on condition of anonymity, said today that the studio had planned to announce Mr.
Stanfill's resignation after a scheduled meeting of M-G-M's board in Paris today.
But that meeting was postponed until Friday.


Review/Art; A Sample of Drawings From the Getty's Riches
The drawings collection at the J. Paul Getty Museum in Malibu, Calif., a selection from which has gone on view at the Metropolitan Museum of Art, is one of the recent success stories in the museum world.
A cynic might say the collection goes to show merely what great wads of money can buy.
And to a point, that cynic would be right.
Certainly no other museum and few private collectors could have afforded the array of pricey works that the Getty acquired since it began buying drawings a dozen years ago.
But there is money well spent and money merely spent, and this exhibition of 121 works proves that the world's richest museum, as it has inevitably come to be known, has distinguished itself above all in this department.


Agreed: It's Barkley and Jordan
Charles Barkley of the Suns, the National Basketball Association's most valuable player, and Michael Jordan of the Bulls, the league's scoring champion for a record-tying seventh straight time, were unanimous selections to the 1992-93 all-N.B.A. team announced yesterday.
Joining the Phoenix forward and the Chicago guard on the first team were forward Karl Malone of the Utah Jazz, center Hakeem Olajuwon of the Houston Rockets and guard Mark Price of the Cleveland Cavaliers.


CHRONICLE
Something for those who need their fix of TINA BROWN news this week: The editor of The New Yorker watched her caricature go up on the walls of Sardi's this week.
"I think this is the most improbable thing that ever happened to me, but I will try to put on as good a show as all those other people on the wall," she said the other day.
"This is a wonderful little club that I never expected, as an editor, to be able to join. This gives me a guest pass."


The Art Market
Where an Arc Once Ruled
The General Services Administration has come up with a new and decidedly politically correct plan for the space surrounding 26 Federal Plaza in lower Manhattan.
It involves the American sculptor Beverly Pepper and the Boston landscape architect Martha Schwartz, and the new scheme comes with the neighborhood seal of approval.
Four years have passed since the furor over Richard Serra's "Tilted Arc," the monumental steel sculpture that bisected the space in front of 26 Federal Plaza from 1981 to 1989.
After a prolonged and heated artistic battle that involved the plaza's tenants and neighborhood residents, the 12-foot-high, 112-foot-long piece was proclaimed by the agency to have rendered the plaza unusable.
In 1989 the work was dismantled and removed, an act that the artist said was tantamount to destroying it.


No Headline
"Today is the day. This is the bullet." -- REPRESENTATIVE AL SWIFT, Democrat of Washington.  [ A12:4. ]


PRESIDENT BACKS A GAY COMPROMISE
President Clinton today endorsed a compromise on ending the ban on homosexuals in the military, emphasizing that the Government should not "appear to be endorsing a gay life style."
The President offered support for the approach of "don't ask, don't tell" -- the label given to a range of plans that would allow homosexuals to serve but leave limits on how open they could be about their sexuality.


Another tobacco company is trying to entice smokers with offerings of merchandise.
ARE millions of smokers too busy to smoke?
They may well be, as another big cigarette brand joins a lengthening list offering clothing and other merchandise as enticements to get them to clip, save, sort and send in proofs of purchase from packages.
Beginning Tuesday, the R. J. Reynolds Tobacco Company will introduce "Winston Weekends," an elaborate national promotional program for its best-selling Winston cigarette line, the country's No. 2 smoke behind Philip Morris's Marlboro.
The program's centerpiece is a 24-page calendar-cum-catalogue, offering 48 merchandise items and 7 sweepstakes to smokers over 21 who clip "Worth a Winston" proof-of-purchase seals from packs of Winston and Winston Select.


Review/Film; A Man, a Woman And a Sperm Bank Yield a 90's Romance
"So you bought sperm!" the horrified Zora Matthews (Nia Long) says accusingly to her mother.
Sarah Matthews (Whoopi Goldberg) has just explained that she conceived Zora by means of artificial insemination, paving the way for "Made in America" to launch a succession of sperm bank jokes.
Ordinarily, a comedy aiming for gags of that order could scarcely lay claim to any delicacy.
But this one, broad as it is in other regards, features charming, well-matched and even subtle performances from its two principal stars.
Tabloid headlines may not mean much to a finished film, but chemistry certainly does.
And "Made in America" pairs Ms.
Goldberg and Ted Danson in a funny, disarming and believable screen romance, the first such movie role Ms.
Goldberg has had.
Seeming warmer and more comfortable in this antic comedy than she has before, Ms.
Goldberg is helped not only by the right co-star but also by the right role.
As the feisty proprietor of a bookstore specializing in African-American topics, she radiates intelligence and humor.
As the mother of Ms.
Long's earnest science student, she manages to seem a lot more youthful than her child.


Joint Chiefs to Get 2 Options on Homosexuals
Defense Secretary Les Aspin will in the next several days present the Joint Chiefs of Staff with two policy options to allow homosexuals to serve in the military, senior Defense Department officials said today.
One plan would allow gay troops to declare their homosexuality, though quietly; the other approach most likely would not, although this version is still being refined, a senior Pentagon official said.


Tokyo, Outrageously Costly, Gets More So for Americans
Tokyo has long ranked as the world's most outrageously expensive city.
American tourists loved to go home with tales of street vendors selling muskmelons for $100 apiece.
Now, with a surge in the yen that has shaken Japan for the last three months and driven the American dollar to historic lows, the outrageous has turned to the ridiculous for anyone brave enough to measure prices in dollars.
So ridiculous that when President Clinton arrives here in five weeks for his first economic summit meeting, he won't have to summon a big-name hair stylist to Air Force One to run up a $200 tab.
He can easily drop that much getting his hair styled in the Okura Hotel, where Presidents traditionally stay.


U.S. Studies Expansion Of Phone Links to Cuba
The Clinton Administration is considering allowing American telecommunications companies to expand service in Cuba.
The move would allow private American companies to do business with Cuba for the first time since 1961, when the United States imposed a trade embargo.
Administration and Congressional officials said other policy changes, which they declined to specify, were also being studied.


Perez May Be Heading South to Marlins
The Florida Marlins have contacted TONY PEREZ, fired as the Cincinnati Reds' manager Monday, about working for the expansion club.
"They're a great organization and it's an honor for me that they called me," Perez said yesterday from his Cincinnati apartment.


Fuhr Is Denied Club Membership
A country club whose members include several Buffalo Sabres players and officials has denied membership to Sabres goalie GRANT FUHR, who is black.
An official for Transit Valley Country Club in Amherst, N.Y., a suburb of Buffalo, would not say why Fuhr was rejected but said the decision was not because Fuhr is black.


M.T.A. Agrees to Increase Services for Disabled
In an effort to comply with Federal law, the Metropolitan Transportation Authority agreed yesterday to a sharp increase in transportation services for disabled people in New York City.
The plan announced by the M.T.A and the city would eventually provide transportation to any disabled person who asks for it, said Janette Sadik-Khan, director of the Mayor's Office of Transportation.
The current Access-a-Ride program -- specially equipped vans that shuttle passengers around the city -- is in such demand that many of those eligible do not receive service, preventing them from reaching jobs, schools and recreational activities.


Celebrity Photographer Wants Both Meanings
AFTER a half-century of photographing celebrities, Editta Sherman remains ever-ready for her close-up.
Dramatically lighted portraits of musicians, writers and actors of a bygone era ring the walls of her bright Carnegie Hall aerie, her 8-by-10-view camera still dominating the studio like a mahogany-frame behemoth.
She nods and points to the slightly faded or tilted pictures of "my people"-- Oskar Werner, Leopold Stokowski, Tyrone Power and Yul Brynner, among others -- and delivers a dizzying commentary peppered with asides to long-gone tycoons, heiresses and Broadway swells.


Senior Judges Keep Court System Afloat
To the Editor:
A.
M.
Rosenthal demonstrates in his effort to resist any dismantling of the war on drugs (column, May 18) that he, along with several members of Congress, misunderstands what a senior Federal judge is.


Honors at City College, And Farewell to a Chief
Juan Bosch, the former president of the Dominican Republic, was one of four honorary degree recipients that addressed the 1,900 graduates at City College's 147th commencement yesterday on the campus at 138th Street and Convent Avenue.
The acting president of the college, Augusta Souza Kappner, who gave the main address, opened her speech by quoting the first president of City College, Horace Webster, on the objectives of the school: "The experiment is to be tried, whether the children of the people -- the children of the whole people -- can be educated; and whether an institution of learning of the highest grade can be successfully controlled by the popular will, not the privileged few."


No Headline
This Administration experienced a near-death experience.
We couldn't afford to let him die. -- REPRESENTATIVE DAVE McCURDY, Democrat of Oklahoma.  [ 7:3. ]


Beliefs
Seldom has a national figure stirred so much wonder and speculation in the news media by saying things that most of the American public consider unremarkable.
In an April 6 speech in Austin, Tex., and several interviews since then, Hillary Rodham Clinton talked about the Golden Rule and the Ten Commandments and "common-sense truth." She borrowed the Presidential bully pulpit from her husband, and here is what she declared:


Italians Try to Place Blame For Bomb Damage at Uffizi
In the Michelangelo Room, the walls are cracked and empty, and sunlight filters through a broken roof.
From the Dosso Dossi Room nearby, the empty frames where the windows used to be offer a glimpse of devastation more familiar to the Balkans or Beirut than to this city with its self-image of culture and refinement and taste.
One day after a huge car bomb blast funneled its way from a narrow street below to bludgeon the famed Uffizi Gallery, this city, the custodians of its priceless art and many other Italians seem to be grappling still with the consequences of the outrage.


TV Critic Had Vision Of Medium's True Role
To the Editor:
The New York Times used to promote its classified ads with the slogan "I got my job through The New York Times." The death of Jack Gould, your television critic and reporter from 1944 to 1972 (obituary, May 25), reminded me that I got my job through The Times as Federal Communications Commission chairman in the Kennedy Administration.


Russia Ends Gay Ban
Russia has repealed its Soviet-era law banning homosexuality, according to a long list of changes to the Criminal Code that was published on Thursday by Parliament's newspaper, Rossiskaya Gazeta.


The Everything Solution
The Clintons and their brain trust think the solution to the health care crisis is managed competition.
The idea is that health care consumers -- all of us -- will be organized into large purchasing cooperatives.
The size of these cooperatives will enable them to bargain down the price of care they buy from hospitals and doctors.
That's the theory, anyway.
I don't know if managed competition will work.
But even if it doesn't, the idea behind it -- solving a problem by grouping more people into an existing process -- could be applied to lots of other areas of our national life.
The National Hockey League is already experimenting with the idea.
It has been trying to prop up sagging revenues by allowing almost every team into the playoffs.


Pierce's Dad Shown the Exit
Mary Pierce, seeded 15th, went the distance today against Kimberly Po in the French Open, but Pierce's infamously disruptive dad and coach, Jim, failed to survive beyond the first set of his daughter's 6-7 (7-4), 6-3, 6-3 victory.
Pierce was under increased surveillance today because of overly boisterous behavior during Mary's previous match.
Today, once he began shouting during the first set, he was warned to desist, and when he resumed his tirade at the close of the set, he was escorted from the stands by a cordon of security guards.
Pierce got into a fistfight here last year with two Dutch spectators, and the Kraft Tour this year adopted stricter measures against any spectator, particularly a member of a player's entourage, who exhibits obstreperous behavior during an event.


Fun at Home: Key's 3-Hitter And 4 in 1st
There was finally some fun and frolic for the Yankees last night at Yankee Stadium, a place that has often been a dungeon of doom for them this season.
Blame the home-field disadvantage on the lack of power or the new players still melding, but the Bronx has not been kind to the Yankees.
Last night, it felt the way a home should.
Cozy.
There was Dion James opening the Yankee first by lining a homer off Kirk McCaskill that barely cleared the right-field fence.
Manager Buck Showalter reached for his slippers.
There was Jim Leyritz slicing a two-run homer that hugged the right-field line in the first and also narrowly nudged over the short porch.
Showalter reclined on his couch.
Finally, there was Jimmy Key perplexing the Chicago White Sox with his intelligent pitching, holding them without a hit until the fifth and guiding the Yankees to a 4-0 victory.
Showalter shut out the lights after Key's three-hitter.
It felt good to be home.


Reclusive Artist Gets Attention for the Realists
Were it not for Antonio Lopez Garcia's reclusive nature, his last-minute cancellation of a retrospective of his works here in September 1992 might well have been seen as a publicity stunt.
Indeed, now that the exhibition has finally opened, the contretemps is helping draw crowds to the Reina Sofia art center.
But this 57-year-old Spanish artist's reluctant gesture was, in fact, his way of protesting that Madrid's new museum of modern and contemporary art, which only days earlier had inaugurated its permanent collection, had chosen not to display the works of any member of his generation of Spanish realists.


Suns Win With Fourth-Quarter Surge
Charles Barkley gave a chalk talk before tonight's game here.
"O.K., guys," he said, not amicably.
"What's our favorite play tonight? '2Chuck.' That means get the ball to Chuck and get out of the way."
He then scribbled "2Chuck" on the locker-room board.
"I got to write it down so Paul Westphal won't forget it," he said, and then he was off to shave his head.


Courier on Inside Track Despite Outside Court
Jim Courier toiled today in relative obscurity, a defending champion relegated like a sideshow to a French Open side court, but he shrugged off the indignity and posted his usual result here, where he's now steamrolling along on a 17-match undefeated streak.
His latest victim, Jeff Tarango, was awash in admiration for the two-time champion's unwavering work ethic in the course of their 6-1, 6-7 (7-2), 6-3, 7-5 encounter, when only the merest of second-set lapses prevented Courier from being what Tarango called "flawless."


Chevron Dealers Feel Orphaned
When about 40 Chevron wholesalers in Arkansas gathered at a Hilton hotel in Little Rock on Thursday morning, they had no idea of the severity of the blow that Bill Schroder, a marketing manager for the nation's largest refiner, was about to deliver.
"Let's get right down to it," one wholesaler recalled him as saying.
Mr.
Schroder then told them that Chevron was pulling out of their state after more than a decade, leaving them to fend for themselves, as wholesalers and often as retailers.


Dockside Commerce and Industry; In Fleet Week, Russians Raise Cash; Americans Talk Love
It has been 130 years since a Russian warship docked in New York City, so before steaming into town this week at the helm of his Russian destroyer, Comdr.
Mikhail Soldatov said he tried to bone up with some background reading: Jack London, Mark Twain and James Fenimore Cooper.
Despite all the preparation, many aspects of life in New York City have surprised Commander Soldatov and his crew.
Chief boatswain's mate Nikolai Nagut, for instance, said he was most impressed by New York drivers.
"They are masters of the road, this way the cars move through the traffic," Mr.
Nagut said.


Q &amp; A
Expenses on Form 1099
Q If I receive an I.R.S.
Form 1099-MISC that includes both compensation and reimbursement for out-of-pocket expenses, how can I avoid being liable for income taxes on these expenses?
JOHN ANDERSON, Manhattan
A Independent contractors who have accounted for expenses and who receive a Form 1099 that includes these expenses should explain the situation to the company that issued the form.


Andrew Stein's Lesson
Andrew Stein got the message: New Yorkers weren't going to elect him mayor.
So he dropped out of the campaign.
But did he and the rest of the political world get the other message: that elections can't always be bought?
Because make no mistake, that's what Mr.
Stein was planning to do.
The Council President had raised over $4 million and might have doubled that, convinced that money would make the difference.
It didn't.
More than Mr.
Stein's fund-raising tactics foiled his campaign.
But those tactics didn't help.
The public is clearly losing patience with extravagant campaigns, whether they're financed by wealthy candidates, special interests or both.


Bill Gingerly Urges Talks On Segregation Problems
In a first tentative step toward addressing the racial and economic segregation of schools in Connecticut's cities, the State House of Representatives voted early today for legislation that urges towns and cities to cooperate regionally to improve all public schools.
The bill, expected to win approval in the Senate next week, is much weaker than legislation submitted four months ago by the administration of Gov.
Lowell P. Weicker Jr., which set goals for racially integrating schools across each of six regions of the state.


CHRONICLE
Five years ago, when the Rev.
Dr.
NORMAN VINCENT PEALE turned 90, 1,000 people gathered in the Waldorf-Astoria Hotel to wish him well.
On Monday, he will be 95, and this time the celebration is expected to be low key, though no less heartfelt.
"We are going to have all our family -- our three children and their spouses, eight grandchildren, three of whom are married, and one great granddaughter," Dr.
Peale's wife, RUTH STAFFORD PEALE, 86, said yesterday as she prepared to leave for the celebration at Mohonk Mountain House, the resort in New Paltz, N.Y.
"He's awfully glad it will be just family. He hates to have a lot of attention paid to his birthday, but he is willing to admit that this one is special."


3Com Shares Plummet On Analysts' Remarks
Shares in the 3Com Corporation, a leader in computer networking devices, lost about 30 percent of their value today after two securities analysts lowered their ratings on the company's stock.
3Com shares plunged $11.50, to close at $27, on volume of 13.8 million shares.
The stock was the biggest percentage decliner in Nasdaq trading.


Corrections
An article in Business Day yesterday about the dollar's sharp decline against the Japanese yen referred incorrectly to the Federal Reserve's intervention in the currency markets on April 27.
That intervention was the first since November 1989 in which the Federal Reserve sold yen to buy dollars.


Executive Changes
CALIFORNIA FEDERAL BANK, Los Angeles, named Gregory E. Burdick executive vice president for residential lending.
CAPITOL RECORDS, Hollywood, Calif., a unit of EMI Records Group of North America, named Gary Gersh president and chief executive.
GE CAPITAL CORP., Stamford, Conn., the financial services unit of General Electric Co., appointed Paul A. Street senior vice president and manager of strategic planning and business development.
GIDDINGS &amp; LEWIS INC., Fond du Lac, Wis., a maker of machine tools, named Joseph R. Coppola chairman and chief executive.
PAINE WEBBER INC., New York, appointed Lawrence A. Armour senior vice president and director of media and investor relations.


Pet Cemetery Used in Scheme Is Sold by U.S. for $650,000
In perhaps the final act of a highly emotional and at times bizarre spectacle, the Federal Government accepted a bid yesterday by three Long Island men to buy and operate the Suffolk County pet cemetery where thousands of animals were burned en masse or thrown into huge pits.
The buyers, two executives and a lawyer, have agreed to renovate the 27-acre Long Island Pet Cemetery in Middle Island, and they said they intended to erect a memorial to the pets that were improperly disposed of there.


The Medicare Exodus
To the Editor:
The disorganized, unorganized majority who have not yet been herded into health maintenance organizations feel the pressure rising.
But how to express our unease when what we want in medical care is an emphasis on individual freedom?
"Doctor Fears Changes May Be for Worse" (front page, May 13) expresses the viewpoint well from the doctor's side.


Olympia Mediator Is Named
Former Secretary of State Cyrus R. Vance was named by a Federal bankruptcy judge yesterday to mediate a struggle over control of the United States holdings of Olympia &amp; York, the distressed Canadian real estate company.
Mr.
Vance, who recently ended 19 months of efforts to negotiate a settlement to the fighting in the former Yugoslavia, is expected to meet early next week with the parties to the Olympia &amp; York battle.
He will try to help stave off a potential crisis that some company creditors have said could result in bankruptcy for the American wing of the company.


Classical Music in Review
Bethany Beardslee-Winham Soprano Weill Recital Hall


Bulls Now Speechless As Well as Winless
The Chicago Bulls spoke today.
Their statement was one of unified defiance. It was also one of complete silence.


Disabled Birds Can Too Enjoy Life
To the Editor:
Eileen Jones's may 15 letter is on target about how pets can hurt wildlife, but her treatment of an injured swan angered my wife, Jan Meyers, and myself.
We are licensed to save injured and sick federally protected birds with the intent of returning them to the wild.
Ms.
Jones states that it seemed kinder to let the swan go through euthanasia.
She stated the bird would never fly again and, even with surgery, would be arthritic.


They're All Over 50 And Five Under Par
Showing strong signs that he is ready to win again on the Senior Tour, Lee Trevino took a share of the lead today after the first round of the Cadillac N.F.L.
Golf Classic.
At the Upper Montclair Country Club, on a course that was set up to accommodate the 26 professional football players who played today, Trevino, Don Bies and Rocky Thompson all shot five-under-par 67's to lead three other golfers by a stroke.


Polish Cabinet Falls Over Tight Budget
The year-old Government of Prime Minister Hanna Suchocka, who steered Poland further toward a market economy, collapsed today when it lost by one vote a no-confidence motion called to protest her tight budget policies.
The defeat of the Prime Minister, who has been shown to be immensely popular in opinion polls, left the nation's immediate political future once again in the hands of President Lech Walesa, the former Solidarity leader who had led the opposition to the Communists and was elected President in 1990, but whose own popularity has been on the wane.


Now, the Really Hard Part
President Clinton went on the road to try to build enough momentum for his budget to clear the Senate.
Supporters in places like St.
Paul cheered him on, but with worried frowns.
Articles, pages 6 and 7.


Proportional Voting Suits School Elections
To the Editor:
"The School Board Sham" (editorial, May 4) demonstrates some misunderstanding of proportional representation.
You describe the system as confusing and complex.
It is neither.
Proportional representation's recent negative image may have more to with political corruption in Italy than with proportional representation.


Campaign Breakdown; Stein's Message Fails To Win Over Voters
Faced with the collapse of his $3 million campaign for mayor of New York City and the need to begin a re-election drive quickly, City Council President Andrew J. Stein yesterday returned to a locale that symbolizes his greatest governmental triumph -- a once-beleaguered nursing home that he fought to rehabilitate.
There he spoke with confidence of being re-elected to a vastly diminished office that next year will have its name changed to the more modest "public advocate" and implied how, at 48, he was young enough to fight another day for a higher position.


Appointments Announced at The Times
The appointment of Donna C. Miele as vice president for human resources at The New York Times was announced yesterday by John M. O'Brien, executive vice president and deputy general manager.
Mr.
O'Brien also announced the creation of a vice presidential post for operations and labor relations, to be filled by Michael J. Kurtz, previously vice president for human resources.


INSIDE
Polish Government Is Ousted
Poland's Government collapsed after it lost a vote of confidence over budget policies of the Prime Minister, but the President did not immediately accept her resignation.
Page 3.
A Cushion for Investors
Stock options can provide a good night's sleep for investors who toss and turn when their portfolios zig and zag.
Your Money, page 31.
Clinton May Hire Reagan Aide
President Clinton is considering appointing David Gergen, President Reagan's communications director, as a White House counselor.
Page 6.


Clinton's Poll Rating Sinks To a Historical Low Point
President Clinton's job performance rating is lower at this point in his term than that of any President since World War II, according to two national polls made public yesterday.
Most of the interviewing in the polls, both conducted Wednesday and Thursday, occurred before the House of Representatives narrowly passed Mr.
Clinton's economic program on Thursday night.


Bowman Won't Return as Penguin Coach
SCOTTY BOWMAN's two-season stint as the Pittsburgh Penguins' coach ended abruptly yesterday when the N.H.L.'s winningest coach left an offer from the club on the bargaining table and said he would talk to other teams.
The Penguins then rescinded their offer and said the only way Bowman would return would be as the team's player-development director or as a consultant, positions he held before replacing cancer-stricken BOB JOHNSON as coach in 1991.


Beach Season 1993: Trying to Make Do With Much Less
For many beachgoers in the New York region, the Memorial Day rite of reclaiming a favorite swath of sun and sand will be an adventure in unfamiliar terrain.
It was, as few can forget, the winter of the Northeaster -- two of them, one in December and the other in March.
Both were as fierce as any in living memory, environmental officials and beach community residents said, and together they left the Atlantic seaboard beaches from southeastern Connecticut to southern New Jersey ravaged.


William P. Collins, 47, Energy Aide to Reagan
William P. Collins, a former Undersecretary of Energy in the Reagan Administration, died Wednesday at Fairfax County Hospital in Virginia.
He was 47.
Mr.
Collins, a resident of Alexandria, Va., died of a heart attack, his sister, Nancy Collins, said.


Tens of Thousands in Florence Protest Bombing of the Uffizi


ECONOMY SLOWED IN FIRST QUARTER
Growth in the United States economy slowed to a near-standstill in the winter while inflation sped up, the Commerce Department reported yesterday in its second look at economic performance between January and March.
The report prompted investors to sell stocks, stirred fears of a tighter monetary policy and revived talk of that 1970's scourge, stagflation.


Bubka to Vault Outdoors in U.S.
SERGEI BUBKA, the world-record holder in the pole vault, will be competing outdoors in the United States for the first time at the Bruce Jenner Classic today in San Jose, Calif.
Bubka's decision to compete in the meet took event organizers by surprise but they welcomed it.
"That's as good as it gets," said BERT BONANNO, the meet's director.
"He's never jumped in the United States outdoors. It's exciting."


America's Tallest Lighthouse Reopens


In Praise of a Drink At the End of the Day
To the Editor:
Dr.
Nicholas A. Pace condemns a study that shows the benefits to the heart of having two or three drinks a day, says alcohol in any amount is bad for your health and gives statistics to prove it (letter, May 11).


Bail Release Affirmed in Glen Ridge Case
One of the three men convicted in the Glen Ridge sex assault case was allowed to remain free on bail today after prosecutors refused to document a college student's contention that he had assaulted her in 1990 in Boston.
After prosecutors declined to have the young woman or any witnesses testify about the allegation at a bail hearing here today, Judge R. Benjamin Cohen said he had no grounds to revoke the $2,500 bail for Christopher Archer, 21.


Corrections
A roll-call listing yesterday showing the vote on the tax bill in the House of Representatives showed an incorrect total in some copies for Democrats who voted for the measure.
The total was 218, not 248.


Corrections
The stock options table in Business Day yesterday included incorrect Thursday prices supplied by Tribune Media Services for some options expiring in December 1993 and January 1994.
Readers wishing copies of the corrected table may write to the Business Editor, The New York Times, 229 West 43d Street, New York, N.Y. 10036.


Computer Code Plan Challenged
The nation's largest computer makers have challenged a Clinton Administration plan to standardize a high-technology coding system that would let law-enforcement officials wiretap telephone calls and computer data transmissions.
The manufacturers say modern computer coding technology is essential for commerce and industry and cannot be restricted by the Government without hurting business.


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY  BADILLO JOINS FORCES WITH GIULIANI
Rudolph W. Giuliani and Herman Badillo joined forces to run for Mayor and Comptroller in a Republican-Liberal alliance against Mayor Dinkins.
As he clutched a microphone atop a flatbed truck at East 116th Street and Lexington Avenue in East Harlem, Mr.
Badillo, a Democrat and the elder statesman of the city's Hispanic politicians, said he was joining Mr.
Giuliani, a Republican and a former Federal prosecutor, "to rebuild our great city, restoring it to a place where standards are applied and met." Page 1.
LOVER JOINS SLAIN FIANCE IN DEATH
Shaleen Wadhwami and Hema Sakhrani met and fell in love at New York University.
They planned to marry in July, a month before Mr.
Wadhwami was to start medical school on a full scholarship.
But one man did not share their joy.
Chandran Nathan, the police said, had an obsession with Ms.
Sakhrani.
Late Wednesday night, the police said, he went to the door of Mr.
Wadhwami's home in Manhasset, L.I., and fired 20 bullets at the young man, killing him as his parents slept upstairs.
Anguished, Ms.
Sakhrani jumped to her death yesterday morning from the 16th-floor terrace of her family's apartment in Rego Park, Queens, the police said.
Page 1.
MORE SERVICES FOR DISABLED RIDERS
In an effort to comply with Federal law, the Metropolitan Transportation Authority agreed to a sharp increase in transportation services for disabled people in New York City.
Page 23.
REGION
PHONE COMPANY PLANS LAYOFFS
The New York Telephone Company, the state's second-largest employer, said yesterday that it plans to lay off 600 low- to middle-level managers around the state next September.
The cost-cutting move would pare $36 million, or 1.8 percent, from the company's $1.97 billion payroll.
Page 23.
INTEGRATION BILL GAINS IN CONNECTICUT
In a first tentative step toward addressing the racial and economic segregation of schools in Connecticut's cities, the State House of Representatives voted for legislation that urges towns and cities to cooperate regionally to improve all public schools.
Page 24.
BAIL RELEASE AFFIRMED IN GLEN RIDGE CASE
One of the three men convicted in the Glen Ridge sex assault case was allowed to remain free on bail after prosecutors refused to document a college student's contention that he had assaulted her in 1990 in Boston.
Page 25.
U.S.
SELLS PET CEMETERY USED IN SCHEME
In perhaps the final act of a highly emotional and at times bizarre spectacle, the Federal Government accepted a bid by three Long Island men to buy and operate a pet cemetery in Middle Island, L.I., where thousands of animals were burned or thrown into pits.
Page 24.
MAN ACQUITTED IN BEATING OF DOCTOR
A Federal jury acquitted a Jersey City man on civil rights charges in the beating of an Asian-Indian physician in an attack that prosecutors said was racially motivated.
Page 24.
Memorial Day holiday schedules 22
About New York by David Gonzalez 23
Commencements 25
Beliefs 25


Don't Believe It, Macedonians Aren't Bulgarian
To the Editor:
A May 12 report that President Clinton was considering sending United States troops to Macedonia states: "Macedonia is home to about 2 million people; about a third are of Muslim Albanian descent and most of the rest are of Bulgarian origin." The majority of the population of Macedonia (67 percent) is ethnic Macedonians, not Bulgarians.


Stock Options: Not Just for High Rollers
For conservative investors who toss and turn when their portfolios zig and zag, stock options can increase investment returns, bring stability to a portfolio and maybe even result in a good night's sleep.
Of course, options didn't get their dicey reputation without cause.
Used speculatively or to control large blocks of stock, options can create huge losses if they force the investor to buy stock above market prices or to sell stock below the market.


A Death in Custody Brings a 2d Autopsy
A second autopsy was conducted yesterday on the body of a man who died in police custody this week.
The latest analysis, by a medical examiner with the State Commission of Corrections, was conducted after allegations that the man, Johnnie Cromartie, 40, was beaten to death early Tuesday morning by two police officers while he was being treated for an epileptic seizure at New York Downtown Hospital.


The Verdict on Two Courts; Indonesia's Silenced Accuser
A show trial is a judicial travesty whose real purpose is to manufacture propaganda.
An especially clumsy example was the sentencing last week in Indonesia of an East Timor rebel leader named Jose Alexandre Gusmao.
The presiding judge spent seven hours reading a 250-page verdict, denouncing the crimes said to justify sentencing the accused to life in prison.
But when Mr.
Gusmao sought to read his own 27-page defense, he was silenced by the court.
That was unusual even by Indonesia's authoritarian standards.
Human rights groups like Asia Watch can recall no previous political trial there in which the defense statement was suppressed by judges.


USX Must Pay $630 Million in Price-Fixing
In one of the largest antitrust judgments, a Federal court has ruled that the USX Corporation must pay roughly $630 million to several steel companies that brought a price-fixing suit against a former USX subsidiary, the Bessemer &amp; Lake Erie Railroad Company.
The decision Thursday by the Third Circuit Court of Appeals, in Philadelphia, upheld a 1991 ruling that found the railroad had conspired from the 1950's to the early 80's to monopolize the docks in lower Lake Erie ports and had fixed prices for transporting and unloading iron ore.


Transactions
Baseball  American League
MINNESOTA TWINS -- Recalled Larry Casian, pitcher, from Portland of the Pacific Coast League.
Removed George Tsamis, pitcher, from the active roster.
National League
CINCINNATI REDS -- Activated Rob Dibble, pitcher, from the 15-day disabled list.
SAN DIEGO PADRES -- Purchased the contract of Kevin Higgins, catcher, from Las Vegas of the Pacific Coast League.
Basketball  National Basketball Association
PHILADELPHIA 76ERS -- Exercised their option to buy out the contract of Armon Gilliam, forward, making him a free agent.
Football  National Football League
SAN FRANCISCO 49ERS -- Signed Wilson Hoyle, placekicker.
Named Ron Juanso publications coordinator and Steve Little physical development assistant.
Horse racing
BELMONT PARK -- Suspended Dominick Galluscio, trainer, for 60 days because one of his horses tested positive for two prohibited substances after a race on April 3.
College
CHAPMAN -- Named Mary Hegarty women's basketball coach.
MASSACHUSETTS -- Named David Peters assistant ice hockey coach.
ST.
MARY'S -- Signed Terri Rubenstein, women's basketball coach, to a four-year contract extension.
STETSON -- Named Pierre Pilote men's tennis coach.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
Economic growth slowed to a near-standstill last winter while inflation sped up, revised figures showed.
The gross domestic product expanded at only a 0.9 percent rate -- the slowest since the fourth quarter of 1991 -- and inflation, at a 4.2 percent annual rate, was at its highest since early 1991.  [ Page 1. ]
Whether the higher taxes and reduced spending approved by the House will help the economy will depend a lot on what changes the Senate makes when it considers the plan next month.  [ 6. ]  Companies
Former Secretary of State Cyrus R. Vance was named by a Federal bankruptcy judge to mediate a struggle over control of the United States holdings of Olympia &amp; York Developments.  [ 33. ]
Chevron's decision to dispose of hundreds of gas stations has angered wholesalers and retailers, who say the company did not give them sufficient notice.  [ 33. ]
USX must pay roughly $630 million to steel companies in a price-fixing suit against a former USX railroad subsidiary.
The company said it would appeal, perhaps to the Supreme Court.  [ 33. ]
Bell companies can own information services, a court ruled in a defeat for newspapers and other information companies.  [ 33. ]
Shares of 3Com lost about 30 percent of their value after two analysts lowered their ratings on the company's stock.  [ 35. ]
Boxes of Marriott files pertinent in a bondholder suit fell off the back of a courier truck and have not been found.  [ 35. ]
A California home builder is wiring a 111-home development with fiber-optic communications cable.  [ 35. ]
Computer makers challenged an Administration plan to standardize coding for telephone and computer data transmissions.  [ 35. ]
New York Telephone will lay off 8 percent of its 7,700 managers in September as part of its efforts to cut costs.  [ 23. ]
Major league baseball owners overwhelmingly approved a six-year advertising joint-venture with ABC and NBC.  [ 27. ]  International
With a surge in the yen's value that has shaken Japan for the last three months and driven the American dollar to historic lows, the outrageous has turned to the ridiculous in Tokyo.  [ 1. ]
Hoping tourism can aid their struggling economies, Libya, Croatia, Peru and other diverse destinations are struggling to repair their war-torn tourist infrastructures.  [ 33. ]
The Administration argued that Ross Perot's television commercial is wrong in contending that the Nafta will cost jobs.  [ 45. ]
U.S. telecommunications companies may be allowed to expand their service in Cuba.  [ 8. ]  Markets
The stock market dropped sharply in reaction to lower economic growth figures and computerized sell programs.
The Dow industrials lost 27.4 points, closing at 3,527.43.  [ 34. ]
Prices of long-term Treasury issues fell moderately in light trading ahead of the long holiday weekend.  [ 42. ]
The dollar tumbled to another low against the Japanese yen after a rescue attempt by the Federal Reserve failed.  [ 44. ]  Gold prices fell sharply in late profit taking.  [ 44. ] Your Money
Stock options can help increase investment returns, bring stability to an investment portfolio and maybe even result in a good night's sleep for investors who worry about their holdings.  [ 31. ]
A form of no-load mutual fund charges no up-front fee, no back-end fee, but a killer of an annual fee that continues forever.  [ 31. ]
Owners who rent their vacation homes should be aware of complex rules on the tax treatment of second homes.  [ 32. ]


Review/Film; 56 Years Later, More of Snow White
If movie blockbusters from "The Godfather" to "Batman" can beget successful sequels, why not "Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs" 56 years after the original?
That must have been the reasoning behind "Happily Ever After," a clever but hardly memorable follow-up to the Disney animated film classic.
"Happily Ever After," which opened yesterday, is by no means an official Disney-approved sequel.
Presented by the First National Film Corporation with animation by Filmation, its Snow White bears a strong family resemblance to the Disney character without actually looking like her.
Its prince has red hair, and the Seven Dwarfs are nowhere to be found.


Review/Theater; Hosts vs. Guests in Satire of 80's Excess
They are a cozy family portrait of the venomous excesses of the 1980's.
A wife swap and six months later, these same four are a veritable Bosnia and Herzegovina of domesticity, lame and halt, deaf and blind, living without water, food, heat or indoor plumbing, savagely trying to kill one another on general principle.


Young (19 in Row) Loses Game and Green Loses Temper
Dallas Green is sick of this.
He's sick of the poor hitting, he's sick of the fielding mistakes and he's sick of watching his Mets foul up close games.
Last night at Shea Stadium, the Mets made three fielding errors and allowed five stolen bases by the Cincinnati Reds.
They wasted a nine-inning, two-run effort by Doc Gooden and helped Anthony Young get stuck with a 19th straight defeat -- which ties a Mets record -- when he relieved in the top of the 10th.
They had a chance to win two in a row for the first time since mid-April and they blew it.


George Smith Watchetaker, Dancer, 77
George Smith Watchetaker, a Comanche elder, painter and longtime American Indian dance champion, died on Thursday in a hospital in his hometown, Lawton, Okla.
He was 77.
Mr.
Watchetaker, a student of Comanche history and performing, was a five-time American Indian national dance champion and five-time world dance champion.
He was knighted by Queen Elizabeth after a command performance, and performed for Presidents Franklin D. Roosevelt and Harry S. Truman.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article in some editions yesterday about a Connecticut bill to ban military-style semiautomatic weapons referred incorrectly to the firearms affected.
Submachines and other fully automatic weapons would not be covered; they are already effectively banned by Federal law.


Holiday Weekend
Memorial Day will be observed on Monday. Here are holiday schedules.  NEW YORK
GOVERNMENT OFFICES Closed.
POST OFFICE Express Mail and special delivery only; main post office open at 33d Street and Eighth Avenue.
BANKS Closed.
PARKING Sunday rules in effect.
SANITATION No pickups, recycling or street cleanings.
SCHOOLS Closed.
FINANCIAL MARKETSClosed.
TRANSPORTATION Buses and subways on Sunday schedule.
Long Island Rail Road on weekend schedule, with extra trains this afternoon.
Metro-North on weekend schedule.
NEW JERSEY
GOVERNMENT OFFICES Closed.
POST OFFICES Express Mail and special delivery only.
BANKS Closed.
SCHOOLS Local option.
TRANSPORTATION N.J. Transit on Sunday schedule.  CONNECTICUT
GOVERNMENT OFFICES Closed.
POST OFFICES Express Mail and special delivery only.
BANKS Closed.
SCHOOLS Closed.
TRANSPORTATION Metro-North on weekend schedule.  Traffic Alert  MONDAY
MEMORIAL DAY PARADE, Manhattan.
Broadway between 72d and 86th Streets; 86th Street between Broadway and Riverside Drive; and Riverside Drive between 86th and 90th Streets will be closed from 8 A.M. to early afternoon
MEMORIAL DAY PARADE, Staten Island.
Forest Avenue from Victory Boulevard to Decker Avenue from 11 A.M. to 4 P.M.
ASTORIA-BROADWAY FESTIVAL, Queens.
Broadway between Steinway and Crescent Streets from 10 A.M. to 7 P.M.


No Jury Trial in Apple Suit
The jury trial scheduled for June 28 in the long-running copyright infringement suit by Apple Computer Inc. against the Microsoft Corporation and the Hewlett-Packard Company has been removed from the court calendar with the approval of the three companies.
A pretrial hearing scheduled for Tuesday by Federal District Judge Vaughn Walker will still take place, and the case could still proceed to an appeal after the judge's has ruled.


Classical Music in Review
Sergiu Schwarz Violinist 92d Street Y


New York Telephone Plans to Lay Off 600 Managers
The New York Telephone Company, the state's second-largest employer, said yesterday that it plans to lay off 600 low- to middle-level managers around the state next September.
The cost-cutting move would pare $36 million, or 1.8 percent, from the company's $1.97 billion payroll.
The layoffs -- the third round of involuntary dismissals since March 1992 in cuts ordered by Nynex, the company's parent -- will affect 8 percent of New York Telephone's 7,700 managers in switching centers, installation and repair offices and technical support and operator service centers across the state.


The Verdict on Two Courts; Judicial Courage in Pakistan
A bold decision by Pakistan's Supreme Court has advanced the cause of democracy and civilian rule in a country that has experienced too little of both.
The court ruled that President Ghulam Ishaq Khan exceeded his powers last month in dismissing Prime Minister Nawaz Sharif and dissolving Parliament.
No less propitious is what didn't happen.
As the reinstated Mr.
Sharif remarked, this time Pakistan's powerful army "played its constitutional role by keeping out of politics."


CHRONICLE
The lines between entertainment and reality grow ever dimmer.
MICHAEL MORIARTY, who stars as an assistant district attorney on the television series "Law and Order," will be on a panel on Thursday with a decidedly untheatrical title: "The Criminal Jury Selection Process: Should New York State Adopt the Federal System of Jury Selection and Should the Use of Peremptory Challenges Be Eliminated?"
The other panelists at the discussion, to be sponsored by the New York County Lawyers' Association and held at 14 Vesey Street, include two lawyers, a Queens assistant district attorney and a Court of Claims judge who sits in Supreme Court in Bronx County.


THE CLINTON BUDGET: The Overview; Clinton Takes His Fight For Budget on the Road
Facing an even more difficult task in the Senate than he had in the House of Representatives, President Clinton went back on the road today to generate political support for his budget.
At a rally in the courtyard of Philadelphia's City Hall, he implored the crowd to "stay with us, fight with us" to keep the plan on track in the Senate.


Don't Believe It, Macedonians Aren't Bulgarian; More Than 1,400 Years
To the Editor:
Your assertion about the Bulgarian origin of the Republic of Macedonia population (news article, May 12) is false.
Macedonians are of Slavic origin and have been known as Macedonians for more than 1,400 years!
The correct official figures are 65 percent Macedonian, 21 percent Albanians, 4.8 percent Turks, 2.7 percent Roma and 2.2 percent Serbs.
These figures are also used in the Central Intelligence Agency atlas of Eastern Europe.
LJUBICA Z. ACEVSKA United States Representative of the Republic of Macedonia Washington, May 13, 1993


With Prison Costs Rising, Florida Ends Many Mandatory Sentences
The Legislature approved an overhaul of state sentencing guidelines early this morning, making Florida one of the first states to retreat from the mandatory sentences that have worsened prison overcrowding and escalated prison costs across the nation.
The lawmakers overwhelmingly approved a bill that rewrites the state's 10-year-old sentencing guidelines.
The legislation, which Gov.
Lawton Chiles is expected to sign, eliminates mandatory sentences for a variety of crimes.


THE CLINTON BUDGET: On Democratic Turf; In St. Paul, Clinton Faithful Wince
When President Clinton's economic package narrowly passed the House on Thursday night, there may have been no one outside the White House more relieved than Thaddeus Austin, a real estate agent here.
It is not because Mr.
Austin expects anything from the budget personally.
In fact, he has been expecting higher taxes since Election Day.
He figures an energy tax will hit Minnesotans especially hard, what with the harsh winters and long commutes.
And besides, he, like many Americans, views the Federal budget as a bulbous enigma that the average citizen may not fully grasp no matter how many hours C-Span is on.


Review/Dance; Silent Conversations and Contradictions
Tere O'Connor's "You Baby Goes to Tender Town" began promisingly.
Six dancers touched one another and held that pose for a long time.
Then they withdrew their hands as if confused, only to touch one another again.
The scene's ambivalences suggested much about the way people may vacillate between showing affection and avoiding displays of feeling.
"You Baby Goes to Tender Town," the better of the two works Mr.
O'Connor presented on May 21 at the Kitchen, frequently evoked states of longing and emotional hesitation.
Yet the promises of its beginning were never really kept.


Review/Film; Plumbing a Video Game to Its Depths
The tiny truants and curiosity seekers who turned up at the first showing of "Super Mario Brothers," which opened yesterday at neighborhood theaters without benefit of advance screenings, must have been awfully surprised.
This bizarre, special effects-filled movie doesn't have the jaunty hop-and-zap spirit of the Nintendo video game from which it takes -- ahem -- its inspiration.
What it has instead are a weird, jokey science-fiction story, "Batman"-caliber violence and enough computer-generated dinosaurs to get the jump on "Jurassic Park."
Eleven-year-old boys, the ideal viewers for this vigorous live-action comic strip, will no doubt be impressed with the expense and energy that have gone into bringing "Super Mario Brothers" to the screen.
Other viewers may wonder how they came to be watching a film about parallel universes, punitive devolution, creatures who eat grilled salamanders on hot-dog rolls, and one memorably disgusting character who has been transformed into a ball of slime.


Review/Music; Dark Vistas Unfold in a New Work by Husa
Almost 40 years ago, Karel Husa arrived in the United States from Prague by way of Paris.
He has taught at Cornell University since then, and he has also continued to compose, matching a highly organized musical sensibility to a first-hand acquaintanceship with all the unpleasantnesses of recent history.
The latest product of this synthesis is a Violin Concerto, which the New York Philharmonic under Kurt Masur and its concertmaster, Glenn Dicterow, performed for the first time at Avery Fisher Hall on Thursday evening.
The three-movement work was commissioned by the orchestra for its 150th anniversary celebration this year.
It is not a happy piece.
Indeed, listeners are likely to be as impressed by Mr.
Husa's vivid skills as they are depressed by his melancholy message.
The difficult solo part, which Mr.
Dicterow plays with admirable elegance and utter fearlessness, becomes a lonely if voluble protagonist.
At the start, an agitated solo leaps back and forth across the instrument's range.
High, sustained violin tones join from the orchestra sections by ones and twos.
This underpinning, desolate and ominous, grows in weight and color but offers little solace to the insistently unhappy solo writing.
Mr.
Dicterow's violin abjures all hedonistic beauty; the instrument becomes instead a dramatic tool, and heavy drama it is.


Officer Is Charged With Accepting Bribe
A New York City police officer was arrested yesterday after he accepted $2,200 from an undercover investigator posing as a drug dealer who needed an escort to deliver $100,000 in drug profits, the Queens District Attorney said.
The officer, Andre McDougal, 28, of the 101st Precinct, was suspended and charged with bribery, official misconduct and computer trespassing.
He was arrested at a parking lot in Bayside, Queens, after he escorted the undercover officer in a car from Jackson Heights, an investigator said.


Those That Were Last Are Now First
With the average stock fund rising only 1.9 percent through May 14, most stock-fund investors haven't made much money this year.
Much of the lag reflects poor performance by the big brand-name consumer goods companies, led by Philip Morris, maker of Marlboro cigarettes.


Knicks Trying to Drown Out Bulls' Violin Music
The Knicks figure that the quickest way to stop the Chicago Bulls' crying game is to beat them this weekend.
As New York prepared for Game 3 of the Eastern Conference finals on Saturday, the Bulls' weeklong tirade was the main topic of conversation.
The Bulls have complained about the officiating in the series and the Knicks' physical style of play.
The Knicks saw this as a thinly veiled attempt to gain an edge with the officials as the series shifted to Chicago for Games 3 and 4.


THE CLINTON BUDGET: Changes at the Top; As Political Missteps Mount, White House Considers Enlisting Former Reagan Aide
President Clinton's chief of staff announced today that personnel changes were imminent, and White House officials later said that David Gergen, who was President Ronald Reagan's communications director, was being considered for a job as counselor to Mr.
Clinton.
Mr.
Gergen, who is currently an editor at large of U.S.
News &amp; World Report, has had several conversations with Clinton aides about a job that would put him over the White House communications director, George Stephanopoulos, the officials said.


Baseball Flips Channel On TV Future
Major league baseball owners yesterday overwhelmingly approved a new way of doing business with national television networks by approving a six-year joint venture with ABC and NBC.
Only two of the 28 teams -- the New York Mets and the Boston Red Sox -- opposed the venture, which had sparked debate from the moment the proposal was presented on May 8.
The Yankees abstained, sitting out a vote taken during a 50-minute conference call that decided not only how baseball views its value but also its ability to command audiences, even during the post-season.


THE CLINTON BUDGET: Arm-Twisting; When the President Rings, Mavericks Run for Cover
The White House telephone operators can reach Boris N. Yeltsin or Queen Elizabeth II in a snap.
But they could not find Representative Collin C. Peterson all Thursday afternoon.
He was hiding from the President in the House gym.


After Sporadic Violence Over Verdict, An Uneasy Calm Returns to Miami
An uneasy calm settled over Miami's inner cities tonight after the acquittal of a police officer in the shooting of a black motorcyclist touched off sporadic stone and bottle throwing, attacks on motorists and an assault on a mini-police station.
The angrier reactions over the acquittal of Officer William Lozano on manslaughter charges came mostly in the predominantly black Overtown area, a rundown section of boarded-up businesses and sprawling housing projects that was the scene four years ago of the shooting incident in which Mr.
Lozano was charged.
But the reaction this time was muted compared with the flames and bloodshed that followed the original shooting.


Miami Police Officer Is Acquitted In Racially Charged Slaying Case
In a decision met with anger and dismay among blacks in Miami, a Hispanic police officer who was convicted there in 1989 on two counts of manslaughter in the shooting deaths of two young black men was acquitted today in a second trial on the same charges.
William Lozano, the 33-year-old, Colombian-born police officer who has been the focal point of the most racially charged case in Florida in the last decade, threw his arms up in joy and embraced his lawyers when the verdict was announced late this afternoon.


Once Off-Limits, Now Destinations With an Edge
Declaring that tourism produces "a very big income," Col.
Muammar el-Qaddafi of Libya proposed in a recent televised speech that his country encourage mass tourism.
And Colonel Qaddafi is not alone in assuming that travel and tourism can aid struggling economies.
Destinations as diverse as Croatia and Peru are struggling to repair their war-torn tourist infrastructures.
Egypt is cracking down on radical Islamic fundamentalists, and one reason officials give is that the terrorists' campaign is harming the country's $3 billion tourist industry, Egypt's largest source of foreign revenue.
And the hope of luring tourists with hard currency is why China and Cuba are racing to build hotels, restaurants and other amenities of the travel trade.


Observer; Like Lead To the Romans
Happening more or less simultaneously, Michael Jordan's midnight visit to the gambling hell of Atlantic City and the bombing of the Uffizi Gallery in Florence dramatize the modern quarrel about how best to destroy civilization.
Some say fire will do the trick, and some say ice, or so the poet wrote.
The modern dispute, however, is between those who favor bombs and those who believe law can do the job quieter.


THE CLINTON BUDGET: The Outlook; Will It Help or Harm? Economists Say Yes and Yes
Deficit reduction is a two-edged sword, and now that the House of Representatives has approved higher taxes and reduced spending, economists are assessing whether the budget plan will help the economy by cutting interest rates or harm it by cutting jobs.
Their answer: a little of each.


COMPANY BRIEFS
FOURTH FINANCIAL CORP., Wichita, Kan., acquired F&amp;M Bank Services, Bancshares of Woodward Inc., and Nichols Hills Bancorp.
The three bank holding companies had combined assets of about $295 million and increased Fourth Financial's assets to $5.8 billion.
LUFKIN INDUSTRIES, Lufkin, Tex., announced its plans to close two manufacturing and assembly plants and lay off as many as 109 workers because of poor sales of its oilfield pumps and equipment.
Lufkin lost almost $27 million in its fourth quarter.


Ruling Backs 'Baby Bells' On Information Services
In a defeat for newspaper publishers and other information companies, a Federal appeals court in Washington today upheld a lower court ruling in 1991 that the regional Bell telephone companies are allowed to own information services.
The unanimous decision by the three-judge panel leaves the seven "Baby Bells" free to offer services like electronic Yellow Pages, news services and financial information over their telephone lines.


The Inventor and the Salesman: Taking a Bright Idea to Market
Stuart Ford of Manakin, Va., said the idea for his combination chipper, shredder, vacuum and blower came to him when he realized more and more states were closing landfills, forcing people to dispose of their own lawn debris.
While market research found this type of machine was available, they cost around $2,000 and less than 2 percent of households had acquired them.
The inventor and marketing consultant figures that if he could build one that was affordable, compact and convenient for home use, that number would grow.
He then set about developing the machine he called the Cougar.
With the help of a draftsman, he designed and built a protortype and contracted with tool makers to produce the parts.
One of these is a steel fabricator in Cleveland that assembles the machine, the first of which came off the production line this month.
To date, Mr.
Ford has invested about $200,000.
He expects to sell the machines for about $550 each and sees a strong market.
"Based on early figures, we anticipate that sales of the Cougar will be around $2.5 million by the end of the year," he said.


Neilson to Coach Panthers, Says Report
ROGER NEILSON, the Rangers' former coach, will become the first coach of the National Hockey League's expansion Florida Panthers, according to a newspaper report published yesterday.
But Neilson told the Sun-Sentinel of Fort Lauderdale that he's also considering jobs with two other teams.
The newspaper quoted unidentified sources around the league as saying Neilson will be hired by the expansion team.
However, Neilson and Florida General Manager BOB CLARKE denied an offer has been made.


Builder Puts Fiber Optics In Homes
In one of the first examples of its kind, an Orange County, Calif., home builder is wiring a new 111-home seaside development with fiber optic cable to meet the expected communications needs of such affluent buyers as doctors and executives.
The homes in the project, south of Newport Beach, are the first new ones in California to be wired directly with fiber.
Nationwide, tests are under way in about 30 residential sites of the technology envisioned for a nationwide electronic superhighway.


Andrzej Wasowski; Polish Pianist, 69, Toured as Prisoner
Andrzej Wasowski, a Polish pianist admired for his lyrical approach to Chopin and widely remembered for his wartime adventures, died at George Washington University Medical Center in Washington on Wednesday.
He was 69.
The cause was lung cancer, said his wife, Maria.


German Court Restricts Abortion, Angering Feminists and the East
Germany's highest court ruled today that the country's new liberal abortion law was unconstitutional.
The court imposed interim restrictions that outraged feminists, especially those from eastern states, where abortion had been freely available for 20 years.
The Constitutional Court sent the issue back to Parliament, which passed the law last year making abortions legal in the first three months of pregnancy.
But the court sought in the meantime to set compromise guidelines as it ruled on an issue that is as hotly debated here as in the United States.


No Front or Back Fees, But Watch That Middle
INVESTORS already baffled by the salesmanship, chicanery and mystification that have given rise to more than 4,000 mutual funds are now facing what could be their greatest challenge yet: the loaded no-load.
No up-front fee, no back-end fee, just a killer of an annual fee that continues forever.


Louis Grudin Dies; Avant-Garde Poet And Artist Was 94
Louis Grudin, a poet and artist, died yesterday at St.
Vincent's Hospital.
He was 94 and lived in Manhattan.
He had had a brief illness, his family said.


Despite Fierce Pressure, New Yorker Defies Party
Representative Carolyn B. Maloney, the freshman Democrat from the Upper East Side of Manhattan, fretted all day before she became the only New York Democrat to vote against President Clinton's budget package.
President Clinton called, Vice President Al Gore called and five Cabinet members called, but Ms.
Maloney remained undecided.
A senior House leader said it was made clear to Ms.
Maloney that she could forget about rising to a position on any important committees if she voted nay.


Envoys Fear a Cambodia Power Grab
On the last day of voting in what has been an unexpectedly peaceful election in Cambodia, United Nations officials and diplomats warned today of new concerns that the incumbent Government would try to hold on to power even if its political party was defeated at the polls.
A senior United Nations official said Yasushi Akashi, the director of the 22,000-member United Nations peacekeeping force in Cambodia, had received daily complaints from the Government this week of purported irregularities in the voting.


I.R.S. Wonders Who Is At Your Beach House
WITH the vacation season at hand, owners of vacation homes need to analyze the tax consequences before allowing assorted family members to simply wander off to the mountains or beach.
Complex rules govern the mix of personal and rental use that will determine how the second home is treated when filing your tax return.
This analysis begins with the three separate sets of rules for mixed-use residences.
Depending on the balance between days that the home is rented and days of personal use, it can be classified as personal property, rental property or hybrid property.


Don't Believe It, Macedonians Aren't Bulgarian; Attack on Greece
To the Editor:
"An Appeal to the Conscience of the United Nations Regarding Macedonia" (advertisement, May 10), signed by supporters of the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, falsely and hatefully attacks Greece as an "aggressor." The deleterious effects of this attack upon individuals of Greek ancestry in the United States and abroad are compounded when that paid appeal is not clearly marked as an "advertisement."


Capping Benefits -- or Not
One important compromise that eased the passage of the President's budget plan on Thursday concerned entitlement programs, which have been one of the major reasons the Federal deficit has risen so quickly.
Spending on Medicare, food stamps, retirement checks and other Federal benefits has grown faster than predicted, and much faster than the tax revenues that pay for them.
Because the programs are popular, their effect on the deficit is hard to control.


Welcome to CUNY, Dr. Moses
This week's announcement that Dr.
Yolanda Moses is to be the next president of the City College of New York has already been met with criticism and apprehension.
An anthropologist and administrator in the California State University system, Dr.
Moses has been denigrated by some critics as a marginal scholar and a mindless proponent of diversity.
But these attacks appear wildly overstated, an irresponsible invitation to bigotry.
They will make a tough job even tougher.
Dr.
Moses faces a formidable challenge: to rebuild the premier campus of a beleaguered City University system, while navigating the city's treacherous political waters.
City College was once the jewel in the City University's crown.
Acclaimed as an Ivy League equivalent among urban colleges, it counts numerous Nobel laureates among its graduates.
And it has a distinguished record as an entry point for bright but poor immigrants.
These immigrant students once came mainly from Europe; now they are more likely to hail from the Caribbean or Southeast Asia.


Classical Music in Review
'Jephtha' Choral Symphony Society and Cantata Singers Christ and St.
Stephen's Church Manhattan


Bridge
When the Eastern Regional Championships continue today at the Sheraton New York Hotel, Seventh Avenue and 53d Street, attention will be focused on the historic Goldman Pairs, which dates back to 1929.
When the Goldman ends tomorrow night, the players will forget bridge for an hour or so: They will be entertained by four professional comedians who regularly appear in Manhattan comedy clubs.
This idea is the brainchild of Sandy Stern, who was involved in her own comedy on the diagramed deal from a recent home game.
As South she arrived in an ideal four-heart contract after a mysterious sequence following a three-diamond pre-emptive opening by East.
Most South players would choose between a routine four-club overcall or a three no-trump gamble, and few would contemplate a three-heart bid.


Classical Music in Review
'The Insect Comedy' Center for Contemporary Opera Hunter College


Corrections
An obituary yesterday about Thomas F. Galvin, a developer, architect and builder in Manhattan who died on Thursday, misidentified his daughter.
She is Susan Hall.


The Case of the Missing Boxes; For Marriott's Papers, A Beltway Twilight Zone
It was a dark and stormy night.
Or maybe it was a bright, sunshiny day.
Whichever it was, boxes of files being transported from the Marriott Corporation's headquarters in Bethesda, Md., to the office of its lawyers in Washington somehow fell off the back of a courier truck and have not been found.
What complicates the loss is that bond holders who have sued to prevent Marriott from restructuring into two companies say some of the documents are important to their lawsuit, which is pending in Federal District Court in Baltimore.


Sports of The Times; Old Davey: A New Red, A New Man
IN the dusk, and to warm applause, a relatively new employee of the Cincinnati Reds, wearing a red Cincinnati baseball suit and cap, which looked decidedly foreign on him, climbed from the dugout onto the Shea Stadium turf yesterday.
He felt, as he knew he would, "emotional." For six years "plus," as he described it, from 1984 to 1990, he wore the blue-and-white garb of the hometown Mets -- and for a while, a kind of crown, too, since this was Davey Johnson, manager of the team that had won the world championship in 1986.
The "plus" for Johnson turned out to be only about a quarter of his last season, when, as he knew, the crown had grown rusty, and that, like Lear, his services were no longer required.


Administration Attacks Perot's Ad on Trade Pact
The Clinton Administration tried a preemptive strike against Ross Perot today as three top officials argued that his television commercial planned for Sunday was wrong in contending that the North American Free Trade Agreement would cost American jobs.
At a news conference today, Mickey Kantor, the United States trade representative; Labor Secretary Robert B. Reich and Laura D'Andrea Tyson, chairwoman of the President's Council of Economic Advisers, said that Mr.
Perot was using misleading and inaccurate information to attack the agreement.
Mr.
Kantor said he had discussed the agreement with Mr.
Perot and believed the former Presidential candidate was being manipulated by the pact's opponents.


Dow Declines by 27.40 On New Economic Data
The stock market dropped sharply yesterday, partly in reaction to a downward revision of first-quarter economic growth figures.
But computerized sell programs amid surprisingly heavy trading before the long Memorial Day weekend probably exaggerated the declines, analysts said.
The Dow Jones industrial average dropped as much as 44.56 points before closing at 3,527.43, down 27.40 points in a retreat from the record highs established earlier in the week.
Still, the Dow managed a gain for the week of 34.60 points.
The Standard &amp; Poor's 500 dropped as much as 4.74 points yesterday before it closed down 2.22 points, to 450.19.


NAME CHANGE IS PLANNED FOR FRIENDSHIP AIRLINES
The investment firm run by Frank Lorenzo said yesterday that it was dropping the name of Friendship Airlines for the small airline it is seeking to operate.
The company, Houston-based Savoy Capital, declined to comment on the move, and said it would temporarily resort to the original name for the carrier, ATX Inc.
The start-up carrier is seeking approval from the Transportation Department to operate short-haul flights along the East Coast.


NEWS SUMMARY
International 2-4 GERMAN COURT LIMITS ABORTION
The top court in Germany ruled that its abortion law was unconstitutional and imposed interim restrictions that outraged feminists, especially those from the east, where abortion was freely available for 20 years.  1


Roger G. Morvan, 66, French Encyclopedist
Roger Georges Morvan, a French encyclopedist, lexicographer and poet, died on May 22 in the Cochin hospital in Paris.
He was 66 and lived in Paris.
The cause was cancer, said James I. Lader, a family friend in New York.


Corrections
A listing in Weekend yesterday about Memorial Day events misstated the starting time for the Memorial Day Parade in Manhattan and misidentified its sponsor.
The parade is to begin at 9 A.M. on Monday at Broadway and 72d Street; it is sponsored by the Manhattan chapter of the Vietnam Veterans of America.


A Lover Leaps to Join Her Slain Fiance in Death
Shaleen Wadhwami and Hema Sakhrani met and fell in love at New York University, two successful children of immigrant families from India who seemed to have limitless futures.
They planned to marry in July, a month before Mr.
Wadhwami started medical school on a full scholarship, a courtship as well as budding careers that delighted their families and friends in the closely knit Indian communities of Queens and Long Island.
One man did not share their joy.
Chandran Nathan, the police said, had an obsession with Ms.
Sakhrani.
Late Wednesday night, the police said, he went to the door of Mr.
Wadhwami's home in Manhasset, L.I., carrying a semiautomatic rifle and fired 20 bullets at the young man, killing him as his parents slept upstairs.


Mtunthama Journal; A Bit of Eton in Africa Stirs a Debate on Learning
After 20 miles of corrugated dirt road, winding past oxcarts and barefoot children and tobacco plantations, the reddish dust of Africa suddenly gives way to a glimmering vision of billiard-table lawns and neoclassical brick cloisters.
Students in uniform green sweaters and neckties stroll to lectures, clutching Xenophon's account of the fall of Athens and notebooks filled with Latin homework.


Bosnian Capital Under Siege As Fierce Fighting Continues
Fierce fighting continued around the capital today between Serbian militiamen and Bosnian Army forces after an overnight attack by the mostly Muslim Bosnian Army on the Serb-held road between the airport and the Serbian mountain stronghold at Pale, radio reports and witnesses said.
Fighting flared up all day along the front line on Mount Trebevic, just above the city's old quarter, where brush fires burned into the evening, and artillery and small-arms fire erupted around the city.


BADILLO JOINS RACE ON GIULIANI TICKET TO OPPOSE DINKINS
Rudolph W. Giuliani and Herman Badillo joined forces yesterday to run for Mayor and Comptroller of New York City in a Republican-Liberal alliance against Mayor David N. Dinkins, invoking the multiparty legacy of Fiorello H. La Guardia and kicking off a second straight competitive general election in one of the nation's most solidly Democratic strongholds.
As he clutched a microphone atop a flatbed truck at East 116th Street and Lexington Avenue in East Harlem, Mr.
Badillo, a Democrat and the elder statesman of the city's Hispanic politicians, said he was joining Mr.
Giuliani, the Republican former Federal prosecutor, "to rebuild our great city, restoring it to a place where standards are applied and met." Unswayed by Embassy Offer
Their partnership presaged not only a rerun of the 1989 election, which Mr.
Dinkins won by just 2 percentage points, but perhaps the most complex mayoral race since John V. Lindsay's re-election as the Liberal Party candidate in a three-way race in 1969.
They picked their spot deliberately: the landmark corner that La Guardia made famous 60 years ago in his "fusion" campaign against Tammany Hall, in a neighborhood that is now as predominantly Hispanic as it was then Italian and Jewish.


RESULTS PLUS
COLLEGE BASEBALL  St.
John's Stays Alive in N.C.A.A.
Brett Bartkewicz paced a 21-hit attack with five singles and Jason Loscalzo had four hits including a home run as St.
John's beat George Mason, 16-9, yesterday in a loser-out game of the National Collegiate Athletic Association West Regional in Tempe, Ariz.
St.
John's (26-19), which also got three doubles and a single from Anthony D'Esposito, made five errors in the first two innings and fell behind by 3-0 before staying alive in the double-elimination regional, getting five unearned runs against George Mason (33-15) in the fifth.
Redmen starter C. J. Nitkowski (6-3) struck out 10 and allowed two earned runs over seven and two-thirds innings. (AP) Fordham Loses in Midwest: Top-seeded North Carolina State took advantage of Fordham's porous defense in the first three innings and went on to a 12-4 victory in the first round of the Midwest Regional in Stillwater, Okla.
The Wolfpack (48-15) scored five unearned runs in the first inning after Fordham starter Ramon Hernandez was within one pitch of getting out of the inning.
Four more unearned runs in the third put the game out of reach.
Fordham (31-26) next plays the loser of last night's game between Oklahoma State and Connecticut. (AP) Rutgers Loses One: In Knoxville, Tenn., Clemson won, 7-3, to hand Rutgers its first loss in the Mideast Regional.
Rutgers (37-16), the Atlantic 10 Conference champion, will play the loser of the game between N.C.-Charlotte and Tennessee. (AP) Yale Is Out: In College Station, Tex., North Carolina eliminated Yale, 11-6, in the Central I Regional.
Yale, winner of the Ivy League, ends the season at 33-11. (AP) GOLF  Clearwater Shoots a 61, and He's in Third  Fulton Allem weathered a record-setting performance by Keith Clearwater and established a one-stroke lead yesterday in the storm-delayed second round of the Southwestern Bell Colonial in Fort Worth, Tex.
Allem birdied the final hole from 25 feet to cap a seven-under 63 and set a tournament record of 11-under-par 129 over the first 36 holes.
Clearwater birdied the last seven holes -- averaging more than 20 feet a putt while falling one short of the PGA Tour record -- for a 61 on the 7,010-yard Colonial course.
His 61 was a course and tournament record, and a score that has been bettered only 10 times in the history of the American tour, a pair of 59's by Al Geiberger and Chip Beck, and eight scores of 60.
With a 132 total, however, Clearwater trailed both Allem and Dick Mast, who shot 66 and was a stroke off the pace on a day the course was robbed of its natural defenses by gentle breezes and greens slowed and softened by a day-long series of showers.
In a group at 133, one behind Clearwater, were Tom Watson, Greg Norman, Russ Cochran, Mark Calcavecchia and Jeff Maggert. (AP) Two Eagles for Robbins: Kelly Robbins had two eagles in a four-under-par 68 yesterday to take sole possession of the lead after two rounds of the L.P.G.A.
Corning Classic in Corning, N.Y..
Robbins, who started the round in a three-way tie for the lead, has a 36-hole total of 138, one stroke in front of Hiromi Kobayashi of Japan, who also shot a 68.
Alison Nicholas had a 71 and was next at 141.
Murphy and Turnesa Rally: Going into the back 18 of the 36-hole best-ball Wilson Memorial Cup yesterday at the Scarsdale (N.Y.) Golf Club, Steve Murphy and Jim Turnesa thought their chances of winning the 22d annual tournament for a third time were minimal.
The twosome from the Knollwood Country Club in Elmsford finished the first 18 with a two-under-par 70 that put them in seventh place, seven strokes off the leaders, John Baldwin and Peter Van Ingen of the Meadow Brook Country Club on Long Island.
But Murphy and Turnesa combined for a 65 on the back to finish with a 135 and earn the victory by a stroke as Baldwin and Van Ingen scored a 73 and fell into a second-place tie at 136.
Also in second was Ridgewood team of Paul Antenucci and Tim Shea.


Four for the Title in Lacrosse
Syracuse enters today's semifinals of the National Collegiate Athletic Association lacrosse tournament on a nine-game winning streak.
The Orange have been scoring goals in clusters, with 97 in the last 5 games, including 20 by Matt Riter and 11 by Jamie Archer.
Syracuse will meet Princeton at Byrd Stadium in College Park, Md., after Johns Hopkins faces North Carolina.
The victors will play for the championship there on Monday.


NATO's Leadership Gap; Washington's Seeming Confusion on Bosnia Throws Alliance Into Crisis of Relevance
Confused and ambivalent signals from Washington about handling the war in Bosnia and Herzegovina have thrown the NATO alliance into its most serious crisis since the end of the cold war.
Critics in Washington and New York, but also in Brussels and Bonn, have begun to question whether an alliance designed to stave off the Soviet Union has any relevance to the prevention of the ethnic and national conflicts that have broken out in the ruins of the Communist empire and threaten to endanger the stability and security of Europe if they are not contained.


Blast the Aphids; Keep Watering
Remove all those faded blossoms from your lilacs to keep them from setting seed and draining the plant of some of its energy for next year's blooms.
On the other hand, if you don't have time, don't worry about it.
You'll just have fewer flowers.
So it goes in the real garden.
More pressing matters: blast the roses with the hose to wash off all those aphids on the buds. (Believe it or not, simple water will kill these soft-bodied insects, and you won't even have to use insecticidal soap.) Continue to water newly planted roses, shrubs and trees thoroughly if you haven't had a good rain this week.


New Coupe Completes Civic's Line
IN mystery stories and on television, somebody always seems to be slipping a lock with a credit card.
And while my experience with recalcitrant latches is limited, I have been around long enough to discover that this method never works.
Or almost never.
I tried it one morning last week on a balky ashtray after a frustrating drive home the night before, tugging and fiddling in the dark and finally opening the moon roof to flick my ashes at the stars.


Central Americans Turn Once More to the Army
SCURRYING across town and hiding from the police, dozens of members of the Congress that President Jorge Serrano Elias had just dissolved gathered on Thursday in a legislator's office.
Sorting options for their restitution, they skipped civil disobedience, subversion and other tactics, and turned to the most experienced available hands.
Would the Army please do its "historic and patriotic" duty, they asked publicly, and either throw Mr.
Serrano out or put them back in?


Paris
Paris is a city of havens, shaded and miraculously tranquil enclaves often hidden just a few yards from the broad, bustling boulevards carved out by Georges Haussmann in the 1860's.
Squares or small parks, these sanctuaries sometimes possess a peculiarly Parisian elegance and grandeur.
Others have a quiet charm that is distinctly provincial, suggestive of boules and pastis in the dusk.
To walk among these squares, particularly in summer, alternating the hectic activity of this eminently commercial city with moments of quietness, is to experience an essential quality of Paris.
For part of the charm of this town lies in the way it amalgamates many moods and images, conjuring, in a sudden grandiose vista, the glory of a certain notion of France, only to evoke, a moment later, the intimacy of village life through the figure of a surly concierge mopping a sidewalk in her bathrobe.


E. A. Seebode, Peter Zazzali
Elizabeth Anne Seebode, a daughter of Drs.
Anna and Joseph Seebode of Cedar Grove, N.J., was married there yesterday to Dr.
Peter George Zazzali, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
George Zazzali of Belleville, N.J.
The Rev.
Dr.
Angelo D'Agostino performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at St.
Catherine of Siena Church.
Mrs.
Zazzali is a mental health clinician in Newark, at the University of Medicine and Dentistry of New Jersey.
Her father is the Harris L. Willets professor of urology there.
Her mother is a physician in the student/employee health center there and an obstetrician and gynecologist in Cedar Grove.


A Question Of Color
To the Editor:
In his essay "A Famous Collection Escapes Its Moorings"  [ May 2 ] , Michael Kimmelman neglects to consider whether there may not be at least the smallest amount of good reason in Albert Barnes's rules about his art collection.
Barnes preferred small groups to large crowds, a preference still heard today.
That he had little patience with arts bureaucracies and art pundits is not exactly a fault.


Della Robbia Bar
To the Editor:
Christopher Gray is entitled to his opinion of the significance of Dellla Robbia Bar  [ 'Does a Far-From-Pristine Remnant Rate Protection," April 4 ] , but it is important to note that there was overwhelming support for the designation of this tiled interior at the Landmarks Preservation Commission's public hearing last December.


BEST SELLERS: May 30, 1993
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Fiction
1
1
42
THE BRIDGES OF MADISON COUNTY, by Robert James Waller. (Warner, $14.95.) A photographer and a lonely farmer's wife in Iowa.
2
2
11
THE CLIENT, by John Grisham. (Doubleday, $23.50.) A deadly secret, revealed by a lawyer just before he commits suicide, presents serious problems for an 11-year-old boy. (LP)
3
3
4
I'LL BE SEEING YOU, by Mary Higgins Clark. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $23.) A television news reporter has mystifying experiences when she covers a story in a hospital.
4
10
128
OH, THE PLACES YOU'LL GO! by Dr.
Seuss. (Random House, $12.95.) The problems of finding your way through life; in verse and pictures.
5
4
4
GAI-JIN, by James Clavell. (Delacorte, $27.50.) Cordial relationships and terrorism between the Japanese and foreigners in Yokohama in 1862.
6
5
7
LIKE WATER FOR CHOCOLATE, by Laura Esquivel. (Doubleday, $17.50.) Frustration, love, hope -- and recipes -- sampled by a woman coming of age on a Mexican ranch.
7
6
6
THE LAST COMMAND, by Timothy Zahn. (Spectra/Bantam, $21.95.) The final volume of a "Star Wars" trilogy.
8
8
5
A SEASON IN PURGATORY, by Dominick Dunne. (Crown, $22.) The political and social machinations of a wealthy Irish Catholic family.
9
9
4
ANGEL, by Barbara Taylor Bradford. (Random House, $23.) The reunion of four people, all successful in glamorous jobs, is transformed by the appearance of two celebrated men.
10
7
7
"J" IS FOR JUDGMENT, by Sue Grafton. (Holt, $21.95.) Kinsey Millhone investigates the case of a man who apparently committed suicide.
11
11
5
PERFECT, by Judith McNaught. (Pocket, $22.) A model young woman is abducted by a onetime award-winning film maker.
12
13
EINSTEIN'S DREAMS, by Alan Lightman. (Pantheon, $17.) Fantasies said to be dreamed by Albert Einstein in 1905, when he was a patent clerk.
13
13
5
CHARMS FOR THE EASY LIFE, by Kaye Gibbons. (Putnam, $19.95.) The fortunes of three indomitable North Carolina women who have to cope with men who disappoint, disappear and die.
14
16
4
FOR LOVE, by Sue Miller. (HarperCollins, $23.) An affair is renewed and the past reconsidered by people returning to their Massachusetts hometown.
15
12
4
WHISPERS, by Belva Plain. (Delacorte, $22.95.) The realities that lie below the surface of an outwardly happy family.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Nonfiction
1
1
42
WOMEN WHO RUN WITH THE WOLVES, by Clarissa Pinkola Estes. (Ballantine, $20.) A Jungian analyst reinterprets myths and folk tales to enable women to understand their psyches.
2
2
37
THE WAY THINGS OUGHT TO BE, by Rush H. Limbaugh 3d. (Pocket, $22.) Anecdotes and opinions offered by the talk show host.
3
3
15
HEALING AND THE MIND, by Bill Moyers. (Doubleday, $25.) Conversations about the relationship of sickness to thoughts and emotions.
4
5
24
CARE OF THE SOUL, by Thomas Moore. (HarperCollins, $22.50.) Spirituality and daily life.
5
6
3
THE REAL ANITA HILL, by David Brock. (Free Press, $24.95.) A journalist's account of the relationship between the law professor and Clarence Thomas, whom she testified against.
6
4
6
THINKING OUT LOUD, by Anna Quindlen. (Random House, $22.) Essays on current topics.
7
8
3
EMBRACED BY THE LIGHT, by Betty J. Eadie with Curtis Taylor. (Gold Leaf Press, $14.95.) A woman's near-death experience.
8
7
3
CULTURE OF COMPLAINT, by Robert Hughes. (New York Public Library/Oxford University, $19.95.) Essays critical of current trends.
9
9
2
TURMOIL AND TRIUMPH, by George P. Shultz. (Stewart/Scribners, $30.) The memoirs of Ronald Reagan's Secretary of State.
10
13
28
BANKRUPTCY 1995, by Harry E. Figgie Jr. with Gerald J. Swanson. (Little, Brown, $19.95.) The collapse of America under Government debt.
11
11
4
CONDUCT UNBECOMING, by Randy Shilts. (St. Martin's, $27.95.) The roles that gay men and lesbians have played in our armed forces.
12
10
7
A WORLD WAITING TO BE BORN, by M. Scott Peck. (Bantam, $22.95.) A call for people to make civility part of their lives.
13
15
36
THE TE OF PIGLET, by Benjamin Hoff. (Dutton, $16.) Aspects of Taoist philosophy explained through the actions of an A. A. Milne character.
14
14
11
ASSEMBLING CALIFORNIA, by John McPhee. (Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux, $21.) Investigations into the geological history of California.
15
10
PREPARING FOR THE TWENTY-FIRST CENTURY, by Paul Kennedy. (Random House, $25.) A historian assays social and political forces.
15
12
5
REMEMBERING DENNY, by Calvin Trillin. (Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux, $19.) A memoir of a bright young man of the 1950's who committed suicide two years ago.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous
1
1
5
A WOMAN'S WORTH, by Marianne Williamson. (Random House, $17.) Advice about beauty, age, relationships, sex, children and careers.
2
2
11
BEATING THE STREET, by Peter Lynch with John Rothchild. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $23.) Advice about investing in stocks and mutual funds.
3
3
46
HARVEY PENICK'S LITTLE RED BOOK, by Harvey Penick with Bud Shrake. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $19.) Anecdotes and tips about playing golf from a legendary teacher.
4
4
7
MEN ARE FROM MARS, WOMEN ARE FROM VENUS, by John Gray. (HarperCollins, $20.) Ways to improve communication between the sexes.
5
62
HOW TO SATISFY A WOMAN EVERY TIME, by Naura Hayden. (Bibli O'Phile/Dutton, $15.95.) Sexual counsel for married couples.
These listings are based on computer-processed sales figures from 3,050 bookstores and from representative wholesalers with more than 28,000 other retail outlets, including variety stores and supermarkets.
The figures are statistically adjusted to represent sales in all such outlets across the United States.
Rankings reflect sales for the week ending May 15. *An asterisk before a book's title indicates that its sales, weighted to reflect the book-selling industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
LP indicates that a book is available in large print.
And Bear in Mind
(Editors' choices of other recent books of particular interest)
THE MAN WHO WASN'T MAIGRET: A Portrait of Georges Simenon, by Patrick Marnham. (Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux, $25.) A thoughtful, convincing account of a man whose diligence -- 76 Maigret books, 117 other "serious" novels and more than 200 others -- makes his claim to have made love to 10,000 women seem plausible.
After his mother died, he stopped writing.
Odd.
THE INVENTION OF TRUTH, by Marta Morazzoni. (Knopf, $18.) An absorbing novella about artists and lookers at art; it concerns John Ruskin and 300 women working on the Bayeux Tapestry.
THE BEST INTENTIONS, by Ingmar Bergman. (Arcade, $22.95.) The Swedish director playfully calls this book about his parents a novel.
Whatever it is, it's lush and devastating at once.
FOR GOD, COUNTRY AND COCA-COLA: The Unauthorized History of the Great American Soft Drink and the Company That Makes It, by Mark Pendergrast. (Scribners, $27.50.) Everything knowable about the potation of the 20th century.
LIFE'S DOMINION: An Argument About Abortion, Euthanasia, and Individual Freedom, by Ronald Dworkin. (Knopf, $23.) Mr.
Dworkin contends that the relevant choices cannot depend on anyone's "right to live" (or to die), but must proceed from the idea that life is sacred, and that therefore the state must not interfere.
REBEL POWERS, by Richard Bausch. (Seymour Lawrence/ Houghton Mifflin, $21.95.) The narrator of this novel, a thoughtful man trying to proceed honestly, examines his family, imperiled by the clash of old verities and threatening new ideas.
LOVING DAUGHTERS, by Olga Masters. (Norton, $21.95.) This subtly passionate novel involves a humanly imperfect Australian family endangered by the arrival of a handsome clergyman.


LeAnn P. Wilcox, Kenneth Plutnicki
LeAnn Patricia Wilcox, a daughter of Lee and Martha Wilcox of Kansas City, Mo., was married there yesterday to Kenneth Plutnicki, the son of Edward and Dolores Plutnicki of Bayonne, N.J.
The Rev.
Gerald Waris performed the ceremony at St.
Peter's Roman Catholic Church.
Ms.
Wilcox, 35, is keeping her name.
She and her husband are copy editors, she for the sports desk of The New York Times in Manhattan, and he for the sports desk of The Record in Hackensack, N.J.
Ms.
Wilcox graduated from Kansas State University.


A Hit by Bo Ends No-Hit Bid by Abbott
The pitch was right where Jim Abbott wanted it, a fastball high and inside, intended to prolong the bid for his first no-hitter.
The swing was all Bo Jackson could muster, as he barely got around on the eighth-inning pitch before it zoomed by him.
But the result of the ball clashing with the skinny part of the bat yesterday was a bloop, climbing over second base and dropping into shallow center field.
It was a hit, a devastating hit.
When Jackson reached first base, he waved and saluted Abbott.
A day of misery had just eased with one out in the eighth for the White Sox, five outs short of their becoming no-hit victims.
With each out, the decibel level at Yankee Stadium and some blood-pressure levels in the White Sox dugout had been rising.
But the no-hitter eluded Abbott because Jackson fisted an 0-1 fastball for a single that did not travel 180 feet.


On China: Mr. Clinton Keeps Faith
President Clinton has now given Chinese leaders notice that their trading privileges with the U.S. will depend directly on their respect for internationally recognized human rights.
He thus keeps faith not only with his campaign commitments but with America's responsibility to millions of Chinese who want to see political freedom keep up with the rapid pace of economic change.
U.S. trade pressure won't turn Beijing's lifelong Leninists into Jeffersonian democrats, but it will maximize Washington's leverage over Chinese conditions.
And it will put America's economic weight behind the struggles of those Chinese most sympathetic to American values -- students, intellectuals, workers and ordinary citizens of cities like Beijing, many of whom still suffer the consequences of the repression that began in Tiananmen Square four years ago this week.


Corrections
A listing on May 16 in the special Summer Arts section gave an incorrect area code for the Seattle Opera.
Its number is (206) 389-7676.


Ravaged Somali Valley Reviving in a Wary Peace
More than six months ago, at the height of famine and fighting in Somalia, the bush town of Bardera was a vast cemetery, its streets littered with hundreds of bodies as starvation and illness took about 200 lives each day.
Today, a wary peace has come to Bardera, a fertile valley that was swept of its resources by civil war, and it is filled with signs of new vitality.


Good Breeding Can Be the Death of You
The spider web has long served as a convenient metaphor for life's perilous unpredictability.
Inadvertently disturb one of the delicate threads, and the deadly spider, dripping venom, comes running.
The image is employed repeatedly throughout the musical "Kiss of the Spider Woman," as the title promises.
I'm not so sure I expected it to turn up in a play by A. R. Gurney, though.
Mr.
Gurney has had a productive career chronicling the passing of the WASP aristocracy of greater New England, which once ruled the country and defended what were thought to be its finer values.
If nothing else, his characters have prided themselves on their inherent civility and their ability to rise above life's unpleasantness.


Laureate Forerunner
To the Editor:
Your May 19 article about Rita Dove's appointment as poet laureate identified her as the first black person to hold this post.
That may be technically true, since the title dates only from 1986.
But Robert Hayden, a renowned black poet and former college professor of mine, was appointed to this position in 1975, when it was still known as poetry consultant to the Library of Congress.
He was in addition a member of the American Academy of Arts and Letters and a 1975 fellow of the Academy of American Poets.
SHERMAN L. GREENE New York, May 22, 1993


A Neighborhood Changes, but Deep-Rooted Residents Remain
For Beverly Hartstein, a perfect day is a few laps at the community center pool, horseback riding or a stroll along Orchard Beach's white sandy shores in the Pelham Parkway area of the North Bronx.
"I like it here," said Mrs.
Hartstein, a 60-year-old retired nurse, as she takes a few laps around Bronx House's pool.
"I can't imagine living anywhere else."


Pamelia Ward, John White Jr.
Pamelia Parker Ward, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Peter M. Ward of Darien, Conn., was married there yesterday to John Hill White Jr., a son of Mr. and Mrs.
White of Greenwich, Conn.
The Rev.
Anne B. Kimball and the Rev.
Michael Jude Fay, a Roman Catholic priest, officiated at St.
Luke's Episcopal Church.
Mrs.
White is a coordinator of financial strategy with the Gartner Group, a computer consulting firm in Stamford, Conn.
She graduated from Roger Williams College.
Her father is a senior partner in the New York law firm of Chadbourne &amp; Parke.
Her mother, Audrey Ward, is a broker with Pollack &amp; Williams, a real estate brokerage in Darien.


Stripes As Stars
The sawtooth-edge-stripe skirt from Karl Lagerfeld is fashion's spring success.
The novelty print, in a synthetic stretch fabric, seems to be the introduction many women need to experiment with a longer skirt that can be dressed up for evening with a blazer piped in white or worn in the daytime with a variety of tailored jackets.
The slim skirt, in black or navy on white, is always worn long, as it was shown in Paris, and always with black stockings, shoes or ankle boots -- just as the designer presented it in October.
One woman even adopted the lace-up white boots, as Mr.
Lagerfeld showed them.
The distinctive pattern is a relief to the monotone of the familiar matching suit.
It is also the uptown woman's alternative to the downtown crowd's boldly striped pants.


The Paperless Office Looms on the Horizon. Again.
IN the 1960's, in the original vision of the office of the future, computer screens and magnetic data storage would replace filing cabinets and typewriters.
Paper would become obsolete.
It hasn't worked out that way.
Each new electronic office device -- copier, computer, printer and fax machine -- has instead contributed to the blizzard of office paper.


Pamela L. Myers and Paul Jeremias
Pamela Lee Myers, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Nat C. Meyers Jr. of Scarsdale, N.Y., was married yesterday evening in Tarrytown, N.Y., to Paul Jeremias, a son of Dr.
Martin Jeremias of Hamilton, Ontario, and Sonya Jeremias of Dundas, Ontario.
Rabbi Daniel Wolk officiated at the Tarrytown House.
Ms.
Myers, who is keeping her name, is the administrator of exhibitions and programming at the Guggenheim Museum in New York.
She graduated from Cornell University.
Her father is the managing director of the Ancom Communication Company, an audiovisual communications concern in Scarsdale.
Her mother, Frances G. Myers, is the special assistant in the Westchester County Office for the Disabled in White Plains.


Lisa Fleck and Bruce Quackenbush
September wedding plans have been announced for Lisa Beth Fleck, a daughter of Aaron H. and Barbara O. Fleck of Sarasota, Fla., and Bruce Kalloch Quackenbush, a son of Hubert G. and Joan K. Quackenbush of Orlando, Fla.
Ms.
Fleck, 30, is a vice president at Bear, Stearns &amp; Company in New York.
She graduated from Tulane University.
Her father founded Aaron H. Fleck &amp; Associates, an investment advisory concern in Sarasota.
Her mother, now retired, owned Orco Inc., a former tile manufacturing and distributing company there.


Technology; Big Advances Against Small Killers
PARASITIC diseases kill and debilitate millions of people every year, but for a combination of socioeconomic and scientific reasons, they have long defied conventional medicine.
Now researchers at the University of California at San Francisco, with financing from the Defense Department, have taken a novel biotechnology approach to two common parasites.
And the results are promising.
The university scientists, who reported their work recently in the Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, a scientific journal, have identified compounds that interfere at crucial points in the life cycles of the parasites that cause two tropical diseases: malaria and schistosomiasis.
The compounds are not drugs, but they provide useful leads that medicinal chemists may be able to turn into drugs.


Dear Mr. Lipsyte: A High School Class Responds on Glen Ridge
As an exercise for her sophomore English class at Arcata High School in Arcata, Calif., Pamela Ford Cavanaugh asked students for their impressions of Robert Lipsyte's column about the Glen Ridge sexual-abuse case ("Will the Moral Court Please Come to Order," The Times, May 19), in which Lipsyte noted that "all the boys, the innocent and the guilty, come through the same SportsWorld culture of violence." What follows are some of the students' responses.
Dear Mr.
Lipsyte:
About what happened in Glen Ridge, N.J., you were right: It could happen anywhere.
But it could also be done by anyone, not just by a few football players, but by teachers, parents, relatives and journalists.
Children and teen-agers need to be taught at home the values of life, hard work and morals.
A coach's job is to teach the sport and to desire winning.
Who likes to lose when you're 16?
I don't know if you just never played sports, were the last pick or just fell asleep.
Sports add stamina, character and confidence to a person.


Who Owns Ideas, and Papers, Is Issue in Company Lawsuits
You've done it -- invented a recipe for the perfect chocolate-chip cookie.
But your boss wants to keep making them the old-fashioned way for now.
So you go into business for yourself, selling the cookies like, well, hot cakes -- until your old boss sues . . . and wins.
Why?
Because, according to the standards emerging from the growing number of lawsuits over the theft of trade secrets, you stole your own idea.


Tickets in France
To the Editor: On a recent school trip to Paris, our group of seven students and two teachers was changing Metro (subway) lines to reach Sacre-Coeur.
As we proceeded upstairs, downstairs and around corners, in search of the correct line, we encountered five women in black uniforms who demanded to see our tickets.
Although unaware of the necessity of safeguarding them, especially since it is virtually impossible to jump the turnstile, we were able to produce the small green ticket -- except for our youngest student, who was chastised by the uniformed guard.
No amount of pleading could sway the control agents.
With the threat of police action and the confiscation of his passport, the student, now near tears, was fined 135 francs ($27) on the spot.
It was Easter Sunday!


Holiday Weekend
Memorial Day will be observed tomorrow.
Here are holiday schedules.
NEW YORK  GOVERNMENT OFFICES Closed.
POST OFFICE Express Mail and special delivery only; main post office open at 33d Street and Eighth Avenue.
BANKS Closed.
PARKING Sunday rules in effect.
SANITATION No pickups, recycling or street cleanings.
SCHOOLS Closed.
FINANCIAL MARKETS Closed.
TRANSPORTATION Buses and subways on Sunday schedule.
Long Island Rail Road on weekend schedule.
Metro-North on weekend schedule.
NEW JERSEY  GOVERNMENT OFFICES Closed.
POST OFFICES Express Mail and special delivery only.
BANKS Closed.
SCHOOLS Local option.
TRANSPORTATION N.J.
Transit on Sunday schedule.
CONNECTICUT  GOVERNMENT OFFICES Closed.
POST OFFICES Express Mail and special delivery only.
BANKS Closed.
SCHOOLS Closed.
TRANSPORTATION Metro-North on weekend schedule.
Street Closings MEMORIAL DAY PARADE, Manhattan.
Broadway between 72d and 86th Streets; 86th Street between Broadway and Riverside Drive, and Riverside Drive between 86th and 90th Streets will be closed from 8 A.M. to early afternoon.
MEMORIAL DAY PARADE, Staten Island.
Forest Avenue from Victory Boulevard to Decker Avenue from 11 A.M. to 4 P.M.
ASTORIA-BROADWAY FESTIVAL, Queens.
Broadway between Steinway and Crescent Streets from 10 A.M. to 7 P.M.


Air Miles Suspended
Air Miles, a year-old program that enabled consumers to accrue frequent-flier points by using certain credit cards or shopping at designated stores, has been suspended in the United States, according to Keith Mills of the Loyalty Management Group in Boston, which operated Air Miles in the United States.
Some 2.5 million households were enrolled in the program, said Mr.
Mills.
Participating companies included Lenscrafters, General Cinema and A.T.&amp;T., as well as local sponsors in Boston, Hartford and Chicago.
Tickets, which Mr.
Mills said numbered in the hundreds, were issued by American, United, USAir and Air Canada.


If You're Thinking of Living in: Spotswood
ALTHOUGH it is in the heart of Middlesex County, one of New Jersey's most populous areas, the Borough of Spotswood has retained much of its old-time country ambiance.
Most of its streets are tree-lined and Main Street did not even have sidewalks until 1989.
The 19-man Police Department still patrols every street daily and nightly, checking doors of businesses.
On Christmas Eve there is a tree lighting with caroling at "the Triangle," the intersection of Snowhill Road, Main Street and Park Avenue in the center of town.
On Memorial Day, a parade with bands and floats winds its way down Main Street.


A Peace Offering That Starts at the Head
HAVING one's hair shampooed professionally is, for my money, one of life's great spine-tingling pleasures, only it never seems to last long enough.
But at Nymph -- short for New York Master Practitioners of Hair -- in SoHo, a four-step shampoo and scalp-massage treatment ($35) goes on for a blissful half-hour.
It is not just so that your hair will look nice.
"Scalp massage is a method of peaceful healing," said Lorraine Massey Wong, who owns the hair salon with her husband, Sam Wong.


Votes in Congress
Tally Last Week in Connecticut, New Jersey and New York Senate 1.
Wellstone Modified Amendment No.370: To reduce the individual contribution limit to $100 per Senate election cycle.
Connecticut  Dodd (D) . . .
N Lieberman (D) . . .
N New Jersey  Bradley (D) . . . ...
Y  Lautenberg (D) . . . ...
Y  New York  D'Amato (R) . . .
N Moynihan (D) . . .
N KEY: Y Yea; N Nay; (A) Absent or did not vote; (P) Present.
House 1.
Reconciliation Bill: Would raise taxes by about $250 billion and cut spending on benefit programs by about $100 billion over five years. 2.
Second Supplemental Appropriations Act of 1993: Would make supplemental appropriations, transfers, and rescissions for the fiscal year ending September 30, 1993.
Connecticut
1. Kennelly (D) . . . ... Y... Y
2. Gejdenson (D) . . . ... Y... Y
3. DeLauro (D) . . . ... Y... Y
4. Shays (R) . . . N... Y
5. Franks (R) . . . N... N
6. Johnson (R) . . . N... Y  New Jersey
1. Andrews (D) . . . N... Y
2. Hughes (D) . . . ... Y... Y
3. Saxton (R) . . . N... N
4. Smith (R) . . . N... Y
5. Roukema (R) . . . N... N
6. Pallone (D) . . . N... Y
7. Franks (R) . . . N... Y
8. Klein (D) . . . N... Y
9.
Torricelli (D) . . . ...
Y...
Y  10.
Payne (D) . . . ...
Y...
Y  11.
Gallo (R) . . .
N...
N  12.
Zimmer (R) . . .
N...
N  13.
Menendez (D) . . . ...
Y...
Y  New York
1. Hochbrueckner (D) . . . ... Y... Y
2. Lazio (R) . . . N... Y
3. King (R) . . . N... N
4. Levy (R) . . . N... Y
5. Ackerman (D) . . . ... Y... Y
6. Flake (D) . . . ... Y... Y
7. Manton (D) . . . ... Y... Y
8. Nadler (D) . . . ... Y... Y
9.
Schumer (D) . . . ...
Y...
Y  10.
Towns (D) . . . ...
Y...
Y  11.
Owens (D) . . . ...
Y...
Y  12.
Velazquez (D) . . . ...
Y...
Y  13.
Molinari (R) . . .
N...
N  14.
Maloney (D) . . .
N...
Y  15.
Rangel (D) . . . ...
Y...
Y  16.
Serrano (D) . . . ...
Y...
Y  17.
Engel (D) . . . ...
Y...
Y  18.
Lowey (D) . . . ...
Y...
Y  19.
Fish (R) . . .
N...
Y  20.
Gilman (R) . . .
N...
Y  21.
McNulty (D) . . . ...
Y...
Y  22.
Solomon (R) . . .
N...
N  23.
Boehlert (R) . . .
N...
Y  24.
McHugh (R) . . .
N...
Y  25.
Walsh (R) . . .
N...
Y  26.
Hinchey (D) . . . ...
Y...
Y  27.
Paxon (R) . . .
N...
N  28.
Slaughter (D) . . . ...
Y...
Y  29.
LaFalce (D) . . . ...
Y...
Y  30.
Quinn (R) . . .
N...
Y  31.
Houghton (R) . . .
N...
N  KEY: Y Yea; N Nay; (A) Absent or did not vote; (P) Present.


Dear Mr. Lipsyte: A High School Class Responds on Glen Ridge
As an exercise for her sophomore English class at Arcata High School in Arcata, Calif., Pamela Ford Cavanaugh asked students for their impressions of Robert Lipsyte's column about the Glen Ridge sexual-abuse case ("Will the Moral Court Please Come to Order," The Times, May 19), in which Lipsyte noted that "all the boys, the innocent and the guilty, come through the same SportsWorld culture of violence." What follows are some of the students' responses.
Dear Mr.
Lipsyte:
I agree with you that some athletes are sex fiends and will do just about anything to get a girl into bed, but I disagree with your implying that all athletes are sex fiends.
I have many friends who are athletes, and I, too, am an athlete, and the vast majority of us are not sex fiends.
And lastly, all girls are not innocent of everything.
Excluding rape, "it takes two to tango," and I happen to know girls who throw themselves at athletes.
CHRIS LEHMAN


Dinkins Campaign Strategy: Show Them Who's the Mayor
The best way to remain Mayor, David N. Dinkins has clearly decided, is to remind New Yorkers as often as possible that he already is.
To the extent that Mr.
Dinkins has developed a political strategy in what is expected to be a very close race, it is to emphasize his incumbency.


How to Sharpen Tools To Their Fine Points
EXCEPT for lawnmower blades and hedge clippers, yard and garden tools are seldom sharpened adequately.
Many owners of shovels, hoes and other digging tools may not be aware that the tools should be sharpened.
For sharpening most outdoor tools, all that is needed is a 10- or 12-inch mill-bastard file.
For finer-edged tools like pruning shears, also buy a 10-inch smoothing file, and for both tools buy a file card, a type of wire brush for cleaning filings from between files' teeth.
Using a file card is a key to keep files sharp.


Building the World's Largest Middle Class
THE NEW DEALERS Power Politics in the Age of Roosevelt.
By Jordan A. Schwarz. 411 pp.
New York: Alfred A. Knopf. $27.50.


A Woman Enters the Boxing Ring, as a Trainer
EUGENE PARLER, a wiry 19-year-old, delivered a few stiff jabs at a heavy bag that barely budged.
His trainer, Emma Jordan, admonished him for not hitting harder.
"You're slapping it!" Ms.
Jordan said.
Mr.
Parler responded by launching a right hook that sent the bag snapping back.


Julie Goldstone, David Marcley
December wedding plans have been announced for Julie Anne Goldstone and David Allen Marcley, the co-owners of Dave's Grill, a restaurant in Montauk, L.I.
Ms.
Goldstone, 32, formerly owned Sheldon Communications, a public relations concern in New York.
She graduated from Tulane University.
She is a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Sheldon B. Goldstone of Scranton, Pa., where her father is a dermatologist.


Diane Cognato, E. D. Efthimides
Diane Cognato, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Charles Cognato of Norristown, Pa., was married yesterday to Emil D. Efthimides, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Aris Efthimides of Franklin, Mich.
The Rev.
Leonard Furmanski performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at the St.
Thomas of Villanova Church on the campus of Villanova University, in Villanova, Pa..


Getting Instrumentalists And Earth in Tune
IN the perfect days of June, the poet James Russell Lowell assures us, "Heaven tries the earth if it be in tune"; Saturday evening at 7:30, however, it will be the oboist of the New Haven Symphony trying if the orchestra be in tune for the 11th annual "Picnic in the Park" concert, benefiting the symphony and the Connecticut Fund for the Environment.
Certainly the group's music director, Michael Palmer, has chosen an environmentally apt program, beginning with Dvorak's work "In Nature's Realm" and proceeding to other nature-inspired works like Smetana's "From Bohemia's Meadows and Fields," Moussorgsky's "Night on Bald Mountain" and Beethoven's "Pastoral" Symphony.


Corrections
The Art column on May 2 about two exhibitions at the Lehman College Art Gallery in the Bronx misidentified an art critic and a photographer.
The critic is D. S. Mirsky; the photographer is Pedro Serrano.


It's French, With an Italian Connection
LE PETIT BIJOUX names and describes a new French restaurant in Lynbrook, for the nine-table storefront is indeed a little gem.
The pocket-size charmer receives some of its sparkle from three imposing crystal chandeliers reflected in a wall of mirrors.
Ribbon-print wallpaper and an eclectic assembly of traditional French art soften the formality.


Smear Tactics
The Australians have a surprisingly glib recipe for baking in the sun, considering that they have the highest rate of skin cancer in the world.
They Slip, Slop, Slap, which means they slip on a shirt, slop on some sunscreen, slap on a hat.
Titanium dioxide is the "new" cosmetic equivalent of slipping and slopping.
A cousin of zinc oxide, the greasy white glop that lifeguards used to slather on their nose in the days of "Beach Blanket Bingo," it provides a physical rather than a chemical barrier to the sun's ultraviolet (UV) rays.


New Driveways to the Pits
The 33 drivers who will start the 77th Indianapolis 500 on Sunday had their final briefing on rules and procedures today during the drivers' meeting at the Indianapolis Motor Speedway.
This year, new warmup lanes have replaced the apron that used to be along the edge of the track.
On race day, drivers will be able to enter the pits as they always have, coming off Turn 4 at the head of the front stretch, which figures to be the fastest way into the pits.
But they may also drop off the racing surface and onto the warmup lane either at the end of the backstretch or in the short straight between Turns 3 and 4.


CONNECTICUT GUIDE
ART'S ALIVE IN KENT
Five art exhibitions will be on view in Kent through June 20, four in the center of the town's two-block Main Street of boutiques, galleries and restaurants, and one a short distance down Route 7.
At Bachelier-Cardonsky, above the House of Books, David Loeb's paintings of people evoke the old Dutch masters' soft lighting, impeccable draftsmanship and thoughtful facial expressions.


ENERGY TAX PLAN TO BE SCALED BACK, MOYNIHAN REPORTS
The chairman of the Senate Finance Committee said today that the Clinton Administration and the Senate would scale back the size of the proposed energy tax to ease the burden on business, perhaps by exempting whole industries.
Daniel Patrick Moynihan, the New York Democrat, said the resulting loss of revenue would be offset by additional spending cuts, possibly in Medicare, the Government health program for the elderly.


Choosing the Right Fish for Grilling
SUCCESSFULLY grilling fish depends on two conditions.
First, the grill or the source of heat must be searingly hot so the fish can take on appetizing color before it is overcooked.
Second, the fish should have a firm enough texture so it does not fall apart.
Adequate preheating and sufficient coals should guarantee that the grill is hot when it is time to cook fish.
Placing the grate as close as possible to the heat source enhances intensity.
As for types of fish that are best for grilling, thick steak fish -- like tuna, swordfish and shark -- head the list.
Monkfish is also excellent, as is mahi-mahi, tilefish and salmon.
Softer fish like cod and halibut are more difficult to handle, and it is also not advisable to attempt fish that come in thin fillets, like flounder.


N. Adele Hogan, William P. Scott
N.
Adele Hogan, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Thomas Hogan of Fayetteville, N.Y., was married there yesterday to William P. Scott, a son of Elizabeth Scott of Bellmore, L.I., and the late William A. Scott.
TheScott  Rev.
Kevin Corcoran performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at the Church of the Immaculate Conception.


U.S. Scientists Baffled by an Epidemic in Cuba
Scientists sent to Cuba to investigate an epidemic of a disease that impairs vision and damages nerves say they are baffled about its cause and the reason the number of cases has risen to 34,000 from nearly 26,000 a month ago.
Although some experts in the United States had said the epidemic appeared to have been caused by a vitamin deficiency, laboratory tests have not established any environmental, genetic, nutritional, infectious or toxicological cause for the epidemic, the Pan American Health Organization said in a statement last week.


Currency
Last
Prior
Year
Week
Week
Ago
Japanese Yen107.30
110.40
127.60
per Dollar
German Mark1.5850
1.6265
1.6080
per Dollar
Canadian Dollar1.2713
1.2643
1.2032
per U.S. Dollar
British Pound1.5605
1.5390
1.8285
U.S. Dollar per British Pound
Gold$378.00
$367.25
$336.25
Republic National Bank
Currency: Friday NY Close


Kyoto as It Used to Be
THE essence of old Kyoto, a city often described as the cultural soul of Japan, may lie behind an onion patch.
It is a plain patch of broad furrows, with a few wispy rows of vegetables in spring that point toward a droopy thatch-roofed hut, but the history of that cottage and its environs are part of what make this section of Kyoto, called Arashiyama, one of the more evocative spots in a splendid city threatened by overdevelopment.
The ancient cottage, known as Rakushisha, or the hut of fallen persimmons, rests in a quiet residential neighorhood alongside a lane shaded by towering trees.
It is the sort of place that might inspire a poet skilled at capturing the transcendent moments when man and nature seem to intersect.
That, in fact, is a part of what this unusual area remains to this day.


A la Carte; Riverboat Restaurant Is Setting Sail From Riverhead
THE Peconic River Lady, a new riverboat restaurant, is scheduled to make her first cruise this weekend.
The 149-passenger 85-foot paddlewheeler will sail from the Riverhead Town Dock on a schedule that includes regular brunch, luncheon and dinner cruises, as well as wedding, corporate, moonlight-dance and sunset voyages.
Michael Jacobchek, one of four partners who own the craft, has for some years operated J. P. Michaels and the Birchwood restaurants in Riverhead.


MAY 23-29: Stemming the Refugee Tide; Germany's Open Door To Asylum-Seekers Closes
After more than two years of impassioned debate, German lawmakers voted last week to amend the Constitution and impose drastic new restrictions on the entry of foreigners seeking political asylum.
The 1949 West German Constitution included a guarantee of asylum for any persecuted foreigner.
For years it posed no problem, but after the collapse of communism in 1989 hundreds of thousands of refugees began streaming into Germany.


A Trail of 35,000 Lost Lives and a Grave Every 80 Yards
The Oregon Trail has been called the world's longest graveyard, with one body, on average, buried every 80 yards or so.
People lost their lives to influenza, cholera, severe dysentery, or accidents.
They were crushed by wagon wheels, stepped on by oxen or killed when a simple cut turned into a gangrenous infection.
Nearly 350,000 people made the overland trip from 1843 to the mid-1860's, when stagecoach lines and then railroads replaced the trail as the main overland route.
One out of 10 died along the way.


Correction
A map on May 16 with an article about the status of public beaches in the Hamptons misidentified Pike's Beach, which was washed away in last winter's storms.
It was in Westhampton Beach, east of the Moriches Inlet.


Days of Getting, Spending and Photography, Too
Wordsworth thought that making money and buying goods damaged the spirit -- "Getting and spending, we lay waste our powers" -- and Wordsworth did not even live through the 1980's.
Those who did without slipping over the poverty line either made a fortune in junk bonds or heard the basic capitalist commandment grow as loud as a bass amplifier: "Thou shalt want more and more." The tendency to commodify just about everything, a tendency of long standing, swelled in that decade to a kind of Wagnerian climax.
Art, far from being exempt, had already become an investment vehicle and went through boom and bust cycles as if paintings were the Nasdaq composite.
Photographs now tagged along for the ride.
Before there was even an art market for photography, the camera was deeply implicated in the commodification business.
In the 19th century, photographs contributed to the translation of personality into consumer merchandise that came to be called celebrity.
In the 1920's, when advertisers realized how effective they already were in whetting appetites, photographs became central to the selling of desire.
Then in the 80's, just as large numbers of photographers decided to critique the consumption of images, the market finally decided that photographs were worth money and turned them into commodities too.


Healthy Snacks Beat Three Heavy Meals
To the Editor:
Re "7 Deadly Sins of Living Linked to Illness as Well as Mortality" (Health page, May 12): As an avid health and fitness enthusiast, I agree with Dr.
Lester Breslow's premise that several habits must be broken if one is to be healthy.
But to make "eating between meals" one of his deadly sins seems misleading.


Schoolboy Hits 3 Homers in Inning
MIKE PIERCE of Shenandoah High School of Middletown, Ind. hit three home runs in the same inning to break a record held by TED WILLIAMS and 33 others.


Elizabeth Glener, Michael Gallay
Mr. and Mrs.
Howard Glener of New York have announced the engagement of their daughter, Elizabeth Dori Glener, to Michael Eric Gallay, a son of Renee Gallay of Thornwood, N.Y., and the late Alan D. Gallay.
An August wedding is planned.
Miss Glener, 26, is an assistant district attorney in the Bronx.
She graduated from Cornell University, and she and her husband received law degrees from Boston University.
Her father is a senior sales representative for the Cardinal Communications Group, a typography and graphic arts company in New York.
Her mother, Lyla F. Glener, is a deputy assistant chief in the office of the New York City Corporation Counsel.


Canseco's Pitching A Hit With Red Sox
Red Sox 15, Rangers 1
Danny Darwin won his fifth straight game by allowing four hits and striking out eight in six innings yesterday as the Boston Red Sox overcame four errors to rout the slumping Texas Rangers, 15-1, in Boston.


A Pond That Is Zealously Protected
THERE was a time last summer when unrest came to the little pond in the woods of North Sea.
As ospreys dove for fish and a mother duck taught her fuzzy ducklings to fly using the swimming float as her heliport, the day seemed as peaceful as every other.
Ann Sobotka was doing the breast stroke, taking her daily swim to Muriel and Bob Goldfarb's dock.
But then it happened.
A young man dared to bring a jet ski onto Little Fresh Pond.
"He didn't last long," said Stuart Summit, who, along with his wife, Mary Ann, are the new kids on the pond.


WESTCHESTER GUIDE
ANIMALS AND ACROBATS
Camel rides and elephant rides are a few of the attractions to be sampled by families visiting the Memorial Day Weekend "Animals and Acrobats" event today and tomorrow at the Van Cortlandt Manor in Croton- on-Hudson.
Entertainers will be costumed as 19th-century itinerant road- show performers, forerunners of today's traveling circuses.


THE FOUNDING MOTHER
The work of Emily's List is commendable.
I hope the use of the cigar, in the photograph of Ellen Malcolm, does not suggest that she is now joining the historical and actual smoke-filled back rooms where deals are cut.
If Malcolm is going to repudiate comments that she "has turned into Boss Malcolm," she might choose another prop for future pictures.
JUDITH RAE MILLER Project Manager, The American Stop Smoking Intervention Study for Cancer Prevention  Department of Health Providence, R.I.


Report Questions States' Radiation Oversight
The Nuclear Regulatory Commission may not be adequately protecting the public in all states from exposure to radiation from materials used in industry and medicine, the General Accounting Office says.
While the commission regulates nuclear power plants, it has delegated to 29 states responsibility for regulating radioactive materials from other sources within their borders.


Erik Orm Autor and Ariadne M. Allan
Mr. and Mrs.
David B. Allan of Medfield, Mass., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Ariadne Marguerite Allan to Erik Orm Autor, a son of Kent R. Autor of Anchorage, Ala., and Dr.
Anne P. Autor of Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada.
A September wedding is planned.
Ms.
Allan is an associate producer for "60 Minutes," the CBS News program in Washington.
She graduated from Smith College.
Her father is the owner and president of the Alexander Allan Insurance Agency, which was founded in Medfield by the prospective bride's paternal grandfather, the late Alexander Allan.


RESULTS PLUS
TRACK AND FIELD Bubka Sets U.S.
Vault Record Competing outdoors for the first time in the United States, Sergei Bubka had the highest pole vault ever on American soil yesterday at the Bruce Jenner Classic in San Jose, Calif.
Bubka cleared 19 feet 8 1/4 inches.
The Ukrainian world record-holder previously became the first vaulter to jump that height indoors in the United States.
The U.S. outdoor best had been 19-6 1/2 in 1987 by Joe Dial.
Bubka's world outdoor mark is 20 feet 1 1/4 inches.
In other action, Andrew Valmon won the 400 meters in 45.71 seconds, edging Antonio Pettigrew by .13 seconds.
Olympic champion Quincy Watts, who won at that distance in the New York Games last week, was never a factor, posting a 46.85.
Kevin Young, the world record-holder in the 400 hurdles, ran a 48.17, bettering his time in the New York Games by .60 seconds.
It was the fastest time for the event anywhere this year. (AP)


Gilt by Association
Many magazines have children of the famous on their mastheads, but one in particular has become a hotbed of celebrity offspring.
At Mademoiselle, three of the five contributing editors -- Drena De Niro, Marci Klein and Tatiana Von Furstenberg -- have well-known parents.
Elizabeth Saltzman, the editor at large, is the daughter of Ellin Saltzman, the fashion director at Bergdorf Goodman; and Ana Luisa Paraud, a fashion editor, is a daughter of Carolina Herrera.
The assembling of contributors with famous surnames was not premeditated, said Gabe Doppelt, the editor in chief.
"They were just people I thought could be useful to the magazine," she added.


2 Are Arrested In a Derailment That Injured 72
Two Coast Guard members were charged on Friday with derailing an Amtrak train last year by switching the tracks moments before the locomotive passed at full speed, the authorities said.
The train, the Colonial, which originated in New York, wrecked on Aug. 12 five miles before it was scheduled to reach Newport News.
The accident injured 72 of the 123 passengers, and the engineer remains on medical leave.


At Work; An Employee-Rights Minefield
Stephen Paskoff leans toward his quarry, one hand balled into a fist in his pocket, the other rolling a Magic Marker as if it were two steel balls and he were a ship's captain.
Chris Joannides, a marketing manager at the Public Service Electric and Gas Company in Newark, looks as if his collar is shrinking by the second, but he stands his ground as he plays his role in the possible sexual harassment scenario before him during a recent training seminar.
If a female employee came to him in confidence and complained about unwanted attention from a co-worker, he probably would want to let someone higher up in the public utility know, even though it would place him in a dilemma as a manager.


Business Diary
THE ECONOMY Round One of the Budget Battle Goes to Clinton After a long wait, Bill Clinton enjoyed a significant victory, albeit by a weak margin, when the House passed, 219 to 213, the President's budget plan.
Approval was seen as a prerequisite if Mr.
Clinton hopes to have any clout on the rest of his agenda: health care, trade and so on.
The plan that passed includes what is by some measures the largest tax increase ever, with the goal of accomplishing what may be the greatest Federal deficit reduction ever.
The taxes come in several varieties and are likely to affect all but the very poorest people.
In addition, spending on automatic benefit programs will be reduced by almost $100 billion and freezes in discretionary spending are supposed to save about $100 billion more over five years.
Mr.
Clinton pushed hard for this victory, giving in on some details, but retaining most of what he wanted.
Still, the House vote was seen as the easy one, and a number of Senators are determined to amend the plan.
The Growth Engine Sputters The United States economy, which was cruising along at a growth rate of 4.7 percent in the last quarter of 1992, misfired in the first quarter of this year even more badly than was previously thought, the Government disclosed.
It now appears that the gross domestic product grew at an annual rate of only nine-tenths of 1 percent in January through March.
That was only half the 1.8 percent rate estimated a month ago.
It was the weakest economic growth since the fourth quarter of 1991.
A Tumble in Public Confidence In the Conference Board's latest survey, the public's confidence has fallen to its lowest level since before the presidential election.
Only 13 percent think jobs will be more plentiful in six months than they are now, for instance; it was the lowest level in a year.
But if people are losing hope for the future, they are not so gloomy about current economic conditions.
The current-conditions index remained a good deal higher than it was in October.
As Norma Pace, president of WEFA's Economic Consulting and Planning in New York, put it, "The index is an accurate reflection of how consumers feel, but it's not a good reflection of how they spend." The Fed Can't Stop The Drop The Federal Reserve intervened to try to stop the decline of the dollar against the yen on Thursday and Friday, but it was not enough to keep the United States currency from establishing record lows.
That is because many traders believed Washington is not all that uneasy with the idea of a stronger yen, which could lead to a decrease in the American trade deficit with Japan.
By late in the week, however, the Treasury Under Secretary for International Affairs, Lawrence H. Summers, said, "The market has moved too far, too fast." How far and how fast?
It took 125 yen to buy a dollar in January; for a while on Friday, it took fewer than 107.
Layoff Notices Not Required A Federal judge has ruled that the General Dynamics Corporation did not have to follow the law requiring that workers be given 60 days' notice before being laid off.
The case involved a mass layoff in 1991 after the Navy canceled a warplane program.
Other companies must deal with the competitive marketplace, natural disasters and economic cycles and still must warn their workers of possible layoffs.
But military contractors have a bigger burden.
They do business with the Federal Government.
A Short HDTV Honeymoon As it became clear that the three research teams competing to develop high definition television, known as HDTV, in the United States all had worthy technologies, the focus shifted to nontechnological matters, including jobs.
So, there was a sense of relief when the rivals agreed last week to join forces, presumably heading off lawsuits by those not chosen.
But the euphoria was shortlived.
Experts quickly suggested that it might be impossible to reconcile crucial technical issues without alienating television equipment companies or computer companies.
INTERNATIONAL Renault, After the Socialists When the Socialists held the reins in France, they stopped the privatization of Government-owned companies.
But now the Socialists are gone, and the new Prime Minister has designated 21 companies for privatization, starting next fall.
Added to the list for the first time was Renault, which has done surprisingly well in the crowded European auto market.
In Default?
The Aga Khan?
Among the world's rich and famous, there are few people as rich and as famous as the Aga Khan.
But this counts for little these days in Italy.
When the Aga Khan's investments in luxury resorts faltered and his main holding company failed to make a loan payment, his creditors moved to seize assets, and the Milan stock exchange suspended trading in his companies.
Another Chance for China As a candidate, Bill Clinton lacerated George Bush for not using trade as a lever to improve human rights in China.
But as President, Mr.
Clinton has not deployed his main weapon: China's "most favored nation" trade status.
He will give Beijing another year to make progress on rights.
COMPANIES Time on Their Side Since Time took Warner as a partner, there have been periodic reports that the company was looking for well-heeled investors.
Now they are starting to appear.
Earlier this month, U S West said it would take a 25.5 percent stake in Time Warner Entertainment.
Then Seagram unexpectedly disclosed that it had acquired 5.7 percent of Time Warner's stock and wanted to accumulate 15 percent.
Time Warner professed to be delighted, although it was not immediately clear what it might gain from a closer relationship with a Canadian liquor and fruit juice company.
Crossing Paths Again Before Kohlberg, Kravis, Roberts took RJR Nabisco private for $25 billion, one of its biggest deals was a $6 billion buyout of Beatrice.
But it was not a particularly happy deal for Kohlberg, which finally sold the company to Conagra, headed by Charles M. Harper.
But Kohlberg, Kravis must have been impressed by Mr.
Harper's performance because it has now turned to him to become chief executive of RJR Nabisco.
Looking Under The Rock At Prudential Securities, insiders say, some high-commission brokers in the booming Dallas branch ran amok from the mid-80's until last summer.
Among other things, they are said to have purchased securities without authorization and forged clients' signatures.
Now the S.E.C. is reported to be investigating whether the firm has violated a 1986 settlement involving earlier complaints that its supervisors had failed to do their jobs.
Rendezvous in Hog Heaven Harley-Davidson, which has roared past its competitors by improving the quality of its motorcycles and promoting the joy of the open road, is about to celebrate its 90th anniversary with festivities in Milwaukee on June 12.
To get the expected 60,000 bikers to the blast on time, the company has mapped out 10 paths to Milwaukee and the company is assigning high-ranking executives to serve as ride hosts for the various routes.
Its chief executive, Richard Teerlink, for instance, is leading the caravan from San Francisco.
A Dip at Dell...
In the folklore of the computer industry, the story of the rise of Dell Computer is one of the standards.
Hatched in a University of Texas dormitory room by 19-year-old Michael Dell, the company has grown in less than a decade to be the fourth-largest personal computer maker.
But now Dell has had its wings clipped.
The company reported first-quarter profits that were half of the previous year's even though revenues were sharply higher.
The big problem was that the company had failed to keep up in the fast-growing notebook-computer market.
For the week Dell's stock plunged $9 a share, or more than 27 percent.  ...And an AST Acquisition Dell may soon be unseated as No. 4 in the PC business by AST Research, based in Irvine, Calif.
AST has agreed to buy the money-losing TE Electronics, the computer-manufacturing subsidiary of the Tandy Corporation.
Tandy had previously announced that it would spin off TE at the beginning of July as a separately traded company.
For AST, the purchase is a chance to acquire manufacturing capacity.
Tandy wants to concentrate on its Radio Shack stores and other retail operations.
But the sale also removes a pioneer of the PC industry.
There was a time a decade or more ago when Tandy -- along with Commodore and Atari -- was one of the leaders in the industry.
Soap Opera Update Last week on "As the Executive World Turns": After being sued by his former boss Jack (John F. Smith Jr.), Inaki (Jose Ignacio Lopez de Arriortua) breaks his silence and swears he did not take confidential documents when he left General Motors.
One reason he left, he said, was that others were thwarting his dream of building a car plant in the Basque region of Spain.
Meanwhile, a Ger- man magazine calls him "The Unscrupulous One" on its cover.
Still, his new boss, Ferdinand (Piech, Volkswagen's chairman), stands by his ace cost-cutter.
He does disclose, though, that Inaki approached VW about leaving Detroit, and not the other way around.


MAY 23-29: Ambush and Error; A Cardinal Falls Victim To Mexico's Drug Trade
In robes and crucifix, Juan Jesus Cardinal Posadas Ocampo seemed an unlikely person to be mistaken for one of Mexico's top drug outlaws.
But mistaken identity is now the official explanation for the assault by members of a drug gang last week that killed the Cardinal, his driver and five other people in an airport parking lot in Guadalajara.
Officials say the Cardinal's car was inadvertently driven into an ambush set for the head of Mexico's Sinaloa cartel.
The gunmen, believed to be from the Tijuana cartel, probably opened fire because the prelate was riding in a white 1993 Gran Marquis similar to those favored by drug lords, the authorities said.


THE FOUNDING MOTHER
Unlike the back-room bosses of machine politics, Ellen Malcolm and Emily's List encourage wider citizen participation in the process by getting women themselves to provide early money to qualified female candidates (who are pro-choice Democrats) to get them started.
Isn't that what democracy is all about?
GEORGE A. DEAN Southport, Conn.


Corrections
An article last Sunday about investor research that is underwritten by the companies being studied characterized an analyst's report on Columbia Laboratories Inc. incorrectly.
Columbia did not pay for the report.
It says that the analyst identified himself as a representative of a securities firm, and that it dealt with him as with any other analyst.


Fifteen Hurt in Long Island Bus Crash


Susan Houriet and Barclay Palmer
Susan Erwin Houriet, a staff writer for The Advocate, a newspaper in Stamford, Conn., was married yesterday to Barclay Livingstone Palmer, a financial news producer at CNN in New York.
The Rev.
Robert Castle performed the Episcopal ceremony at Waveny House, a mansion in New Canaan, Conn.
Mrs.
Palmer, 28, graduated magna cum laude from the University of Vermont, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa.
She and her husband received master's degrees in journalism from Columbia University.
She is the daughter of Mary Mathias of Brighton, Mass., and Robert Houriet of Hardwick, Vt.
Her father is an author in Hardwick.
Her mother is a social worker at the Indochinese Psychiatry Clinic in Boston.


Fiscal Stimulus? The Economists Say 'Never Mind'
LAST fall, running up the budget deficit to avert another recession did not seem like such a bad idea to dozens of economists.
They signed onto the proposition that the extra spending, mostly on public works, would create jobs, helping to make the economy blossom rather than fade.
They pushed this view on candidate Bill Clinton, who was sympathetic.
And now they are silent.
What happened?
Well, raising the deficit, even temporarily, is no longer on any public agenda.
Deficit cutting, whatever the danger for a weak economy, has become a national obsession.
Under pressure from Congress, President Clinton made deficit cutting the priority.
And even the two most enthusiastic advocates of deficit spending -- James Tobin and Robert M. Solow, both Nobel laureates -- while not changing their view, have bowed to deficit-cutting.


Judgment Day


With F.B.I. Files Open, Suspect Seeks 2d Case
The next time V. James Landano goes into Federal court to seek information that might help free him from a murder charge, he will have a far-reaching United States Supreme Court decision to back him up.
In a unanimous decision on Monday, the high court struck down the Federal Bureau of Investigation's longstanding assumption that all the information it collects during a criminal investigation is confidential and shielded from disclosure under the Freedom of Information Act.


With Stone And Iron Gardens Grow
Rustic garden ornaments may soon replace elegant statuary on lawns across America.
The popularity of weathered figures and furnishings -- some speckled with moss or lichen -- is the most recent development in the booming field of garden decorations.
Rough-textured stone, wood and iron objects, most of them from Europe and Mexico, dominate an exhibition at Longhouse, the 16-acre estate of Jack Lenor Larsen, a New York textile designer.
As the show's curator, Mr.
Larsen placed some 50 fountains, benches, statues, wagons and a gazebo on his property, which features monochromatic gardens, rolling dunes and a swan pond.
Visible in the background is his gabled house, a 1990's masonry structure inspired by the seventh-century Shinto shrine in Ise, Japan.


IN SHORT: FICTION
HANK &amp; CHLOE By Jo-Ann Mapson. HarperCollins, $20.


B. A. McDonald, D. N. Fawcett
Bridget Anne McDonald, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John C. McDonald of Ticonderoga, N.Y., was married there yesterday to Donald Nathan Fawcett, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
G.
James Fawcett of Tyringham, Mass.
The Rev.
Alan D. Shnob, a Roman Catholic priest, officiated at St.
Mary's Church.
The Rev.
Duncan R. McQueen, an Episcopal minister, took part in the ceremony.
Mrs.
Fawcett, 26, is an associate in the privatization group at Smith Barney, Harris Upham &amp; Company, the securities brokerage in New York.
She graduated from Dartmouth College.
Her father is the Essex County District Attorney, in Elizabethtown, N.Y.
Her mother, Anne McDonald, teaches kindergarten at the Ticonderoga Central School.


The Long Days and Short Life of a Medical Student; Relatives Say Fatigue May Have Had a Role in the Car Crash That Killed Frank Ingulli
At 8:30 P.M. on May 19, Frank Ingulli, a third-year medical student working his 15th straight hour, was standing over an operating table and maneuvering a miniature abdominal camera as doctors finished off a gallbladder operation at the medical center here.
Six hours later, Mr.
Ingulli was stretched out on a table in the same hospital and some of the same doctors he had worked alongside earlier were cutting open his chest and feverishly massaging his heart in an effort -- futile as it turned out -- to revive him.
Apparently Driving Home
Mr.
Ingulli, apparently driving to his nearby home to catch some sleep, had been crushed to death in a head-on collision after he mistakenly entered an exit ramp of Interstate 95 and found himself heading southbound on the northbound side of that bustling highway.


A Few Qualms From a Fan Of 'Seinfeld'
NBC'S "Seinfeld" is about nothing.
Or so Jerry Seinfeld and Larry David, the show's co-creators, would have you believe.
Actually, employing an uncanny ear and a laserlike eye for the mundane, "Seinfeld" at its best is about life's minutiae.
And that embraces just about everything.
Recently, on a crosstown bus to Lincoln Center, a man and woman who had obviously just met rambled loudly through a hilariously disjointed account of their jobs, families, former spouses.
Sitting just in front of them as a captive audience, my companion and I listened for a few minutes and simultaneously whispered the same single word: Seinfeld!
It would have made perfect dialogue for an episode.
The weekly series, recently on a ratings roll in its Thursdays-at-9:30 slot and eagerly grabbed by its network for a fourth year, has become that pop-culture prize: a defining experience.


Mutual Funds; They're Like Bonds, but Riskier
AT first glance, they look like bonds: investors receive steady interest payments and, at maturity, get back their original investment.
They're called "target term trusts," and with investors scrambling for alternatives to today's low interest rates, it's not surprising that the trusts are selling like hotcakes.
Just since 1990, the number of funds has risen seven-fold, to 35.


MAY 23-29: The Marshall Papers; The Public Gets a Peek At Supreme Court Workings And Justices Aren't Amused
The atmosphere inside the quiet Documents Room at the Library of Congress remained staid last week even as reporters busily pored over the personal papers of Justice Thurgood Marshall, who died in January.
But a storm raged outside as Justice Marshall's family and eight of the nine current Supreme Court justices expressed anger over the Library's decision to suddenly make the papers public.
The family said that Justice Marshall never would have disclosed the Court's deliberations and that his wishes had been betrayed.
James H. Billington, the Librarian, insisted that he was following Justice Marshall's explicit instructions.


Jane Campion Stirs Romance With Mystery
"I am quite the town freak, which satisfies," says a woman's serene voice on the soundtrack near the end of Jane Campion's stunning new film, "The Piano," a neo-Gothic romance quite unlike anything most of us have seen before.
The voice belongs to Ada, a young Scottish widow who, with her small daughter, Flora, has traveled to New Zealand in the 1850's to marry a man she's never met.
Ada is mute but not deaf.
Her mind has a strong voice of its own.
In the context of all that has gone before, the line, spoken as a kind of coda, is of an exquisite funniness that's born of sorrow, determination and common sense.
Without too much difficulty, one can imagine its being spoken by the anything but freakish 39-year-old writer and director who conceived it: Jane Campion, the woman of the year at the just-concluded 46th Cannes International Film Festival.


IN SHORT: FICTION
YESHUA  The Gospel of St.Thomas.  By Alan Decker McNarie.  Pushcart, $21.


Bulls Find a Team Beneath the Whine
Home again, it were as if the Bulls opened bottles of vintage red and white yesterday, and toasted championship teams of seasons past.
It was in with the wine, out with the whine.
By the time Michael Jordan scored a field goal in the first quarter today, the Bulls had a 13-point lead against the Knicks.
By the end of the first half, Jordan had made two baskets and was still the most dominant player on the court.
He had 9 assists and 12 free throws.
By the end, Jordan had missed 15 of his 18 shots and the Bulls still breezed to a 103-83 victory.
So much for the notion that he scores 50 or the Bulls don't beat the Knicks.


The Case for Fully Deducting Capital Losses
To the Editor:
The new tax proposals that make it more difficult to deduct capital losses (Market Watch, May 16) do more than put the market at greater risk during downturns.
They go in exactly the opposite direction from what should be done, which is to let people charge capital losses in current years, i.e., carry them over only to the extent they exceed current income altogether.
The present limit of $3,000 a year is absurd.
There must be people, alas, who will spend a lifetime paying off their losses.
The $3,000 limit has not been indexed or changed for 30 years.
Let's get rid of it.
The cash flow from immediate write-offs would be a nice source of investment funds and clean out a lot of dead wood.


In the Region: Westchester; Meeting Needs in 'Understored' Areas
BELIEVING that certain parts of Westchester are "understored," a developer has targeted a 14-acre site in Mount Vernon for a superstore that would attract shoppers from well beyond the city's borders.
The developer, Jon Halpern, president of Halpern Enterprises in Tarrytown, is also in the early approval stages of another 14-acre retail center across the county in New Rochelle.
Joseph Maddona, that city's Commissioner of Development, said it would involve either a Costco or a BJ's Wholesale Club.


Corrections
A report last Sunday about the wedding of Sara Feldmann and Robert Sheehan misstated the date.
They were married on Sunday, not the previous day.


Kelly A. McBride, John T. Atkins
Kelly Anne McBride and John Trevor Atkins, investment bankers in New York, were married yesterday in Bryn Mawr, Pa.
The Rev.
James E. Martinez performed the ceremony at Our Mother of Good Counsel Roman Catholic Church.
Mrs.
Atkins is with the investment banking firm of Furman Selz Inc.
She graduated from Harvard University and received an M.B.A. degree from Columbia University.
She is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Donald J. McBride of Haverford, Pa.


Rebels With a Checkbook: The Graying (and Greening) of the Hot-Rod Culture
The hot rods roll into Pomona like gunslingers converging on a strange town, riding low and slow in twos and threes, growling faintly and exuding bad intentions.
They're here for a friendly car show, and yet there's something menacing about the procession of candy-apple-red Deuce coupes and supercharged '27 T-buckets and highboy roadsters straight out of "Hot Rods to Hell" and fat-fendered '40 Fords and '51 Mercs chopped and sectioned and channeled to within scraping distance of the pavement.
Their tires squeal ominously when the drivers punch the throttle, and you half expect a thug with a pack of cigarettes rolled up in his sleeve to jump out and demand your lunch money.
Bill Hogan drove in from Vegas in a luminescent turquoise custom Studebaker with an evil-looking bullet-nose grille.
Although the body has been largely unchanged, he's lowered it so the car seems to squat on its haunches and ooze along the ground.
Forty-three years ago, when it rolled off the assembly line, it was known as a Starlight Coupe.
Today, it's a Stude with a 'tude.


In the Military, Bolder Talk of Acceptance
AS the Clinton Administration struggles to find a compromise to allow homosexuals to serve in the armed forces, more and more soldiers, sailors and pilots are bucking the early tide of outrage in the ranks and quietly saying, "Let's get on with it."
"As long as we don't back down on discipline and a code of conduct, people can accept it," said Brig.
Gen.
Lester L. Lyles of the Air Force, commander of the Ogden Air Logistics Center in Utah.


60's 'Folk' Is Giving Up The Ghost
"This stage is full of ghosts," Pete Seeger proclaimed the other day during an unusual benefit concert at the 92d Street Y. And the sense of mortality and loss was often palpable.
Mr.
Seeger, now 74, would reach for a high note with his once athletic voice only to settle for a whisper.
But what a peculiar thing this folk movement was, and how strange is its heritage!
For all its success, for all its claims to authenticity and its exuberant achievements, its ambitions seem strangely dated.
It is now clear that this was not really a folk movement at all and that much of its music was not folk music.


Celebrating Black Artists and a Solo Show of Abstractions
THERE are but a few hours left in which to catch "Collector's Choice" in Montclair before it closes today, at 4 P.M.
Nevertheless, it seems appropriate to mention the show, and not just because it is a celebration of diversity --otherwise known as old wine in new bottles.
Rather, the show's interest lies in its being composed of works by black artists lent by private collectors, about half of whom are themselves black.
The works hang not in a museum but in the rotunda that once housed a public library and is now part of the Unitarian Church complex, at 67 Church Street in Montclair.


Pacers Near a Coaching Decision
The Indiana Pacers plan to name a new coach early this week, according to team president DONNIE WALSH.
The short list includes LARRY BROWN and LENNY WILKENS, both of whom recently resigned National Basketball Association coaching positions, as well as MIKE FRATELLO, DEL HARRIS and PAUL SILAS.(AP)


Stacey Regent, Robert Eskenazi
ALL year long, the first-grade students at Public School 6 on the Upper East Side were talking about the wedding of Stacey Regent, 27, their redheaded, softhearted and funny teacher.
While some teachers leave their personal lives outside the classroom, Miss Regent made hers very much a part of it.
In the months before the wedding, she passed out photographs of her dress to her class, occasionally taught while wearing her tulle headpiece, made scroll-like invitations for each student and referred to the wedding as "our special class trip."


Early Works From Michael Frayn
BROADWAY theatergoers have sampled but a smidgen of the British playwright Michael Frayn's diversity.
Count "Noises Off," the backstage farce within a farce; "Benefactors," a contemporary urban drama of disillusionment, and "Wild Honey," an adaptation of Chekov's first play, "Platonov."
Mr.
Frayn, who is nearing 60 and was once referred to as "the entertaining intellect," remains a writer of flabbergasting range and prolificacy, with a ceaseless flow of satirical newspaper columns and novels.
His eighth, "Now You Know," a serio-comic work about ethics and politics, came out this year.


Bonn Suspects Neo-Nazi Arson As 5 Turks Die
Five members of a Turkish family, two young women and three girls, burned to death in their house here early this morning in a fire that the authorities suspected was arson by neo-Nazi extremists.
The latest outbreak of suspected right-wing violence plunged the country into shock and strained its relations with Turkey, a NATO ally.
The fire came three days after Parliament tightened the liberal political asylum laws set forth in the Constitution, a move that opponents denounced as a surrender to right-wing violence against foreigners.
Lived in Germany for Decades
Thousands of demonstrators -- including Germans, Turks and other foreigners who have lived and worked together peacefully for years here in the Ruhr industrial district -- converged on the ruins of the three-story house, where the Turkish family had lived for decades, and marched through the city center in protest.


Choosing the Right Fish for Grilling
SUCCESSFULLY grilling fish depends on two conditions.
First, the grill or the source of heat must be searingly hot so the fish can take on appetizing color before it is overcooked.
Second, the fish should have a firm enough texture so it does not fall apart.
Adequate preheating and sufficient coals should guarantee that the grill is hot when it is time to cook fish.
Placing the grate as close as possible to the heat source enhances intensity.
As for types of fish that are best for grilling, thick steak fish -- like tuna, swordfish and shark -- head the list.
Monkfish is also excellent, as is mahi-mahi, tilefish and salmon.
Softer fish like cod and halibut are more difficult to handle, and it is also not advisable to attempt fish that come in thin fillets, like flounder.


How Jeff Weiss Found His Pulpit on the Stage
In Jeff Weiss's "Hot Keys," recently reopened in the East Village, a father and his teen-age son, both amateur wrestlers, strip off their shirts to debate the need for brutality in their incestuous relationship.
They also reminisce about the various boys -- schoolmates of the son -- they have raped and murdered.
And by the way, the scene is played for laughs, as this continuing soap opera -- with a new episode presented each weekend -- spoofs the stuff of tabloid headlines and the outlandish daily parade of confessions on TV talk shows that are no less disturbing for their ludicrousness.


How to Sharpen Tools To Their Fine Points
EXCEPT for lawnmower blades and hedge clippers, yard and garden tools are seldom sharpened adequately.
Many owners of shovels, hoes and other digging tools may not be aware that the tools should be sharpened.
For sharpening most outdoor tools, all that is needed is a 10- or 12-inch mill-bastard file.
For finer-edged tools like pruning shears, also buy a 10-inch smoothing file, and for both tools buy a file card, a type of wire brush for cleaning filings from between files' teeth.
Using a file card is a key to keep files sharp.


Tentative Pact in Supermarket Strike
Donna Lee came out of the Grand Union supermarket on Route 17 this afternoon with a big grin and a shopping cart overflowing with groceries.
A three-week strike at 248 stores in New Jersey and New York had ended at 4:30 A.M. with a tentative contract agreement.
Cordons of strikers had vanished several hours later, and so had Mrs.
Lee's guilt pangs about crossing picket lines to buy food.
"It made me uncomfortable shopping, so I didn't go as often as I normally would," Mrs.
Lee said.
Her skimping ended today.
Besides staples, she stocked up on hamburgers, hot dogs, buns and a big watermelon for a Memorial Day picnic with her husband and son in their backyard in neighboring Mahwah.
Session With Mediator
The proposed settlement between four supermarket chains and about 26,000 cashiers and store clerks was reached after an 18 1/2-hour bargaining session in the offices of a Federal mediator in Iselin.
The agreement came just in time to get picket lines removed for the big shopping days of the Memorial Day weekend, traditionally one of the busiest times of the year for supermarkets.


Coca-Cola's New Logo
WHAT: A new (old) logotype for the Coca-Cola Company's flagship brand, called Coca-Cola Classic in the United States and Canada and Coca-Cola in the rest of the world.
Internally, the logo is known as "the red disk," "the bull's eye" or the "trademark disk." It is intended to serve as the symbol for "Always Coca-Cola," the advertising campaign that the soft-drink giant introduced in February.
WHERE: All over, from bottles and cans to lapel pins.
The logo, fairly widespread already, will become nearly ubiquitous with the onset of summer, the peak period for soft-drink consumption.


Lisa M. Howe, Robert E. Garcia
Mr. and Mrs.
Benjamin Alton Howe of Glen Head, L.I., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Lisa Margaret Howe, to Robert E. Garcia, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
John Morgan Garcia of St.
Petersburg, Fla.
A December wedding is planned.
Miss Howe, 30, is the supervisor of tickets and office operations in the office of the president of Radio City Music Hall Productions in New York, where her fiance is the vice president of entertainment.
She graduated from Colgate University.
Her father, who is retired, was a sixth-grade teacher at the Sea Cliff (L.I.) Elementary School.
Her mother, Barbara P. Howe, is an executive assistant at Time Warner in New York.


A.J. and the Rookie Ride Out the Bumps
A.
J.
Foyt once acknowledged that as a boss, he would be a lot like Mike Ditka.
But did anyone tell Robby Gordon, Foyt's new protege, that he would be playing the role of Jim Harbaugh on a three-interception Sunday?
If he didn't know this before he made his rookie trip to the Indianapolis Motor Speedway this month, then Gordon, a 24-year-old Californian, certainly will by the time he leaves here.


On Sunday; Russian Visit Includes Tour Of Group Home
AS the two vans of Russians headed north out of New York City, their translator pointed out Yankee Stadium, the Bronx, the Hudson River.
There were polite nods.
Sergei Sarychev, "Mr. Polaroid," as his fellow Russians call him, barely lifted his new video camera.
They had bigger things in mind.
They were looking forward to their 12-hour tour of group homes, adult homes, the Veterans Administration Hospital in Montrose, cottage programs filled with disturbed teen-agers and most important, genuine American social workers.


Dear Mr. Lipsyte: A High School Class Responds on Glen Ridge
As an exercise for her sophomore English class at Arcata High School in Arcata, Calif., Pamela Ford Cavanaugh asked students for their impressions of Robert Lipsyte's column about the Glen Ridge sexual-abuse case ("Will the Moral Court Please Come to Order," The Times, May 19), in which Lipsyte noted that "all the boys, the innocent and the guilty, come through the same SportsWorld culture of violence." What follows are some of the students' responses.
Dear Mr.
Lipsyte:
I do not believe that the coaches in question are to blame, for their main job is to teach the kids how to play, not how to live.
I do understand that the coaches promote forcefulness and aggressiveness, yet the students in question, having a high school education, should know the difference between right and wrong.
The parents, peers and others molding these kids' lives are to blame.
Who told them it was O.K. to rape and mentally and physically abuse a person, and get away with it because she's different?


Recycling In U.S. Parks
The National Park Service is on green alert.
This summer, visitors to seven park sites will see recycling bins in picnic areas, visitor centers, scenic overlooks, concession stands and campgrounds.
The sites are the Grand Canyon (Arizona), Acadia National Park (Maine), the Great Smoky Mountains (North Carolina and Tennessee), Yosemite National Park (California), Mount Rainier (Washington), the Everglades (Florida) and the National Mall (District of Columbia).
In addition, campers at these sites are now provided with plastic bags in which to save their recyclable garbage.


Perspectives: Tax-Foreclosed Property; The City as Landlord, on Park Avenue
IT was a surprise, city officials say, that no one came forward to pay off the back taxes owed on the 13-story, 38-unit rental building at 823 Park Avenue, on the east side of the avenue between 75th and 76th Streets.
But since the owner failed to appear during the full year period in which the property might have been redeemed, the city took title to it in December.
Now the Department of Housing Preservation and Development finds itself spending $168,000 on major repairs, and pondering how it should go about disposing of the building.


A Better Solution Than Sound Barriers
"Sound Barriers: Friends and Foes," the May 16 article on the hardships, and joys, resulting from the construction of noise-control barriers along Route 80 at Rockaway Borough, tells only part of the story.
While fully endorsing the positions of those interviewed and applauding their responses, especially if they are negative, I find that some history on the origins of barriers is in order.
We cannot deny the need for improved highways though, of course, we can contest the judgments of our politicians and their buddies in the construction business as to locations and designs of some of the projects.
Above all, we must question, thinking of future generations, the wisdom of more roads while mass transit continues to have a low, low priority.


On Singling Out Forms of Protest
As one of four co-defendants in a pending Connecticut Supreme Court case involving hunter harassment, I was particularly interested to read "Protection Debated For Abortion Clinics" (May 9).
For there are, as hinted at in the article, numerous similarities between the proposed legislation that would make it a crime to carry out certain antiabortion activities near abortion clinics and the law that makes it a crime to carry out certain anti-hunting activities near hunters.


Dear Mr. Lipsyte: A High School Class Responds on Glen Ridge
As an exercise for her sophomore English class at Arcata High School in Arcata, Calif., Pamela Ford Cavanaugh asked students for their impressions of Robert Lipsyte's column about the Glen Ridge sexual-abuse case ("Will the Moral Court Please Come to Order," The Times, May 19), in which Lipsyte noted that "all the boys, the innocent and the guilty, come through the same SportsWorld culture of violence." What follows are some of the students' responses.
Dear Mr.Lipsyte:
It often seems as if the worst class snoozers and homework offenders are the after- or before-school sports-students: those who play soccer till 6:00 P.M. or have already been running track for two hours by the time school starts.
Shouldn't parents be trying to help the students cope with this problem?
Doesn't this make it all the more important for parents to help their children with the unfathomable code of conduct our society expects?
KEE ZUBLIN


Voyager Craft: Nearing the Outer Limits
Like the Energizer rabbit, the two Voyager spacecraft keep going and going.
Launched in 1977, they have surveyed the four giant outer planets, their primary objective, and are cruising toward the outer boundaries of the solar system.
In fact, the Voyagers have now picked up radio signals giving scientists the first clear evidence of exactly where the solar system ends and interstellar space begins.
After months of analyzing the mysterious radio emissions, physicists concluded last week that they were produced when gusts of electrically charged gas streaming out from the Sun -- the solar wind -- slammed into the cold gas of the interstellar medium.
This turbulent boundary is known as the heliopause.


It's Substitution Time in Vermont
PAM BORTON, an assistant coach at the University of Vermont for five years, is the school's new women's basketball coach.
She replaces CATHY INGLESE, who is leaving for Boston College after seven seasons at Vermont.
The Catamounts were 57-2 the last two seasons and won an N.C.A.A.-record 52 straight regular-season games. (AP)


A Rush to Stake Claims on the Multimedia Frontier
THE rush to produce "new media" products combining computers, telecommunications and entertainment is creating a bewildering array of corporate alliances: cable companies teaming with video-game producers, movie studios with computer makers, telephone companies with software developers.
Among the goals: software and hardware that will connect consumers seamlessly to services, information and entertainment, with two-way communications that facilitate the interaction.
The new products would allow users to shop from home, summon any movie at any time, respond to political polls or join a global video game with hundreds or thousands of players.


Dear Mr. Lipsyte: A High School Class Responds on Glen Ridge
As an exercise for her sophomore English class at Arcata High School in Arcata, Calif., Pamela Ford Cavanaugh asked students for their impressions of Robert Lipsyte's column about the Glen Ridge sexual-abuse case ("Will the Moral Court Please Come to Order," The Times, May 19), in which Lipsyte noted that "all the boys, the innocent and the guilty, come through the same SportsWorld culture of violence." What follows are some of the students' responses.
Dear Mr.
Lipsyte:
There is a major problem rising in this country of male jocks thinking they are above the law.
It does happen everywhere, including our small school.
But I play three varsity sports (soccer, wrestling and baseball) and have never been in trouble with the school or the law.
You need to mention this because there are "good" athletes out there like me.


No Headline
"The people are friendly. And the one thing I've really noticed is the lack of free-floating anxiety here. In L.A., it was all around you, from the newspaper telling you about the body count for that weekend to the gangs getting discounts on ammunition." -- BILL BECK, who moved to Boise, Idaho, last year.  [ 20:3. ]


Paris to Lille In 80 Minutes
A third high-speed rail line is now in operation in France, paving the way for train service through the Channel Tunnel next year.
The Paris-to-Lille T.G.V.
North line opened a week ago, cutting the 135-mile trip from 2 hours and 10 minutes to 1 hour and 20 minutes.
In September the trip will take under an hour, a spokesman for the French National Railroads said.
The other high-speed French rail lines are the T.G.V.
Sud-Est, whose stops include Lyons, and the T.G.V.
Atlantique, serving Bordeaux and Brittany.


Remembering Connecticut's Inflatable Army
MANY people know about the submarines and jet engines and guns that Connecticut industry has contributed to the country's war efforts at one time or another.
But one of the state's biggest contributions during World War II involved armaments made of rubber.
Inflatable Products of Orchard Street in West Haven was given 90 days to come up with full scale-model inflatable tanks, troop carriers and other tools of war.
Workers agreed to stay at the factory around the clock for three months under guard, so no word of what they were making would leak out.
When they finished, the products were crated up and shipped to the European theater.


SERBS RAID TOWN U.N. CALLED SAFE
Nationalist Serbian rebels today attacked the Muslim town of Gorazde, one of the besieged eastern Bosnian towns declared safe areas by the United Nations, Sarajevo radio reported.
The town is the last Muslim-controlled pocket in the Drina River valley that Serbian forces have not overrun or neutralized.
The attack, the second in two days, included artillery and rocket fire, the radio said.
It reported villages near Gorazde in flames and heavy civilian casualties, but previous radio reports from the area have exaggerated casualty estimates.


Youths Broaden Their Horizons In Artful Stages
WILLIAM WHITE has big brown eyes and visions of the stage dancing in his head.
Eight-year-old William, who is known as Buddy, says he wants to be a star, and he was full of questions during a tour through the underground labyrinth of the Performing Arts Center of the State University here.
Buddy, who lives in Elmsford, was part of a group called Westchester Kids for the Arts, which was recently treated to a backstage look at how plays and other performances are put together.


Sports of The Times; After Full Lives, Folk Heroes at 50
TWO years ago, Lee Trevino was talking about Jim Albus, then a virtually unknown Long Island club pro from Piping Rock who had stunned the golf realm the week before by winning the Senior Players championship in a duel with the Merry Mex himself.
"If that guy comes out on the tour full time," Trevino said, "he'll win $400,000 in a year."


Fear of the Serbs Spreads in the South
BEHIND the fanciful phrasing of NATO defense ministers meeting here last week -- as they talked of Muslim "safe havens" in Bosnia and of military options still somehow "on the table" -- the reality of the situation in the Balkans was clear.
With Europe and the United States hiding behind each other, Serbian and Croatian aggressors have been given carte blanche to make good on their gains in Bosnia.
The question now is what implications this Western failure will have for the rest of the region, particularly in the potentially explosive Serbian province of Kosovo, where Serbian nationalism clashes head-on with an Albanian population.
Potential conflicts -- among them renewed Serbian-Croatian fighting, or a war in Macedonia -- could confront the West with the same intractable conundrums that it has faced in Bosnia.


A SUMMER DRIZZLE
AFTER THE FAIR maiden of spring, summer's appetite is like an indecisive lover.
Subdued by heat and the mixed blessing of long, slow days, warm-weather hunger is languid and lackadaisical, loath to commit to a full meal, looking to be convinced.
The season obliges with a swollen opulence, an overabundance of produce and choice that sends the summer cook charging the barbecue like a bull to a cape.
Grilled summer food is a quick fix, an impetuous response to lusty temptation.
It takes a cool and even hand to resist; it also takes a little contemplation.


The Sad Realization Of Regionalization
The fuddy-duddy nostalgia corps had hoped baseball owners would see the light Friday when they voted on their new network TV deal with NBC and ABC.
We looked toward heaven -- or Iowa -- for a sign that the sore thumb of a proposal to regionalize the League Championship Series would not be approved.
The sign never came as owners voted by conference call.
There was no resolution to schedule the first five games of the L.C.S. 90 minutes apart -- rather than air them simultaneously -- in addition to the staggered starts already planned for Games 6 and 7.


Ego, Paranoia and Power In the Land of Musical Rights
The American public has, for the most part, no idea of the torture involved in taking a tune from a classic American musical to the simple point of performance.
In reaching the listener's ear, a song can go through a circuitous route that remains a secret to those outside the business.
The journey is one of conflict, frustration, misunderstanding, absurdity and, once in a while, hilarity.
For instance, the late David Carroll, best remembered as the romantic lead in "Grand Hotel," did a nightclub act at Steve McGraw's in Manhattan, a high point of which was his hilarious rendition of "Embraceable You." Hilarious?
This love lyric doesn't normally leave audiences in stitches.


Cuts Force Review of War Strategies
Wrestling with how to maintain the United States' military commitments with a shrinking budget, the Pentagon is moving toward a new strategy in which the military would no longer plan to fight two major wars at once but instead would seek to fight them in turn.
This would be the second time since the end of the cold war that the United States has recast its military strategy.


U.S. Must Keep Promises to Veterans
To the Editor:
You report President Clinton will attend the Memorial Day observance at the Wall, the Vietnam Veterans Memorial, in Washington (news article, May 27), despite a postcard campaign from some veterans charging he would "engage in hypocrisy" if he visited the memorial for the war in which he did not serve.
That "controversy" is not worthy of discussion.


Non-Moments And No-Shows
To the Editor:
It's easy for Edward Rothstein to be charitable toward the Metropolitan Opera: he doesn't have to pay for his tickets  [ "To the Met: Well Done. Do More," May 9 ] .
Our subscription series this past season provided such non-moments as the "Lucia" production Mr.
Rothstein mentions, as well as cancellations by Pavarotti, Battle and Horne.
These privileges entitle us to renew our subscription for next season at a higher price.


In the Region: Long Island; Recent Sales
Dix Hills  $332,500
3 Plymouth Road  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 31-year-old farm ranch; family room w/fireplace, Florida room, den, 1.3 acres, 2-car garage; taxes $6,000.
East Meadow  $176,000
2658 Alder Avenue  4-bedroom, 2-bath, 40-year-old Cape Cod; dining room, eat-in kitchen, den with fireplace, basement; taxes $5,000.
Glen Cove  $300,000
21 Highfield Road  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 85-year-old center-hall colonial; dining room, parlor, billiard room, 1-car garage; taxes $5,000.
Great River  $246,000
166 Church Road  5-bedroom, 3-bath, 21-year-old farm ranch; dining room, eat-in kitchen, fireplace, basement, 2-car attached garage; taxes $7,500.
Manhasset Hills  $405,000  126 Country Village Lane  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 29-year-old colonial; dining room, den, new eat-in kitchen, 2-car garage; taxes $7,800.
West Islip  $159,900
579 Center Chicot Avenue  5-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 35-year-old ranch; finished basement, 1-car attached garage; taxes $4,600.
OTHER AREAS Ossining, N.Y.  $179,500
12 Nelson Avenue  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 64-year-old colonial; dining room, eat-in kitchen, sun porch, nursery, playroom, 1-car garage; taxes $4,161.
Cheshire, Conn.  $290,000
1200 Side Hill Road  5-bedroom, 3-bath, 28-year-old colonial; paneled family room, skylights, sprinkler system, 1.3 acres; taxes $4,457.
Hillsdale, N.J.  $235,000
270 Pascack Road  3-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 33-year-old colonial, h/w floors, circular driveway; taxes $4,454.


ISRAEL SHIFTS VIEW ON OCCUPIED LANDS
When the Israeli Government sealed off the West Bank and Gaza Strip in late March, it was responding to Palestinian attacks that had killed 15 Israelis that month.
Now, what began as an emergency measure is becoming a fixture, and changing entrenched Israeli attitudes toward the occupied territories.
The closing is the longest separation of Palestinians from Israelis since the two populations began mingling after Israel captured the territories in the 1967 war.
It is a significant shift from the open-door policies set in the early years of the occupation by Defense Minister Moshe Dayan.
Now, Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin has promised that the days of free Arab movement into Israel are over.


Ellen S. Simon, Eric A. Pifer
Ellen Stephanie Simon, the daughter of Morton and Marcia Simon of New City, N.Y., was married last evening to Dr.
Eric Andrew Pifer, a son of Larry and Janice Pifer of Silver Spring, Md.
Rabbi A. Allen Block performed the ceremony at the Brooklyn Botanic Garden.
The Rev.
James Sidoti, a Roman Catholic priest, took part in the ceremony.
Mrs.
Pifer, 27, is an account executive at Foote, Cone &amp; Belding Advertising in Philadelphia.
She graduated from Johns Hopkins University, as did her husband.
Her father is the patent counsel for the consumer products group of the Bristol-Myers Squibb Company in New York.


Clippers Not Keen on Magic
Earvin (Magic) Johnson said today that coaching "is in me," and that he would like to begin by being interviewed for the vacant Los Angeles Clipper position.
Clipper executives, however, are close to hiring former Cleveland Coach Lenny Wilkens and are not interested in the former Lakers star, a person close to the situation said.


Malone's Cut: $562 Million and Counting
THE decision to spin off the Liberty Media Corporation was a smart move for Tele-Communications Inc. because it opened up areas of growth while muting criticism about the company's size.
But it also did something for T.C.I.'s chief executive, John C. Malone -- it made him staggeringly rich.
Indeed, in the two years since Liberty was formed, Dr.
Malone's holdings in its stock show a gain of about $562 million.


Tar Heels and Orange Advance to Final
North Carolina and Syracuse sprinted into the final round of the National Collegiate Athletic Association's lacrosse tournament today with victories easier than either team had expected.
Syracuse persistently penetrated Princeton's defensive perimeter and thrashed the Tigers, 15-9.


Ross Whines, Bill Wins
His economic plan is hardly out of the woods, but Bill Clinton's narrow victory in the House last week gave a new sense of direction to his floundering Presidency and provided a road map for the difficult journey ahead.
The victory will not silence critics like Ross Perot, who is again cluttering the airwaves with cheap shots safely fired from distant sound stages.
But it certainly gives the lie, at the least for now, to Mr.
Perot's claim that he alone can end gridlock.
There was a lot on the line Thursday, including Mr.
Clinton's political reputation.
The question was whether a man who'd been wrong-footing himself at every turn could summon the energy to save his budget plan -- the centerpiece of an economic strategy that would surely have crashed, perhaps taking his Presidency with it, had the Republicans prevailed.


Officer Acquitted, and Miami Stays Relatively Quiet


China Denounces Terms of Clinton's Trade Deal
The Government responded today to President Clinton's one-year renewal of China's trade privileges with a harsh denunciation of the conditions he said he would impose on a further extension next year.
Mr.
Clinton renewed the low-tariff trade benefits, known as most-favored-nation status, on Friday, while conditioning another renewal a year from now on improvements in China's human rights situation and progress in other areas including prison labor and nuclear proliferation.


A. P. Nakasian, Joseph Jenkins
Anastasia Price Nakasian, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Samuel Nakasian of Greenwood, Va., was married there yesterday to Joseph Willcox Jenkins, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Joseph W. Jenkins of Pittsburgh.
The Rev.
James Smith performed the Presbyterian ceremony at Emmanuel Episcopal Church.


2 British Cathedrals Turn 900
Two of Britain's great cathedrals are celebrating their 900th anniversaries this year: the Romanesque Durham Cathedral and the medieval Winchester Cathedral, said to be the longest in Europe.
In Durham, 255 miles north of London, a series of exhibitions, concerts, lectures and community activities will take place in the cathedral and throughout the diocese.
Events, which are scheduled through early November, are as diverse as a midsummer bat watch around the cathedral (June 18, 8 P.M., about $1.50), a performance by the Derwentside Choral Society of Verdi's Requiem (June 12, 7:30 P.M., about $12.25 to $18.50) and, through Nov. 3, an exhibition, "Durham Celebrates, Cathedral and County 1093-1993," which will be on display in the north walk of the cathedral's cloisters (about $1.50).


Corrections
A report in the Egos &amp; Ids column last Sunday about Conan O'Brien's talk show, which is to replace "Late Night With David Letterman" on NBC in late summer, misstated the role of Robert Morton in the Letterman show.
He is the co-executive producer; the executive producer is Peter Lassally.


Mark Tellini and Michelle Keene
Michelle LaSalle Keene, a program manager for Western Europe at the Environmental Protection Agency in Washington, was married yesterday to Mark Paul Tellini, a lawyer at the Securities and Exchange Commission, also in Washington.
Msgr.
Joseph C. Cunningham performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at St.
Isaac Jogues Church in Wayne, Pa.
Mrs.
Tellini, 27, and her husband both graduated from Bowdoin College, she magna cum laude and he cum laude.
She received a master's degree in law and diplomacy from Tufts University.
The bride is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Herbert G. Keene Jr. of Strafford, Pa.
Her father is a partner in the Philadelphia law firm of Stradley, Stevens, Ronon &amp; Young.


Lisa C. O'Dell, Richard Rapuano
Lisa Carroll O'Dell, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Harold C. O'Dell of Cocoa Beach, Fla., was married yesterday to Richard Henri Rapuano, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Joseph A. Rapuano of Ridgewood, N.J.
The Rev.
Jerry Lewis, a Roman Catholic priest, performed the ceremony at the Church of St.
Thomas More in Chapel Hill, N.C.
Mrs.
Rapuano is a vice president and the marketing director for Franklin Street Partners, an investment firm in Chapel Hill.
She graduated from Yale University.
Her father, now retired, was an engineer for the Rockwell International Corporation in Cape Canaveral, Fla.
Her mother, Marlene Shumway, is a real-estate appraiser in Merritt Island, Fla.


Batboy Stages Late Rally
Facing a situation with the potential to make even Bill Clinton's haircut look like savvy public relations, the Department of Labor has decided against cracking down on underage batboys.
The issue arose when an alert Labor Department official in Savannah, Ga., read a newspaper account about the Class A Savannah Cardinals' 14-year-old batboy, Tommy McCoy.
The official notified the team that child labor laws stipulate that 14-year-olds must not work past 7 P.M. on school nights or 9 P.M. during the summer, and the team reluctantly sacked the youngster.


13 Centuries of Conflict
ISLAM AND THE WEST By Bernard Lewis. 217 pp. New York: Oxford University Press. $25.


Susan Wallace, Andrew Lane
Dr.
Susan Grace-Marion Wallace, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Edward F. Wallace Jr. of Litchfield, Conn., was married there yesterday to Dr.
Andrew H. Lane, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Calvin W. Lane of Mystic, Conn.
The Rev.
Joseph DeCarolis, a Roman Catholic priest, performed the ceremony at St.
Anthony of Padua Church.
The Rev.
Arthur Dunham, a Congregational minister, took part in the ceremony.
The bride graduated from Amherst College and received her medical degree last week from the University of Connecticut.
In June, Dr.
Lane will begin a residency in internal medicine at the Stong Memorial Hospital in Rochester, where her husband is a resident in pediatrics.
Her father is a veterinarian in Litchfield, Conn.


1993 Bloopie Awards
Every year at about this time, Madison Avenue thrills to the much-deserved recognition given the most egregious examples of confused copywriting.
Here come the Bloopie Awards, or as they are known in the advertising community, the covetedbloopies.
To the New York Palace, one of The Leading Hotels of the World (a phrase with a copyright -- be careful, hoteliers, if you call your fleabag one of the leading hotels of the world), a free gift Bloopie for this ringing claim: "$20 more includes Continental Breakfast for two or free parking." As Elizabeth Horgan of Carmel, Ind., who sponsors this entry, writes, "There may be no such thing as a free lunch, but not until now did I find out that there is no such thing as free parking; it costs $20."


The U.N. Is Showing Promise As Poll Watcher for the World
NEW YORKERS walking down First Avenue last week had an unusual chance to glimpse one of the United Nations' fastest-growing fields of activity.
A large white tent erected in the United Nations garden housed one of three overseas polls where Cambodians living abroad could vote in elections organized by the United Nations in Cambodia last week.
Only 21 Cambodians turned up to vote here, but in Cambodia nearly 90 percent of the nation's more than 4.7 million eligible voters turned out over six days of polling.
That seemed a resounding repudiation of the dreaded Khmer Rouge guerrilla organization, which boycotted the vote but failed to carry out its threat to disrupt it with violence.
The polling has been judged fair, and first results were reported this weekend.


A Grounded Soul: Saint-Exupery in New York
SIX months after the fall of France to the Germans, Antoine de Saint-Exupery sailed from Lisbon to New York, arriving on the last day of 1940.
The best-selling author and aviator had come to America for four weeks; he remained for more than two years.
He was rarely unhappier, or more productive: in his 27 American months he wrote more than half the pages by which he would be remembered, including "The Little Prince," published in New York 50 years ago this spring in both English and French.
A half-century after its first publication, that slim volume has done as much to undermine as to sustain Saint-Exupery's reputation as a philosophizing Hemingway, a Conrad of the skies, a French T. E. Lawrence; however, it continues to sell 100,000 copies a year in the United States alone.
Saint-Exupery enjoyed a triumphant welcome to New York, a city that looked dazzling and wild with animation after the ashen skies and curfews of Europe.
Two weeks after his arrival he claimed his 1939 National Book Award, conferred by the American Booksellers Association, for "Wind, Sand and Stars," a poetic account of his flying experiences over North Africa and South America.
He was a year late for the ceremony, at which the fiction winner had been John Steinbeck; at the time Captain de Saint-Exupery had been flying near-suicidal reconnaissance missions for the French Air Force.
By early 1941, when he collected his award, the book had sold 250,000 copies.


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
THE LAST FULL MEASURE The Life and Death  of the First Minnesota Volunteers.
By Richard Moe.
Holt, $29.95.


Pub Grub American Style, Indoors or Out
FIRST came Breakaway in Fairfield, then Sweptaway (which eventually was) in South Norwalk.
Now we have Thataway in Greenwich.
Its full name is Thataway Cafe but it more closely resembles a dark cozy pub with a huge Tiffany-style stained-glass medallion in the ceiling.
Outdoors, with its sidewalk dining area, is brighter, and that area's cheerful white tables, chairs and umbrellas make it a place to be on a sunny day or warm evening.
The compact, formulaic menu bears a striking resemblance to pub grub American style: trendy, easily prepared, a notch above fast food, as suitable for snacking as for a pick-me-up meal before or after the movies.
Well-priced, it fills a definite need for anyone in a hurry who wants more than a MacSomething.


Karpov Cleans Up At Dortmund Tourney
ANATOLY KARPOV used his accustomed conservative positional style to cut through the Dortmund (Germany) International Tournament like a buzzsaw.
When the competition ended at Easter, he had scored 5 1/2-1 1/2 for a margin of 1 1/2 points over the grandmasters Vladimir Kramnik of Russia and Christopher Lutz of Germany, who tied for second place.
Perhaps Karpov extended himself more than usual because Kramnik was in the field.
He is a discovery of the world champion, Gary Kasparov, who thinks that the exciting 17-year-old may well become a challenger for his title some day.
Karpov, a former champion, may have wanted to communicate the message that, at 42, he still stands in the way.


Q and A
50th Anniversary of D-Day
Q.
What is being done to commemorate the 50th anniversary of D-Day, which will be June 6, 1994? -- C. B. Hansen, New Canaan, Conn.


Kimon Friar, 81, Translator of Greek Literature
Kimon Friar, a prolific American scholar, poet, critic and translator of modern Greek literature, died on Tuesday at a hospital in Athens.
He was 81 years old and had made his home in Athens off and on since the 1960's.
The cause was complications from head injuries suffered in a fall at his home, said Michael Tobias, a friend in Los Angeles.


IN SHORT: FICTION
PARADISE OF THE BLIND By Duong Thu Huong. Morrow, $20.


Karen Kesmodel, Mason B. Brown
Karen Ann Kesmodel, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John Martin Kesmodel of Darien, Conn., was married there yesterday to Mason Barnard Brown, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Meredith M. Brown of New York.
The Rev.
Anne Kimball performed the ceremony at St.
Luke's Episcopal Church.
Mrs.
Brown, 25, is an assistant project manager in the marketing research department at The Los Angeles Times.
She and her husband graduated from Duke University.
Her father is the business operations manager for I.B.M.-Latin America in Tarrytown, N.Y.
Her mother is a management information systems project manager for Pepperidge Farm Inc., the baking company in Norwalk, Conn.


15 Hurt in Long Island Bus Crash
A tour bus overturned on a parkway in Nassau County last night, injuring at least 15 passengers and tying up traffic for miles, the authorities said.
The bus mistakenly entered the eastbound Northern State Parkway, which is closed to commercial traffic, near Roslyn Heights shortly after 6 P.M., said Trooper William Harkin, a spokesman for the state police.


Lucy C. Hodder, Robert Thomson
Lucy Clarke Hodder, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Melville T. Hodder of Cambridge, Mass., was married yesterday to Robert Daniel Thomson, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Andrew Thomson of Evanston, Ill.
The Venerable Philip Newman, an Anglican archdeacon in Melbourne, Australia, and an uncle of the bride, performed the Episcopal ceremony at St.
Saviour's Church in Bar Harbor, Me.
Ms.
Hodder, who is 29, is keeping her name.
She graduated from Princeton University and received a law degree from Georgetown University.
In June, she will become a lawyer in the New Hampshire Attorney General's Office.
Her father is a senior vice president of Lehman Brothers in Boston.
Her mother, Elizabeth Hodder, is an instructor and a research assistant at Harvard University.


Memorial Day Weekend: A Time to Remember


Erin A. McAvoy, C. F. Walz 4th
Ensigns Erin Andrea McAvoy and Charles Frederick Walz 4th, both of the United States Navy, were married on Thursday at the Naval Academy Chapel in Annapolis, Md.
The Rev.
James J. MacNew performed the Roman Catholic ceremony.


Corrections
An article on May 9 about the dwindling of consumer confidence referred incorrectly to the market research firm of which Florence Skelly is vice chairwoman.
It is DYG Inc.


Unsettling Echoes Of Faulkner
To the Editor:
I find it curious that none of the articles about ABC's mini-series "Wild Palms"  [ "The Sunshiny Menace of 'Wild Palms,' " and ". . . And the Shadowy Figure Who Dreamed It Up," May 16 ]  mentions the echo of an earlier work, "The Wild Palms," by William Faulkner.
In Faulkner's novel the dry palms clashing with the dark wind -- a metaphor for utter waste, sterility and destruction -- provide a backdrop for a plot involving adultery, abortion and convicted criminals.
Pretty racy stuff for 1939.


Trouble for New York's Concrete Venture
Ideally the plan was supposed to work this way: By investing $2 million in a private concrete company and giving it an exclusive supply contract, New York City would increase competition and drive down the cost of public construction in Manhattan.
But after seven years of managerial tinkering and ownership battles, the West 57th Street Concrete Corporation is bankrupt, and each year the city is paying $270,000 to $300,000 more for concrete than it would on the open market, according to construction industry experts.
Contractors Have No Choice
"The city has gotten nothing out of its investment except higher concrete prices," said Francis X. McArdle, the managing director of the General Contractors Association of New York.
"Basically, they got themselves into a business in which they had no skill, no knowledge and no success."


Arena-League Player Suffers Spinal Injury
Defensive tackle TED HENNINGS of the Dallas Texans was in stable condition yesterday after fracturing his upper cervical spine during an Arena League game in Detroit against the Detroit Drive.
Among the spectators at the game Friday night was MIKE UTLEY, the former Detroit Lions player who was paralyzed when he was hurt in a 1991 National Football League game.


Corrections
An article on April 25 about Daisy Fuentes, a Cuban-born American who is a host at MTV and a model for Revlon, referred incorrectly to the Cuban Government's policy on allowing Cuban-born Americans into the country.
The Government does grant a limited number of visas to Cuban-born Americans, but they are hard to obtain.


Joyce Levowitz and James Maffezzoli
Dr. and Mrs.
Bernard S. Levowitz of Brooklyn have announced the engagement of their daughter Joyce Eden Levowitz to James Andrew Maffezzoli, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Richard D. Maffezzoli of Towson, Md.
A July wedding is planned.
Ms.
Levowitz, 29, is an associate at the law firm of Coudert Brothers in New York.
She graduated from Duke University and received her law degree from Washington University.
Her father is a professor of surgery at the State University Health Science Center and the director of surgical services at Woodhull Medical and Mental Health Center, both in Brooklyn.
Her mother, Eunice T. Levowitz, is a corporate sales consultant at Macpherson Travel Services Inc. in New York.


LUCKY FELLOW
As a gay man in the 1990's, I can empathize with the sense of frustration Fenton Johnson conveys in "Lucky Fellow" (About Men, May 9).
But why does he refer to "companions" rather than lovers?
I have never met a gay man who introduced me to his companion.
Unless, of course, he was walking his pet schnauzer.
CRAIG PLAXE New York, N.Y.


THE FOUNDING MOTHER
NOW's electoral strategy includes, as a key element, active recruiting of women to run for office.
That is why we voted to support Moseley Braun, even before she had filed, as a way to encourage her to run.


A New Military Strategy
With a shrinking budget, the Pentagon is moving toward a new strategy in which it could no longer fight two major wars at once.
Page 16.


Hasta la Vista, Says Schwarzenegger
ARNOLD SCHWARZENEGGER, appointed as chairman of the President's Council on Physical Fitness and Sports by former President Bush, has resigned after almost four years in the position.


Data Update
*4*BUILDING PERMITS ISSUED (Housing units)
Apr. 93
Mar. 93
Apr. 92
New York
2,236
1,657
2,593
New Jersey
1,413
1,228
1,466
Connecticut
686
537
799
*4*Source: Census Bureau, U.S. Department of Commerce
*4*MORTGAGE INTEREST RATES (Averages)
Last Week
Previous Week
Year Ago
New York
Conventional (30-yr)
7.68
7.61
8.77
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
4.73
4.71
5.98
New Jersey
Conventional (30-yr)
7.55
7.47
8.64
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
4.61
4.57
5.77
Connecticut
Conventional (30-yr)
7.52
7.51
8.66
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
4.38
4.42
5.77
Co-ops (N.Y.)
Conventional (30-yr)
7.87
7.71
8.89
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
5.35
5.31
6.34
*4*Indexes for Adjustable-Rate Mortgages*
1-yr. Treasury security
3.40
3.27
4.12
National Mortgage Contract Rate
7.17
7.17
8.14
*Rates on most adjustable mortgages are set 1 to 3 percentage points above these indexes. (Source: HSH Associates)


The World Is Wide Open
NAME: Liv Tyler.
IDENTITY: 15-year-old model, high school student.


S. R. Bernstein, 86, Editor and Publisher Of Advertising Age
Sidney Ralph Bernstein, chairman of the executive committee of Crain Communications Inc. and the former editor and publisher of Advertising Age magazine, died yesterday at Weiss Memorial Hospital in Chicago.
He was 86.
He had suffered a heart attack at his Chicago home a week ago, the magazine, a Crain publication, reported.
Mr.
Bernstein, a native of Chicago, started his business career as a messenger at what is now Crain Communications and remained active with the company for 71 years.
Over that time, he watched advertising grow from a cottage industry to a multibillion-dollar mammoth.
Columnist for 21 Years
Younger people in the industry knew him best for the column, "con-Sid-erations" that he wrote for Ad Age for the last 21 years.
It was his vehicle to talk about advertising and society in outspoken and sometimes outraged tones.


Road Project Could Help Marsh
"Road Plan at Hatchery Upsets Naturalists"  [ May 16 ]  raises some concerns about the disruption of wetlands in the area.
These concepts are not based on fact.
Contrary to what the article states, the reconstruction will not destroy 20,000 square feet of wetlands nor will it involve areas which are shellfish seedbeds or natural habitats for migratory birds such as the great blue herons.
To assess the project's impact to the wetlands, one must determine the current condition of the area.
A comparison of the 1974 New York State Department of Environmental Conservation Tidal Wetlands Map with present onsite conditions indicates a deterioration of the intertidal marsh as a result of roadway runoff, which has increased siltation, raising elevations in the area.
If no reconstruction occurs, the degradation will continue and result in the loss of both intertidal marsh islands that exist in the area and the intertidal strip along the western tidal bank.
In addition, the siltation has restricted tidal flows to the wetlands south of the roadway, causing the quality of the wetland to be degraded to the lowest classification.


Sound Bytes; After a Decade on the Job, Lotus Chairman Says He's Hitting His Stride
AS chairman, chief executive and president of the Lotus Development Corporation, Jim P. Manzi sets strategy for the second-largest company in personal computer software (after the Microsoft Corporation).
The flagship of the Cambridge, Mass., company is the Lotus 1-2-3 spreadsheet program, but Mr.
Manzi sees the future in an ambitious software program called Notes, a network application that allows individuals and groups of workers to organize and exchange information.
Mr.
Manzi began work as a newspaper reporter before moving to the management consulting firm McKinsey &amp; Company, where one of his assignments was Lotus.
He joined Lotus in 1983.
In 1986, Lotus's co-founder, Mitchell D. Kapor, turned the company over to Mr.
Manzi.


A Growth Fund Shunned by Its Own
THE NAIC Growth Fund, begun in summer 1990 by the National Association of Investors Corporation, has been a disappointment despite its responsible, long-term investment philosophy.
Managed by the people who run a national organization of investment clubs, the closed-end fund went public at $10 a share, right where it closed on Friday.
Last week, a 4-cent-a-share semiannual dividend was declared.
High on the problem list for the fund's managers -- who take no advisory fees -- is that members of the NAIC did not sign up for the fund in the numbers expected.
The small asset size makes expenses per dollar invested quite high.
"We'd taken two surveys by independent outfits, and the underwriter also made calls," said Ken Janke, co-manager of the fund.
After expecting $20 million at the public offering, only $5.4 million trickled in.


Prune Shrubs, Not Your Books
There are so many things the books don't tell you.
For instance, it's all very well to say "Prune your lilacs after they bloom," but no one ever goes into what lies between you and the bush.
My first snag was that I couldn't find my pruning shears, which are as dull as plastic scissors anyway.
I'd been meaning to treat myself to a spiffy pair of Felco No. 8 secateurs from Smith &amp; Hawken, but even if I had ordered them in the morning through the toll-free number, they wouldn't have arrived by the afternoon.
And you know how it is.
Some plant in the garden calls -- and you want to answer it, now. (Only later do you wonder if you had heard wrong, but I'll get to that.)


Once Dissed, But Not Dismissed
In one of the most glaring cases of nepotism in film history, Francis Ford Coppola cast his daughter Sofia as Michael Corleone's child in the 1990 movie "The Godfather, Part III." The critics, on balance, were not kind.
Richard Corliss of Time magazine wrote that Ms.
Coppola's "gosling gracelessness comes close to wrecking the movie." Jami Bernard of The New York Post felt that by casting his daughter, Coppola had "virtually ruined his movie."


Public &amp; Private; A Death Watch
Yolande Jean flips up the short sleeve of her summer dress to show the cigarette burn on her upper arm.
Flip up, flip down.
The burn winks, round and dark.
But it is neither as dark nor as difficult to look at as Yolande Jean's eyes.
Yolande Jean has been paroled into the United States from Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, from the military-run leprosarium our Government created for Haitian refugees who are H.I.V. positive.
In Haiti, Yolande Jean was involved in dangerous political activities: among other things, she worked on a literacy program, seditious indeed in a country that thrives on the tyranny of the few over the impoverished many.


Sihanouk Party Gets Early Vote Lead
The first returns from Cambodia's first multiparty election in more than two decades showed an early lead today for the opposition party associated with Prince Norodom Sihanouk.
Although the United Nations released incomplete vote counts from only 4 of Cambodia's 21 provinces and warned against early predictions of the final outcome, the returns were consistent in each province.
They showed the royalist opposition party in first place by a sizable margin, followed by the governing Cambodian People's Party, with the 18 other parties far behind.


Cottage Industry
Transforming a summer rental takes a keen eye, an ability to rearrange furniture and the addition of a few personal touches.
Here are two imaginative examples.


A Hartford Hospital's Siberian Connection
FOR the last few months, a nurse named Linda Conroy has been prowling Hartford's most impoverished neighborhoods, seeking out children who have not been immunized.
Her job is to give injections to preschool youngsters in their homes, and it is a job that has given her a new view of humanity.
"Six months ago," she said, "I'd walk around those streets with my eyes wide open and my mouth wide open. I've learned to be street-wise. But now I love this job. You know you make a difference here."


Correction
Because of an editing error, an article on May 16 about gardens in Venice misstated the opening date of the Venice Biennale.
It is June 13, not June 9.


A Computer Chain That -- Surprise! -- Knows How to Sell
ALMOST everyone who knew Nathan Morton thought he had lost his mind in 1989 when he gave up his job as a top executive at Home Depot, one of retailing's hottest growth companies, to run an unknown chain of computer warehouse stores.
And "chain" is putting it politely.
Soft Warehouse, as it was called, consisted of two 25,000-square-foot stores filled to the rafters with personal computers, software, peripherals and other computer gadgetry.


'Things Generally Wrong In the Universe'
A bomb explodes, a building quakes, a cloud hangs over the horizon.
Though the smoke soon disperses, public attention lingers, as if the explosion at the World Trade Center had released an important piece of information that could be discerned by tuning into the rippling waves of its aftershock.
The message the public is straining to hear is not reported on the evening news.
It is not a matter of whodunit, howdunit, whydunit.
Even after the authorities have identified suspects, interpreted motives and recommended strategies to prevent a repeat occurrence, something intangible remains: a mood, an atmosphere that persists like background radiation.
Chaos.
Turbulence on a global scale.
A feeling Virginia Woolf once described in her diary as "things generally wrong in the universe." That is part of the message that came pulsing out of the World Trade Center's blasted sub-basements earlier this year.
And it's a message that buildings have been transmitting quite a lot lately.
Dubrovnik.
Sarajevo.
South-Central Los Angeles.
Waco.


Help in Caring For the Elderly
"When the Elderly Have to Care for Their Elderly Relatives"  [ April 18 ]  has made an arresting statement about a problem that troubles a large number of people on Long Island.
Too many of those who are giving care do not know where to look for support.
One project of the Family Consultation Service is to organize support groups for caregivers.
These groups offer emotional backup and also guide people to sources of practical help.
Family Consultation Service, now in its 75th year, is an arm of the Episcopal Church and offers professional guidance to people throughout Long Island at (718) 465-8585.
FRANCIS P. KEHOE  Executive Director Family Consultation Service Queens Village


Ivy M. Barton, J. M. Wagner
Ivy Michelle Barton, the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Robert E. Barton of Peekskill, N.Y., was married yesterday to Jonathan Miles Wagner, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Miles B. Wagner Jr. of King of Prussia, Pa.
The Rev.
Dr.
Eugene Bay performed the ceremony at the Bryn Mawr (Pa.) Presbyterian Church.


Celebrity in Their Blood, Stardom in Their Eyes
The world has gone mad for the sons and daughters of celebrities.
Everywhere you look, you'll find countless children of the rich and famous.
The following lists, by no means comprehensive, tell the story:
THE CAMPAIGNERS: Many celebrity children are endorsing products, following in the footsteps of Isabella Rossellini, the face of Lancome.
Nona Gaye, a singer who is the daughter of Marvin Gaye, was in Armani A/X's recent campaign.
Banana Republic, which has already done ads with Sofia Coppola and Ethan Browne, whose father is Jackson Browne, just shot Luke Flynn, Errol Flynn's grandson.
In the next few months, many other ads will feature faces that may, at the very least, seem familiar.
Benjamin Taylor (above), the son of Carly Simon and James Taylor, will soon be hawking Levi's 501's.
DKNY has signed up Sofia Coppola and her brother, Roman; Zoe Cassavetes, a daughter of John Cassavetes and Gena Rowlands; Ione Skye and her brother, Donovan Leitch, the children of Donovan, the singer.
Drew Barrymore will soon be seen in ads for Guess jeans.
And Andrew Lauren, one of Ralph Lauren's sons, will be featured in ads for his father's clothes.


Pen Pals Meet, for the Fresh Air Fund
Nicole Reid tugged at the stiff gray skirt of her school uniform and craned her neck toward the door.
Standing on a staircase with two dozen classmates, the 8-year-old was awaiting the arrival of her pen pal from Montgomery County, Pa.
"I just hope she likes me," Nicole said of the fellow third-grader she was about to meet.
"I wrote her about how much fun it is at my house. I asked if she has a swimming pool."


Rich Schools, Poor Schools, Never-Ending Litigation
WITH a state judge threatening, in essence, to close down the state's public schools in order to save them, the 3.2 million schoolchildren of Texas nearly started summer early this year.
The move was apparently averted last week, after lawmakers finally agreed on a new law to do what the courts have insisted they do: divide the funds for public education more equitably.
But the threat served as a vivid reminder that 25 years after advocates for children in poor school districts began seeking relief in state courts around the country, there are many places where the issue is far from resolved.
School-financing lawsuits are still pending in fully half the states right now.
In many, the courts are monitoring state legislatures to see if they comply with judicial rulings aimed at producing greater equity.
This was the case in Texas, where a state district judge grew so impatient with legislative foot-dragging and a popular vote that rejected a constitutional amendment aimed at redistributing money, that he said he would shut off all state funding on June 1.
That threat spurred the legislature in Austin to act.


Rape, Retardation and a Town Aghast
In 10 years as the head of the five-man force that polices this dairy-farm and furniture-factory town of 1,500 in west-central North Carolina, Chief Wayne Mills had worked only one rape case.
Then came an anguished call one day in late January.


Why Managers Should Stay Out of Employees' Lives
To the Editor:
The Executive Life column on "Managing Emotions in the Workplace" (May 16) overlooks a crucial question: How many employees really want their supervisor to "manage" their emotions?


Jock Couture
ROLANDO BLACKMAN, the New York Knicks guard, was being dissed by his own teammates.
"It's those shorts, man," John Starks snickered, pointing at Blackman's uniform shorts as the Knicks prepared to do battle with the Chicago Bulls at Madison Square Garden last week.
Greg Anthony could only roll his eyes at the sight of Blackman's long brown legs peeking out from his orange-and-blue-trimmed white shorts.


Manager's Profile; Keith Anderson
Fund: Blackrock Target Term Trust; $1,016 million in assets; co-manager since 1988 inception. (Sponsor: Blackrock Financial Management L.P., New York.)
Born: Sept. 24, 1959; Attleboro, Mass.


Corrections
Because of a transmission error, an interview in the Egos &amp; Ids column on May 16 with Mary Matalin, the former deputy manager of the Bush campaign who is a co-host of a new talk show on CNBC, quoted her incorrectly on the talk show host Rush Limbaugh.
She said he was "sui generis," not "sweet, generous."


Q and A
Problems With Subtenants Question: We have a few absentee unit owners in our condominium who sublease their apartments without asking for proper references.
The subtenants are destroying our building with excessive noise, garbage, loitering and, we suspect, commercial use of their apartments.


Lisa D. Bing, C. Kenneth Ewell
Lisa Danielle Bing, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
William Bing of Harrisburg, Pa., was married yesterday to C. Kenneth Ewell, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Clarence Ewell of Miami.
The Rev.
John A. Ferguson performed the Baptist ceremony at the Mill Creek Farm in Buckingham, Pa.
Mrs.
Ewell is a computer systems consultant with Andersen Consulting in Florham Park, N.J.
She graduated from Northwestern University and received an M.B.A. degree from New York University.
Her father retired as the manager of operations at Fedway Associates, a wholesale wine and liquor distributor in Kearny, N.J.


F.A.A. Says Attendant Was in Pilot's Seat
The Federal Aviation Administration on Friday announced that it had revoked the license of a USAir pilot for letting an off-duty flight attendant sit in his seat while his co-pilot landed the plane.
The agency said the pilot, Capt.
Jon L. Swartzentruber, operated his Boeing 737 in a "careless or reckless manner" by exchanging his seat with the flight attendant while the automatic pilot was disengaged and allowing her "to touch and rest her hands on the controls of the aircraft."


PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: May 30, 1993
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Fiction
1
45
JURASSIC PARK, by Michael Crichton(Ballantine, $5.99.) A biotechnician clones dinosaurs for use in a theme park.
2
2
DARKEST HOUR, by V. C. Andrews. (Pocket, $5.99.) The concluding volume in a series about the Cutlers, a Virginia plantation-owning family.
3
15
THE PELICAN BRIEF, by John Grisham. (Island/Dell, $6.99.) A woman law student probes the murder of two Supreme Court justices.
4
70
THE FIRM, by John Grisham. (Island/Dell, $5.99.) A young lawyer learns that his firm is engaged in secret, possibly illegal activities.
5
4
SHADOWFIRES, by Dean Koontz. (Berkley, $6.99.) A woman is stalked by her supposedly deceased husband.
6
59
A TIME TO KILL, by John Grisham. (Island/Dell, $5.99.) Racial tensions surface during a trial.
7
5
WAITING TO EXHALE, by Terry McMillan. (Pocket, $5.99.) The friendships and romances of four black women in Phoenix.
8
6
"I" IS FOR INNOCENT, by Sue Grafton. (Fawcett, $5.99.) Kinsey Millhone investigates a man once charged with murdering his rich wife.
9
5
JEWELS, by Danielle Steel. (Dell, $6.99.) The life of a woman who deals in precious stones.
10
1
THE MAGIC OF YOU, by Johanna Lindsey. (Avon, $5.99.) A 19th-century British minx sets her cap for an American sea captain long despised by her family.
11
1
THE CAT WHO WASN'T THERE, by Lilian Jackson Braun. (Jove, $4.99.) Jim Qwilleran contends with crimes while on a tour of Scotland, with feline assistance from across the Atlantic.
12
6
THE WITCHING HOUR, by Anne Rice. (Ballantine, $6.99.) A woman descended from witches brings a drowned man back to life.
13
1
YANKEE WIFE, by Linda Lael Miller. (Pocket, $5.50.) A former Civil War nurse answers an ad for a wife, with tempestuous consequences.
14
3
FATHERLAND, by Robert Harris. (Harper Paperbacks, $6.50.) A thriller set in the Third Reich 20 years after Hitler wins World War II.
15
22
RISING SUN, by Michael Crichton. (Ballantine, $5.99.) A woman's death leads to an investigation involving the American-Japanese rivalry.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
NonFiction
1
5
THE SILENT PASSAGE, by Gail Sheehy. (Pocket, $5.50.) Menopause and today's women.
2
4
NOT FOR SALE AT ANY PRICE, by Ross Perot. (Hyperion, $5.95.) The Texas billionaire discusses America's economic and political problems.
3
499
THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $10.95.) Inspiration. (LP)
4
2
TRUMAN, by David McCullough. (Touchstone/ S&amp;S, $15.) A biography of the 33d President.
5
15
I KNOW WHY THE CAGED BIRD SINGS, by Maya Angelou. (Bantam, $4.99.) The poet's account of her childhood and adolescence.
6
85
A YEAR IN PROVENCE, by Peter Mayle. (Vintage, $10.) A sojourn in the south of France.
7
106
YOU JUST DON'T UNDERSTAND, by Deborah Tannen. (Ballantine, $10.) The different languages men and women speak.
8
3
WHERE THE BLUEBIRD SINGS TO THE LEMONADE SPRINGS, by Wallace Stegner. (Penguin, $11.) Essays on the American West.
9 *
20
REVOLUTION FROM WITHIN, by Gloria Steinem. (Little, Brown, $11.95.) The reflections of a feminist on the struggle to achieve self-esteem.
10
12
ROGUE WARRIOR, by Richard Marcinko with John Weisman. (Pocket, $5.99.) The memoirs of the retired commander of a counterterrorist unit.
11 *
30
BACKLASH, by Susan Faludi. (Anchor/ Doubleday, $12.50.) A war against women's rights.
12 *
15
WOMEN ON TOP, by Nancy Friday. (Pocket, $5.99.) Social life and women's sexual fantasies.
13 *
3
WRITTEN BY HERSELF, edited by Jill Ker Conway. (Vintage, $15.) An anthology of autobiographical writings by American women.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Advice, How-To and Miscellaneous
1
8
LIFE'S LITTLE INSTRUCTION BOOK: Volume Two, by H. Jackson Brown Jr. (Rutledge Hill, $5.95.) More tips for achieving a self-fulfilling life.
2
94
LIFE'S LITTLE INSTRUCTION BOOK, by H. Jackson Brown Jr. (Rutledge Hill, $5.95.) Some 500 tips for achieving a self-fulfilling life.
3
136
THE T-FACTOR FAT GRAM COUNTER, by Jamie Pope-Cordle and Martin Katahn. (Norton, $2.99.) How to reduce fat in one's diet.
4 *
119
THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE, by Stephen R. Covey. (Fireside/S&amp;S, $9.95.) Principles for success.
5 *
4
TEACHING YOUR CHILDREN VALUES, by Linda Eyre and Richard Eyre. (Fireside/S&amp;S, $11.) Advice for parents.
These listings are based on computer-processed sales figures from 3,000 bookstores and from representative wholesalers with more than 38,000 other retail outlets, including variety stores and supermarkets.
The figures are statistically adjusted to represent sales in all such outlets across the United States. *An asterisk before a book's title indicates that its sales, weighted to reflect the book-selling industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
LP indicates that a book is available in large print.


Main Chance


Corrections
An article on April 25 about the proposed awarding of a Parking Violations Bureau contract in New York City misstated the extent of an investigation into allegations from Transportation Commissioner Lucius J. Riccio that he was under heavy pressure to award it to Lockheed Information Management Services.
The Times has learned in recent days that city investigators interviewed at least three witnesses and examined documents.
Susan E. Shepard, the Investigation Commissioner, told a City Council committee after the article was published that her department found no evidence of potentially criminal behavior.


Residential Resales
Closings in the week ended May 15  MANHATTAN  Chelsea  $225,000
130 West 17th Street  2-bedroom, 1-bath, 1,400-sq.-ft. loft-co-op; elevator, 10 1/2-ft. ceilings, south exposure; maintenance $615, 60% tax-deductible (Brokers: Herbert H. Kliegerman-Douglas Elliman)  Greenwich Village  $572,750
40 Fifth Avenue (11th St.)  2-bedroom, 2-bath, 1,400-sq.-ft. prewar co-op; 24-hr. doorman, concierge, manned elevator, fireplace; maintenance $1,853, 29% tax-deductible (Brokers: Ambrose Mar-Elia-William B. May)  SoHo  $277,000
292 Lafayette Street  1-bedroom, 1-bath, 1,500-sq.-ft. loft-co-op; elevator, exposed-brick walls, wood columns, tin ceilings, hardwood floors, 3 exposures; maintenance $520, 45% tax-deductible (Broker: Siim Hanja-I.B.C.)  Upper West Side  $450,000
316 West 79th Street  3-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 2,000-sq.-ft. prewar co-op; 24-hr. doorman, dining room, balcony; maintenance $1,320, 25% tax-deductible (Brokers: L.B. Kaye-Corcoran Group)  West Side  $465,000
59 West 71st Street  2-bedroom, 2-bath, 1,600-sq.-ft. prewar co-op; maid's room, dining room, remodeled kitchen, washer/ dryer; maintenance $997, 49% tax-deductible (Brokers: Klara Madlin Real Estate-Halstead Property Co.) BRONX  Gun Hill Road Area  $175,000
3534 Paulding Avenue  2-family semi-attached brick house; 3 bedrooms, dining room in primary unit; 2 bedrooms, dining area in other; 1 bath in each; 1-car garage, 25- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $1,500 (Broker: Highland Real Estate)  Riverdale  $415,000
550 West 261st Street  5-bedroom, 3-bath, one-family brickdetached raised-ranch; dining room, eat-in kitchen, den, recreation room, 1-car garage, 0.33-acre lot; taxes $5,000 Broker: Shelley Scherman Realtor)  Wakefield  $230,000
4162 Hill Avenue  2-family detached brick house; 3 bedrooms, eat-in kitchen in primary unit; 1 bedroom in other; 1 bath in each; finished basement, 75- by 95-ft. lot; taxes $1,923 (Broker: Bryan Real Estate)  BROOKLYN  Cobble Hill  $660,000
19 Strong Place  2-family, 5-story brownstone; 6 bedrooms, 3 bath, dining room, eat-in kitchen, fireplace in primary quadriplex; 1 bedroom, 1 bath in simplex; 25- by 122-ft. lot; taxes $2,400 (Broker: Harborview Realty)  Park Slope  $207,000
917 President Street  2-bedroom, 1-bath, 1,100-sq.-ft. co-op in a brownstone; dining alcove, 12-ft. ceilings, 20- by 20-ft. rear deck, 2 exposures; maintenance $649, 61% tax-deductible (Broker: Brooklyn Properties of 7th Avenue)  QUEENS  Astoria  $253,000
26-17 29th Street  2-family semi-attached brick house; 3 bedrooms in primary unit; 2 bedrooms in other; dining room, eat-in kitchen, 1 bath in each; finished basement, 1-car garage, 25- by 86-ft. lot; taxes $1,306 (Broker: Century 21/Tri-Boro Terrace Realty)
Forest Hills  $360,000
72-32 Ingram Street  4-bedroom, 2-bath, one-family detached Tudor; dining room, fireplace, solarium, rear deck, finished basement, 1-car garage, 50- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $2,342 (Broker: Sarah Jones Realty)  STATEN ISLAND  Concord  $76,000
704 Elbe Avenue  2-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 1,200-sq.-ft. condo in a 6-year-old building; eat-in kitchen, wall-to-wall carpets; common charge $41, taxes $933 (Broker: Salmon Real Estate)  Randall Manor  $168,000
495 Castleton Avenue  3-bedroom, 2-bath, one-family detached aluminum and brick Cape Cod; dining area, eat-in kitchen, full basement, heated 2-car garage, 73- by 90-ft. lot; taxes $1,453 (Broker: Kingsley Real Estate)


World Markets; Valuing Argentina's Crown Jewel
ARGENTINA and its investment bankers First Boston and Merrill Lynch -- begin the "roadshow" on Monday for the privatization of the country's industrial crown jewel -- the oil company Yacimientos Petroliferos Fiscales, known as Y.P.F.
After a presentation on the floor of the Buenos Aires Stock Exchange, the sales group for the giant oil and gas company, which accounts for more than half of Argentina's energy industry, will travel to the United States for the rest of the week.
The roadshow will then go to Tokyo, London and several cities in Europe, and return to the United States.


In the Futility 500, Mets Are Easy Pole-Sitters This Memorial Day
As the major leagues reach the first checkpoint of the season, Memorial Day, the Mets find themselves in a race.
They are contending with the Cincinnati Reds and the Baltimore Orioles for the distinction of being the biggest underachievers of the 1993 season.
Based on early returns, the race shouldn't be close.
Last week, the Mets plummeted 16 1/2 games from first place at one point, the greatest distance from the top for any team this season except for the expansion Colorado Rockies.
To understand just how awful and underachieving the Mets are, consider that 16 1/2-game deficit from the perspective of other huge gaps before June 1:


In the Region: New Jersey; Recent Sales
Cresskill  $256,000
7 Woodland Road  4-bedroom, 2-bath, 40-year-old colonial; 2-car garage, w/w carpeting; taxes $4,214.
Hillsdale  $235,000
270 Pascack Road  3-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 33-year-old colonial, h/w floors, finished basement, circular driveway; taxes $4,454.
Jefferson  $130,000
150 New Jersey Avenue  4-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 22-year-old expanded Cape Cod; brick fireplace, new w/w carpeting, eat-in-kitchen; taxes $3,204.
Northfield  $137,000
2602 Leeds Avenue  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 6-year-old contemporary; fireplace, deck, c/a, fenced yard; taxes $3,300.
Park Ridge  $359,000
159 Sibbald Drive  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 23-year-old colonial; in-ground pool, fireplace, c/a, 2-car garage; taxes $5,800.
Roxbury  $285,000
129 Mount Arlington Road  5-bedroom, 3 1/2-bath, 20-year-old colonial; lakefront lot, new kitchen, 2 fireplaces; taxes $4,780.
OTHER AREAS Ossining, N.Y.  $179,500
12 Nelson Avenue  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 64-year-old colonial; dining room, eat-in kitchen, sun porch, nursery, playroom, 1-car garage; taxes $4,161.
Cheshire, Conn.  $290,000
1200 Side Hill Road  5-bedroom, 3-bath, 28-year-old colonial; paneled family room, skylights, sprinkler system, 1.3 acres; taxes $4,457.
Dix Hills, L.I.  $332,500
3 Plymouth Road  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 31-year-old farm ranch; family room with fireplace, Florida room, den, 1.3 acres, 2-car garage; taxes $6,000.


American Air Curbs CD's And Laptops
American Airlines, the largest carrier in the United States, disclosed this month that starting no later than July it will prohibit the use of laptop computers and compact disk players below 10,000 feet, where the potential impact of interference from such devices is believed to be greatest.
While no scientific proof exists that consumer electronic devices can disturb an aircraft's navigation system, and no accident is believed to have been caused even indirectly by consumer electronics, pilots have reported dozens of instances in which their compasses were inexplicably thrown off course, and then settled down when passengers stopped using computers and other gadgets.


The Voice At the Wheel
Jerry Wexler, who coined the phrase rhythm and blues when he was a writer for Billboard magazine in the 1940's, has been called the "Godfather of Soul Music." As a partner at Atlantic Records and as a producer, Mr.
Wexler has worked with an array of pop-music legends: Ray Charles, Aretha Franklin, Bob Dylan, Willie Nelson and Etta James.
In a new autobiography, "Rhythm and the Blues: A Life in American Music," written with David Ritz, he surveys his half century in the music business.
In this excerpt, Mr.
Wexler, now 76, recalls his first encounter with a then unknown singer.


In Nuclear Tests, We All Live Downwind; Treaty in Peril
To the Editor:
Your May 15 report that President Clinton was expected to renew nuclear testing this year came as a shock.
This would mean that the moratorium on testing by France, Russia, Britain and the United States would end and that all five declared nuclear powers (including China) would resume testing.
This could have dire consequences for the future of the Nuclear Nonproliferation Treaty.
That treaty's first 25-year term expires in March 1995, when a conference will decide how long to extend it.


After Night Of Rage, A Victory In Daylight
Dallas Green poked his head out of the Mets' dugout and looked around cautiously.
"The sun's out," he said, peering at the sky over Shea Stadium yesterday afternoon.
"Somebody said it wouldn't come up today."


The Executive Life; Working Cannes, On a Wing and a Script
ALL year long, Mark Damon dreams of two weeks of conquests on the French Riviera, where the movie stars and seminude sunbathers enliven the sun-warmed sands of this Mediterranean resort for the world's wealthy.
But once here, he sequesters himself in sweltering, smoke-filled hotel rooms and spends his evenings pressing the flesh with suited, middle-aged men at crowded cocktail parties.
Still, for the man who may be the world's top salesman of independently made martial-arts and sex-thriller movies, there is no more intriguing place to be in May than the annual Cannes film festival and market.


A New Popularity For First-Day Covers
THE fanfare with which the Postal Service now introduces new stamps and the broad popularity of some designs -- Elvis lives! -- have attracted attention to first-day covers.
Typically, these are small (No. 6), specially decorated envelopes with stamps that have been canceled with the slogan "First Day of Issue." A collector wishing to create a first-day cover can buy such envelopes with a printed design, or cachet, on the left that reflects the design of the stamp; hand-drawn cachets are an interesting alternative for children and other spontaneous artists.


Broncos Make Change in Status of Brooks
The Denver Broncos have changed MICHAEL BROOKS's status from transitional to unrestricted free agent.
As an unrestricted free agent, Brooks, a linebacker, will be able to negotiate with any team in the league, including the Broncos, who say they intend to compete for him. (AP)


At Georgetown, Poet Urges Respect for Arts
Mona Van Duyn, former poet laureate of the United States, gave the main speech yesterday at the 194th commencement of Georgetown University in Washington.
Ms.
Van Duyn, whose term as poet laureate ended last week, expressed hope that the 633 graduates would foster a deep respect the arts.
"They work invisibly," she said.
"They widen and deepen the human imagination. They increase empathy, without which no being is truly human."


Spanish Socialist's Grip on Power Is Weakening
Over much of the last decade, to Spaniards and foreigners alike, Prime Minister Felipe Gonzalez has personified the energetic new Spain that so quickly emerged from the isolation of the Franco dictatorship to embrace democracy, prosperity and integration with Europe.
True, at times his compatriots felt Mr.
Gonzalez was reigning more than governing, preferring to visit Paris, London and Bonn than Valencia, Burgos or even his native Seville.
But when put to the test at home, he was always unbeatable -- in elections, in debates, in charisma.


Modern Pieces for Organ Share the Spotlight at Grace Church
MOST people tend to think of organ music, at least organ music not designed to serve a specific religious function, as coming from an earlier era.
There is, however, a rich -- and growing -- contemporary repertory as well, and some of it will be explored at 12:35 P.M.
Wednesday in a recital at Grace Episcopal Church in White Plains.
After starting her program with Bach's Organ Fantasia in G, Eileen Hunt will play "Four Versets and a Canzona" and the C major Sonata of James Woodman, a composer (and organist himself) who lives in Cambridge, Mass.
The organist's home church, where she is also director of music, is Green Farms Congregational, just across the Connecticut border in Westport.
For more details, the number to call is 949-0384.


Topics of The Times; The Nose's New York
A hungry New Yorker was strolling east on 43d Street one day last week when suddenly she smelled some kind of curry.
Just as suddenly she wanted to eat some kind of curry.
But though she swiveled her nose north, south, east and west it never found the scent's source.
A few days later her nose had the same problem, only this time it was trying to track down fish and, probably, chips.
It failed.
But, then, that's the way it is in New York once May arrives.
Warm air carries the scent of countless cuisines all over town, and turns the mildly peckish into the starving.


Letting the Clips Fall Where They May
THERE is no way to stop it.
The green grass just keeps growing and growing, especially at this time of year.
Lawn mowers are always at the ready and the only way to keep this green carpet looking worth its name is to keep the blades humming.
Anyone worth his or her trowel knows that when the mowing ritual is not followed, a near hayfield ensues.
But keeping up the lawn ritual now can often be difficult, to say the least.
Those who mow only on weekends are at a disadvantage because grass knows no schedule and just keeps on growing.
Lawn grass seems to grow even when your back is turned.
Sometimes it means mowing twice a week.


Phelps Lends a Hand, in Cambodia
When DIGGER PHELPS quit as Notre Dame's basketball coach several years ago, he gave up a big desk and a comfortable office on the campus in South Bend, Ind.
This past week, he spent his time sleeping atop his desk in a remote, dirt-poor village and threading his way over human bones in Cambodia's killing fields.


The Career and the Kimono
A few months ago, Masako Owada took the elevator to her office on the seventh floor of Japan's Foreign Ministry in Tokyo for the last time.
Heading down the dark hallway, she stepped into the cluttered office of the economics section of the North American division and slipped past her battered gray-steel desk.
Her telephone directories and a row of books about the semiconductor market were lined up neatly on a shelf above her desk.
The phone still bore inky fingermarks -- reminders of the time not so long ago when she routinely put in 15-hour days managing some of Japan's nastier trade disputes with the United States.
On this day, though, the jangling phones went unanswered and her former colleagues were on their feet, waiting for her.
They bowed low as she came into view, wearing the power outfit favored by the ministry's female diplomats: a trim blue suit, a bright scarf tucked neatly around her neck.
The trade negotiator they once flippantly called "Owa" was now Masako-sama -- an honorific befitting the future Empress of Japan.


New &amp; Noteworthy
MAKING HISTORY.
The Struggle for Gay and Lesbian Equal Rights, 1945-1990: An Oral History, by Eric Marcus. (Harper Perennial, $14.) Eric Marcus interviewed 45 men and women active in the civil rights movement for homosexuals.
Last year our reviewer, Jeffrey Escoffier, felt that the coming-out stories, "matched as they often are by the courage of each person's political struggles, can be both inspiring and heart-wrenching."
THE LOST UPLAND, by W. S. Merwin. (Holt, $14.95.) The upland is the region of the Dordogne in southwestern France, where the poet W. S. Merwin lived for many years.
He evokes this landscape in three short stories that celebrate the timelessness of the area's rural ways.
"As a writer who has specialized in ferreting out hidden regions of both the mythic and the material worlds, Mr. Merwin is eminently qualified to guide us to yet another place he has discovered," Ginger Danto said here last year.
Also new is THE SECOND FOUR BOOKS OF POEMS (Copper Canyon, $14), a one-volume paperback, which restores to print four of Mr.
Merwin's earlier collections: "The Moving Target" (1963); "The Lice" (1967); "The Carrier of Ladders" (1970), which won a Pulitzer Prize, and "Writings to an Unfinished Accompaniment" (1973).


Despite Malcolm Trial, Editors Elsewhere Vouch for Accuracy of Their Work
Dismayed by the disclosures that have emerged in the libel trial of Janet Malcolm and The New Yorker magazine, many writers and editors fear that testimony about what they view as inappropriate journalistic practices will damage the credibility of all newspapers and magazines.
Ms.
Malcolm has been accused by Jeffrey M. Masson of fabricating five quotations in her two-part 48,500-word profile of the psychoanalyst, which was published in The New Yorker in 1983.


F. J. Fitzgerald, John Cleveland
Frances Joan Fitzgerald, a daughter of Annette D. Fitzgerald of Tulsa, Okla., and Francis J. Fitzgerald of Essex, Conn., was married yesterday to John Ames Cleveland, a son of Mrs.
Burton C. Rowley of Lyme, Conn., and John L. Cleveland of Jackson, Wyo.
The Rev.
Steven Small performed the ceremony at the Old Lyme (Conn.) Congregational Church.
Mrs.
Cleveland was until recently an editor with Sigma Communications Inc., publishers of the National Register of Commercial Real Estate, in Stamford, Conn.
She graduated from the University of Connecticut.
Her father is the president of Filter Systems Inc., a distributor of air filters in Essex.
Her mother is a registered nurse at St.
Francis Hospital in Tulsa.


Merrill Perlman, Harvey Kleinman
Merrill Perlman a daughter of Albert and Grace Perlman of Wilmette, Ill., and Harvey F. Kleinman, a son of Harriette Kleinman of Lake Peekskill, N.Y., and the late Moe Kleinman, were married yesterday at the home of the bridegroom's mother.
Rabbi Marcia Prager officiated.
Ms.
Perlman, who is keeping her name, heads the metropolitan copy desk at The New York Times.
She graduated from the University of Missouri and received a master's degree in mass communication from Drake University.
Her father, who is retired, was a pharmacist in Chicago.
Her mother is the controller of L. Marshall Inc., a roofing and sheet metal company in Glenview, Ill.


Holiday Weekend Got Off to a Blustery Start


Yale, Class of '68: Time to Take Stock
Nineteen sixty-eight.
It is sometimes assumed that the year was different from all others, more tumultuous certainly but also filled with the spirit of make-the-world-over idealism.
But how much of that spirit actually stuck to the people who embarked on adult life in that year?
A partial but intriguing answer comes from a 477-page volume of essays and autobiographies published recently by the Class of 1968 at Yale in preparation for its 25th anniversary celebration this weekend.
If a conclusion can be drawn from the collective portrait that emerges from the book, it would be this:


How to Sharpen Tools To Their Fine Points
EXCEPT for lawnmower blades and hedge clippers, yard and garden tools are seldom sharpened adequately.
Many owners of shovels, hoes and other digging tools may not be aware that the tools should be sharpened.
For sharpening most outdoor tools, all that is needed is a 10- or 12-inch mill-bastard file.
For finer-edged tools like pruning shears, also buy a 10-inch smoothing file, and for both tools buy a file card, a type of wire brush for cleaning filings from between files' teeth.
Using a file card is a key to keep files sharp.


Nikki Maniscalco and Thomas O'Brien
Nancy Suero Maniscalco, the model editor for Mademoiselle magazine in New York, was married yesterday to Thomas Robert O'Brien, the managing director of Thomas Roberts Associates, a marketing company in Rumson, N.J.
The Rev.
Edward Van Der Hay performed the ceremony at the First Baptist Church in Red Bank, N.J.
Mrs.
Suero-O'Brien, who is 40 and is known as Nikki, graduated from Lehman College.
She is a daughter of Leda Suero of Colonia, N.J., and Lulio Suero of Santo Domingo, the Dominican Republic.
Her father, now retired, was the president of Suero Commerciale C.X.A., a retailer of consumer electronics in the Dominican Republic.


Dear Mr. Lipsyte: A High School Class Responds on Glen Ridge
As an exercise for her sophomore English class at Arcata High School in Arcata, Calif., Pamela Ford Cavanaugh asked students for their impressions of Robert Lipsyte's column about the Glen Ridge sexual-abuse case ("Will the Moral Court Please Come to Order," The Times, May 19), in which Lipsyte noted that "all the boys, the innocent and the guilty, come through the same SportsWorld culture of violence." What follows are some of the students' responses.
Dear Mr.
Lipsyte:
I wish there was something I could do about this but this is an issue of how society has led us to think for many, many years.
I am only one person and can only do so much.
This issue is not only about the sons of America, but also about the daughters, and parents need to talk to both about it.
Women need to stop condoning this kind of behavior, and men need to stop and think about their values before they act foolishly.


EX-REAGAN ADVISER APPOINTED TO POST IN THE WHITE HOUSE
Reaching back into the ranks of an Administration he once derided, President Clinton today named David R. Gergen, a magazine columnist and former adviser to Ronald Reagan, to rescue his fumbling communications operation.
By appointing a Republican strategist and consummate Washington insider to the pivotal job of framing policy for public consumption, Mr.
Clinton conceded that his Administration, plagued for several weeks by missteps, needed considerable new help.


For Black Coaches, Convention Of Ideas
In the weeks leading up to their fourth convention, officials of the Black Coaches Association were describing this year's gathering here as a celebration of having arrived.
The organization was formed in 1987 by 17 young black assistant basketball coaches at predominantly white universities who were frustrated over the lack of African-American head coaches.
These assistants had grown weary of being relegated to recruiting duties while their white counterparts were able to use their jobs as springboards to head-coaching positions.


E. A. Spear, Scott Deakin
Elizabeth Ann Spear, the daughter of Susan and Robert Spear of New City, N.Y., was married yesterday to Scott McDowell Deakin, the son of Susan and Philips Deakin of Allison Park, Pa.
The Rev.
Dr.
Paul Jaquith, a United Methodist minister, performed the ceremony at the Pearl River Hilton in Pearl River, N.Y.
Mrs.
Deakin, 28, is a graduate of Dartmouth College.
She is a senior financial analyst in Cleveland at the Geon Company, a plastics manufacturer.
She and her husband, 27, received M.B.A. degrees from Carnegie Mellon University.


Health in Asia
To the Editor: Regarding "Health Considerations for Travelers to Asia" in Travel Advisory (April 25), we at the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention are concerned that the chart simplifies recommendations on areas of disease risk and by doing so fails to convey the true risk which some travelers may encounter.
An example of this concern can be appreciated in considering travel to India.
Although it may be correct to say that the risk of malaria transmission is, in general, low in most of India, there are areas of high risk.
The risk is heterogeneous, and it is this unpredictability that requires malaria prevention measures.
This is especially true for many parts of Asia that were listed in the chart.
Malaria cases imported from India accounted for 21 percent of all cases reported in the United States in 1990.
Last year, among five malaria deaths in the United States, two were acquired in India.


Letting the Clips Fall Where They May
THERE is no way to stop it.
The green grass just keeps growing and growing, especially at this time of year.
Lawn mowers are always at the ready and the only way to keep this green carpet looking worth its name is to keep the blades humming.
Anyone worth his or her trowel knows that when the mowing ritual is not followed, a near hayfield ensues.
But keeping up the lawn ritual now can often be difficult, to say the least.
Those who mow only on weekends are at a disadvantage because grass knows no schedule and just keeps on growing.
Lawn grass seems to grow even when your back is turned.
Sometimes it means mowing twice a week.


DAVID GEFFEN, STILL HUNGRY
As an educational administrator, I am painfully aware of the temptation to cheat among young persons who strive to succeed.
It's a temptation that must be resisted, even in this decidedly post-Victorian age.
But your article trivializes the cheating and all but condones the forgery.
And we are left with the image of this obvious role model, waiting on his Eames chair for a call to Washington.
ANGELO TARANTA, M.D.
Professor of Medicine, New York Medical College New York, N.Y.


Senate Shows Itself Up on Liquor Ad Bill
To the Editor:
In case any of our senators ever wonder why most of the voting public holds them in such disdain, I suggest that they think about their action in reconsidering the bill to require warnings in liquor advertisements, as you report in your May 16 "Congressional Memo" about the impact on public policy of Nancy Moore Thurmond's death.


Latest Court Candidates Share Similar Histories
When the names of Judges Jon O. Newman and Stephen G. Breyer surfaced together this week on the most recent list of prime Supreme Court possibilities, the comparisons quickly followed.
What emerged, at least initially, was just how similar the two men were in background, temperament and achievement.
The names of other candidates appear on and disappear from the list, and White House officials say others are under consideration.
The choice to fill the seat being vacated next month by retiring Justice Byron R. White ultimately lies with President Clinton, who could ignore his advisers or select one of the names given him.


Bulls Make a Statement by Routing Knicks
A proud team that had been criticized and scrutinized came crashing down on the Knicks today.
And the Knicks cracked under the strain.
Making a strong statement that they are far from finished, the Chicago Bulls pounded the Knicks, 103-83, this afternoon at Chicago Stadium in Game 3 of the Eastern Conference championship series.
The victory cut the Knicks' edge to 2-1 in the four-of-seven-game series, with Game 4 to be played here Monday afternoon.


Cap, Gown and Gag: The Struggle for Control
IT has never been easy to regulate what people can say on American college campuses and even less easy to punish students or professors for inflicting injury with words.
This past semester has made it clear that matters are not getting any easier.
The complications have arisen as administrators and courts have tried to thread the narrow path between guaranteeing free speech and satisfying the demands of minorities to be protected from racist verbal assaults.


John Tuzo Wilson, 84, Is Dead; Early Backer of Continental Drift
Dr.
John Tuzo Wilson, a geophysicist who was one of the most persuasive proponents of the theory that the continents are on rigid plates that slowly drift around the earth's surface, died in Toronto on April 15.
He was 84.
His death was reported in the current issue of Eos, a publication of the American Geophysical Union.
The cause of death appears to have been a heart attack, said Prof.
Ron Farquhar, his associate and former student at the University of Toronto.


SURFACING
MUSIC -- Album art: Rock-and-roll art may never die, despite vinyl's downfall.
Lithographs of the covers of The Who's "Tommy," Bob Dylan's "Self-Portrait" (above) and other famous albums are being offered by Musicom, a music memorabilia company in Philadelphia, for about $400 each.
PRETENSIONS -- Novel introductions: Among this summer's pulp novels there's no shortage of highbrow epigraphs to add a veneer of quality.
Scott Turow's latest novel, "Pleading Guilty," kicks off with a quote from St.
Augustine (above); "The General's Daughter" by Nelson DeMille offers some T. S. Eliot.
TELEVISION -- Prudery: Jay Tarses, the creator of the cult television comedy series "Molly Dodd," thought he had the perfect title -- "Smoldering Lust" -- to capture the over-the-top satirical nature of his new series about a Philip Marlowe-type detective.
NBC thought otherwise, retitling it "A Black-Tie Affair."


Bucks and Blondes: Joe Eszterhas Lives The Big Dream
David O. Selznick once offered some tongue-in-cheek advice to an aspiring screenwriter: "Write whatever you want as long as there's a love scene and the girl jumps in the volcano at the end."
When he first adapted the Ira Levin novel "Sliver," Joe Eszterhas, Hollywood's highest-paid screenwriter, followed the Selznick rule.
Mr.
Eszterhas wrote lots of "she starts to moan" love scenes for the film, changed the Sharon Stone character, a New York book editor, from good to bad, and had her fly with her boyfriend into a Hawaiian volcano at the end:


The Art of Ticket Splicing Experiences a 90's Revival
Since the Tammany machine first nominated a mayoral candidate of Irish descent to appeal to newly enfranchised immigrants nearly a century ago, the balanced ticket has been a tradition in New York.
The practice reached its apogee in the 1960's, as the city became increasingly diverse, then fell from favor as reformers and reconfigured machines eliminated slate voting.
This year, though, with party loyalty further eroded, the city racially polarized and the prospect of a close election looming, politicians are playing with blocs again.


POSTINGS: A Change of Plan in New Canaan; No Visitor Pavilion for the Glass House
People who live in glass houses shouldn't draw crowds.
At least, that's the feeling of planning officials in New Canaan, Conn., where the architect Philip Johnson last week decided that the next building he would put up on the bucolic estate centered on his famous Glass House would be used as a pottery gallery rather than a visitors' pavilion, as had been previously announced.
Daniel A. Foley, the New Canaan Town Planner, said that a former member of the Planning and Zoning Board had informally contacted a National Trust for Historic Preservation official recently to convey concerns about traffic and parking problems that might be created if a visitors' pavilion were built on the property.


MAY 23-29: The Talks Go On; South Africa Cracks Down, Then Changes Its Mind
There are many reasons why arresting more than 70 black militants last week might have seemed like a bright idea to President F.W. de Klerk's Minister of Law and Order, Hernus Kriel.
He has been under pressure to do something, anything, about a slew of terrorist attacks by guerrillas associated with the Pan Africanist Congress.
As a shrewd politician, he would have understood that such a sweep would embellish the ruling National Party's image among anxious white voters before elections.
He also may have relished the chance to embarrass his more dovish colleagues, the negotiators who are trying to drive a bargain on the country's future with the black majority -- including the militant Pan Africanists.
And so without warning his more moderate Cabinet colleagues or, it seems, Mr. de Klerk, the minister launched the biggest crackdown in years.


Trio


Chamber Music Series Appeals to Younger Set
WHEN the strains of Mozart begin at the Festival Chamber Music Society's first summer concert at the Masters School in Dobbs Ferry next Sunday, there will be something different about the audience.
At least half the listeners are expected to be in their 20's and 30's, and -- in light of the "graying audiences" dirge often heard from musicians -- this delights Ruth Sommers.
Ms.
Sommers is a cellist and the director of the Festival Chamber Music Society, which is beginning its sixth summer season in Dobbs Ferry.
The group of 12 musicians, all active players in the New York City area, will perform at the Masters School each Sunday in June at 5 P.M.


BENEFITS
Preventing Drug Abuse
TUESDAY -- CASA, the Center on Addiction and Drug Abuse, which provides education and research on drug abuse and its prevention, will benefit from an awards evening at the Plaza.
Joseph A. Califano Jr., the organization's chairman, and Barbara Walters will be the hosts for the event, which begins with cocktails at 6:30 P.M., followed by dinner.
Art Buchwald will speak.
Daniel B. Burke, the president of Capital Cities/ABC Inc., and his brother, James E. Burke, chairman of the Partnership for a Drug-Free America, will be honored.
Black tie.
Tickets, $500, from (212) 722-6226.


CRIME
What's your excuse?
That's a legitimate question to put to amateur sleuths of those civilized modern mysteries in which the puzzle element is not particularly compelling and in which the detection procedures are not especially grueling.
Chris Norgren, the museum curator and art connoisseur featured in a sophisticated series by Aaron Elkins, would have no problem answering that challenge.
Although he handily solves the murder of an eccentric art dealer in OLD SCORES (Scribners, $20), this cosmopolitan sleuth is really in it for the esthetic kicks.
The thrills are indeed heady when a French art collector, notorious for pulling unorthodox stunts that make the contemporary art world look like a bunch of jerks, offers the Seattle Art Museum an original Rembrandt.
As the museum's resident maven in Renaissance and Baroque art, Norgren is dispatched to Paris to authenticate the gift with -- as per the donor's stipulation -- nothing more than his naked eye.


Clemency Pleas Denied in 14 Abuse-Defense Cases
Gov.
Pete Wilson has denied the clemency petitions of 14 women who had killed their husbands, but said they had acted in response to abuse.
But the Governor reduced the sentence of one woman based on an argument of abuse.
Governor Wilson, a Republican, commuted the sentence of another woman because of her advanced age and ill health, but he rejected her claim that spousal abuse was an extenuating circumstance in the killing of her husband.


A New Effort Aims to Raise Housing Aid
In an aggressive new effort to prevent families from becoming homeless, New York City has begun helping hundreds of welfare recipients facing eviction obtain rental grants that can be almost double what the state normally offers.
More than 200 city workers have been trained in recent months to refer families on the verge of eviction to Legal Aid Society lawyers and others who can help them secure the higher grants under the terms of a pending court case.


Topics of The Times; Chilling Out With Webster's
Feeling stressed out, grossed out, wigged out?
If so, then Memorial Day weekend has arrived in the nick of time.
Head for the beach, the woods, the countryside, where you can chill out.
Maybe, with any luck, you'll become totally blissed out.
The italicized terms are all new entries in the 10th edition of Merriam-Webster's Collegiate Dictionary, which gives its seal of approval every so often to words and phrases that have become common currency.


Celebrating Black Artists and a Solo Show of Abstractions
THERE are but a few hours left in which to catch "Collector's Choice" in Montclair before it closes today, at 4 P.M.
Nevertheless, it seems appropriate to mention the show, and not just because it is a celebration of diversity -- otherwise known as old wine in new bottles.
Rather, the show's interest lies in its being composed of works by black artists lent by private collectors, about half of whom are themselves black.
The works hang not in a museum but in the rotunda that once housed a public library and is now part of the Unitarian Church complex, at 67 Church Street in Montclair.


A Northeast Show at Silvermine, Courtroom Drawings and Sculpture
THE raft of shows under review this week rivals Gericault's "Medusa." At the Silvermine Guild Arts Center in New Canaan there is "Art of the Northeast U.S.A." according to Holly Solomon.
In Stamford a display of drawings by courtroom artists of the decade's most sensational trials was organized for the Stamford Museum and Nature Center by its director of art, Dorothy Mayhall, whose own sculpture is on view at PMW Gallery in Stamford, along with paintings by Lou Hicks.
Ms.
Solomon needs no introduction as a dealer with a shrewd eye for talent, whether it is expressed in conventional media, tinsel or paint loaded with additives.
In the Manhattan of the 1980's her name was virtually a metaphor for excess, although nothing that would compare with Jeff Koons.
Eventually, Ms.
Solomon, an entrepreneur and writer (her "Living With Art" came out in 1988) branched out from Fifth Avenue to Soho, but she steered clear of the short-lived East Village scene.
Under her jurisdiction, however, this year's Silvermine exhibition has broken a record by attracting more than 1,500 entries of which 157 have made it into the gallery.


This Week's Numbers
Thursday Chain-stores sales released *
Bundesbank Council meeting.


The King of Cable Reaches for More
JOHN C. MALONE'S personal life has all the markings of a more genteel, slower time.
Most days, he drives home from the office for lunch.
And each year about this time, he leaves the Denver area to spend the summer at his retreat in Maine or on his sailboat.
He usually makes the long trip to Maine by car because his wife, Leslie, does not like to fly.
But in his business life, as head of Tele-Communications Inc., Dr.
Malone is anything but genteel.
"This is not touch football, this is tackle," he said in a recent interview in his office here.
And he is almost always the fastest player on the field.


L.I. Especially Vulnerable to Melanomas
THE mark resembling a freckle on Muriel Smith's arm was, in fact, a basal-cell skin cancer that she thought that a dermatologist in Long Beach had removed several years before.
In a routine examination a year later in Florida, where Mrs.
Smith lived in the winter, the doctor expressed concern over the appearance of her arm.
A biopsy confirmed his suspicion. It was melanoma.


Re-Creating A Past Era
A Victorian ball on May 26 was the highlight of a yearlong celebration of the New York Philharmonic's 150th year.


Tension Surrenders to Relief As Miami Reacts to Verdict
Under sullen gray clouds and an intermittent drizzle, Miami gingerly went about its normal business today, still anxious over reaction to the acquittal of a Hispanic policeman who killed two young black men but relieved that the verdict on Friday had not set off the racial violence that everyone here had feared.
By morning, rage had turned to bitter resignation, even in neighborhoods that erupted in anger on Friday afternoon when a jury in Orlando declared the Miami officer, William Lozano, not guilty of manslaughter.
"Sure we're mad -- damn mad," Lee Johnson said as he stood outside a laundry a block from where Mr.
Lozano fired a single fatal shot at a 23-year-old motorcyclist on Jan. 16, 1989.
"But it's over with, and it don't do no good to stir up the dead."


Kodak Expands Its Small Lineup
SMALL has become a big thing.
Making everything more portable and compact seems to be a priority for Eastman Kodak's designers.
Last week, the company introduced two more small-scale models in different price ranges -- an inexpensive single-use camera, which is slightly larger than a king-size pack of cigarettes, and the smallest Photo CD player, which is the size of a VCR cassette tape.


Bookshelf
Additional titles of interest:
MAXI, THE STAR.
By Debra and Sal Barracca.
Illustrated by Alan Ayers.
Dial. $13.99. (Ages 5 to 9) A producer wants to test Maxi the taxi dog for a pet food commercial, so he and his driver, Jim, set out from New York to California.
Hollywood is fun, the test is a success, but Jim and Maxi are glad to be back in Manhattan at the end.
The intensely colored illustrations of city scenes and the wide-open spaces are richly amusing.


Conversations/Wade Clark Roof; Charting the Currents of Belief For the Generation That Rebelled
BETWEEN the fall of 1988 and 1992 Wade Clark Roof and a team of researchers orchestrated a large-scale religious version of "The Big Chill" by interviewing more than 1,500 baby boomers about their religious lives.
Where the label makers have seen hippies and yuppies, flower children and the Me Generation, Mr.
Roof, who is the J. F. Rowny Professor of Religion and Society at the University of California at Santa Barbara, discovered deep spiritual struggle and a coming transformation of the country's religious landscape.


An Industrial Policy Is Not Outdated
To the Editor:
In "Wall Street: The Reason It's Far From Washington" (May 9), Karl Zinsmeister attempts to perpetuate the myth that whenever the Government gets involved with industry, the result is failure and waste of money.
In fact, our Government's record is at least as good as that of industry.
Remember the Edsel, 8-track audio tape, RCA's ill-fated venture into the computer business and Polaroid's instant movies?
Each of these ventures lost hundreds of millions of dollars and the Government had nothing to do with any of them.


Two Slaps by Starks Get Him the Thumb
Through much of this season and the playoffs, the Knicks have been fueled by the talent and the drive of John Starks.
More than once, they have seen that same combination transformed into a combustible mix.
Today, his unproductive afternoon ended with a sudden, embarrassing exit.
Starks was ejected from Game 3 of the Eastern Conference championship series against Chicago following his angry and persistent exchange with Michael Jordan of the Bulls with 9 minutes 9 seconds to play.


Trevino and Floyd Are Set for Showdown
In blustery, unforgiving conditions, Lee Trevino and Raymond Floyd jumped to the top of the leader board here today after the second round of the Cadillac N.F.L.
Golf Classic, setting up what promises to be a memorable final-round showdown.
The 53-year-old Trevino, who is seeking his first official victory in more than a year, took a two-stroke lead over Floyd by shooting a two-under-par 70 for a 36-hole total of seven-under 137.
Floyd, 50, also had a 70 for 139.


Sara Rae, B. K. Griggs
Sara Rae, a daughter of Mary E. McGregor and Norman A. Hickey, both of Toronto, was married yesterday to Barklie Kennan Griggs, a son of Joan Kennan of Washington and the late Lawrence T. Griggs.
The Rev.
Michael T. Cole performed the Episcopal ceremony at the Kennan family farm in East Berlin, Pa.
Mrs.
Griggs is a publicity and video assistant for Mercury Records in Los Angeles.
She graduated from the University of Toronto.
Her father, who is retired, was the vice president and managing director of radio stations CHUC-AM and CFMX-FM in Cobourg, Ontario, Canada.
Her mother is a communications officer with the Ontario Ministry of Health in Toronto.
The bride had changed her maiden name.


Cocaine Cowboys
SWORDFISH A True Story of Ambition, Savagery, and Betrayal.
By David McClintick.
Illustrated. 606 pp.
New York: Pantheon Books. $25.


Carter Center: More Than the Past
IF Jimmy Carter's Presidency sometimes seems like a work still in progress, with his stock having risen substantially in the years since he left office, his Presidential library in Atlanta has much the same feel.
From the Byzantine road access, to the construction on the site, to the bustle of activity at the adjacent Carter Presidential Center, Mr.
Carter's museum and library, like his career, has less the feel of a finished retrospective than the feel of something still evolving.


UP AND COMING: Paloma Herrera And Parrish Maynard; She Yearns to Be Juliet. He Wants To Dance Albrecht.
Classical ballet is revitalized in each new gifted dancer.
To watch Paloma Herrera and Parrish Maynard on the stage of the Metropolitan Opera House, where American Ballet Theater is performing through June 12, is to see two of the company's rising stars bring vivid individual color to a centuries-old art.
Ms.
Herrera, a dark-haired, dark-eyed 17-year-old from Buenos Aires, joined the company in 1991 and is a member of the corps de ballet, though she often dances solo roles.
She is a fluid classicist, the kind of dancer who brings a sunny ease to the most demanding of pyrotechnics.
Ms.
Herrera looks as if she is enjoying herself when she dances; she dives fearlessly into sleek modern choreography that still feels a little strange and dances the classical repertory with a sumptuous fullness.


Seville Museum Reopens, Again
After taking nearly 18 years to recover from an unsuccessful renovation attempt, the Museo de Bellas Artes in Seville, considered Spain's second most important museum, after the Prado, finally reopened last month.
The museum, housed in the 17th-century Convento de la Merced Descalza in the historic center of Seville, has existed since the 1830's.
Much of its collection is derived from the expropriated holdings of the city's many monasteries and convents that were closed and banned during 19th-century bursts of anticlericism in Spain.


Data Bank/May 30, 1993


Seles Struggles With Injury and W.T.A. Decision
Three-time French Open champion Monica Seles, omnipresent in Paris even in her absence, has alerted her tennis peers that rumors of her impending retirement due to the stab wound she suffered April 30, along with rumors that the knifing created a merely superficial injury, have been greatly exaggerated.
Seles, who's continuing to recuperate at the Steadman-Hawkins Clinic in Vail, Colo., confirmed that she would be unable to compete at Wimbledon and so far had been unable even to lift a racquet.
The 19-year-old Seles was injured by an assailant during her quarterfinal match in Hamburg, Germany, her first Kraft Tour event after a 63-day layoff because of a prolonged bout with the flu.


Gretchen A. Euler and Mark B. Bliss
Gretchen Ann Euler, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Karl F. Euler of Downers Grove, Ill., was married on Friday to Mark Brayley Bliss, a son of Sally B. Bliss of Oyster Bay, L.I., and the late Anthony A. Bliss.
The Rev.
John Zehring, a Congregational minister, performed the ceremony on the covered bridge over the Contoocook River on the campus of New England College in Henniker, N.H.
Mrs.
Bliss, 24, graduated cum laude from New England College.
Her father owns the Euler True Value Hardware stores in Chicago.


Hollywood, the Next Generation


Plainfield
To the Editor:
Your portrait of Plainfield, N.J., on May 9 contains some accurate descriptions of architecture history, and challenges facing the public schools, but your characterization of the housing stock as "for sale at bargain prices because of the residual effects of race riots in the 1960's" is too much of a blaming-the-victim approach to let stand.


Michael S. Flynn, Heather D. Cady
Mr. and Mrs.
Charles V. Cady of Mystic, Conn., have announced the engagement of their daughter Heather Dodge Cady to Michael Sean Flynn, a son of Mrs.
James E. Flynn of Bayonne, N.J., and the late Mr.
Flynn.
An October wedding is planned.
Ms.
Cady graduated from Brown University.
She is a third-year law student at New York University, as is her fiance.
In the fall, she plans to join the law firm of Cravath, Swaine &amp; Moore in New York.
Her father is a senior technical writer at the electric boat division of General Dynamics, in Groton, Conn.
Her mother, Judith Cady, is the chief executive of the Lawrence Memorial Federal Credit Union in New London, Conn.


MAY 23-29: Handguns and the Home; Acquittal in Baton Rouge, But Not for America
Every day on average, 65 Americans are shot to death with handguns, but few killings have had reverberations as far-reaching and troubling as those in the death of Yoshihiro Hattori last October in Baton Rouge, La.
Jurors there last week acquitted Rodney Peairs, 31, of manslaughter charges, saying he had reason to fear that his home and family were under attack when the 16-year-old Japanese exhange student moved toward him and ignored his order to "freeze." The youth had shown up at the wrong house in search of a Halloween party.


The Executive Computer; In a 3-Sided Battle, Confusion Reigns -- of Course
IN the spring of 1863 only two armies were vexing Atlanta in what some people here still call the War of Northern Aggression.
Last week, three armies were challenging the city's hospitality during the Comdex/ Spring computer trade show: Microsoft unfurled its Windows NT battle flags, I.B.M. sent in reinforcements for its OS/2 software, and the grizzled veterans of Unix found some fresh horses to ride.
The combativeness was just one more sign that the personal computer industry is at a crossroads.
Microsoft, through DOS and Windows, clearly owns the office desktop today, but despite Windows's huge popularity, the program was designed to run on microprocessors that virtually nobody uses anymore.
Windows does not take advantage of 32-bit microprocessors, which include the Intel Corporation's i386DX and i486DX chips, the workhorses of the typical office.
So many corporate information system managers are now trying to decide just which advanced operating system should be the platform on which to carry their PC operations into the 21st century.


Never Mind the Numbers, Business Pays Big Taxes
CONGRESS and the Clinton Administration are on the brink of a budget plan.
But before they jump, they should realize that one central budget issue -- corporate tax rates -- has become a victim of misleading statistics.
Originally, President Clinton's budget plan called for a 36 percent general corporate tax rate -- a 2 percent increase.
But, to minimize the harm to economic growth while still achieving credible deficit reduction, the President later agreed to Representative Dan Rostenkowski's suggestion to seek only a 35 percent rate and to drop the temporary tax credit for large corporations.


Conquering Hero?


Is Amax Deal A Warning Of Inflation?
IT was the spring of 1981.
Inflation and interest rates were high, and although gold had already started down from its 1980 peak above $800 an ounce, almost everyone on Wall Street was certain that commodity prices were destined to rise for years to come.
And Amax Inc., a mining giant that had prospered with soaring prices of metals and minerals, was about to become legendary as a bad market timer.
It was then that Chevron, flush with oil profits, offered to buy Amax for almost $4 billion in cash and stock, or about $78.50 a share.
Amax said no.
"This was not the right time to sell the company in order to realize its full value," Pierre Gousseland, then the chairman of Amax, later explained to angry shareholders.
Investment bankers told Amax's board the stock was worth more than $100 a share.


U.S. Decline: A New Clue
SEVERAL semesters ago, four professors at Wake Forest University administered a "cultural literacy" test to 96 of the school's first-year graduate management students.
These tests, popularized by E. D. Hirsch's "Dictionary of Cultural Literacy" (1988), assess students' knowledge of such common cultural terms as Shakespeare and suffrage.
The examinations have been given widely in primary schools, but the Wake Forest session was a business-school first.
The pioneer test-takers performed execrably.
Of the test's 250 terms, the future business executives correctly identified 17.2 percent.
This sounds bad, but a full appreciation of the awfulness demands the context of specific items.
Here are some typical test terms and the percentage of students who defined them correctly, as reported in Business Horizons, an Indiana University bimonthly:


Sara Ann Bloom, Stephen Browning
Sara Ann Bloom, a daughter of Ronald A. Bloom of New York, and Sheila C. Sayer of Bryn Mawr, Pa., was married yesterday to Stephen D. Browning, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Reed Browning of Gambier, Ohio.
The Rev.
William Neenan performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at the Church of St.
Ignatius Loyola in Chestnut Hill, Mass.


Charity Appell and W. H. Wheelock Jr.
Charity Reynolds Appell, a daughter of Prof. and Mrs.
George N. Appell of Phillips, Me., was married yesterday to William Hawxhurst Wheelock Jr., the son of Mr.
Wheelock of White Plains, and Antoinette Wheelock of Raleigh, N.C.
The Rev.
John J. Bishop performed the Episcopal service at the Church of the Good Shepherd in Rangeley, Me.


A Who's Who Of the Commute
AT Grand Central Terminal during the evening rush, trains leave for points north every few minutes.
But many commuters can be seen careering through the station, desperate to make what they have come to know as "their" train.
"It's just a matter of minutes, yet people feel they have an absolute call by destiny to take the 5:32 P.M.," said Daniel Brucker, a spokesman for Metro-North.
"If they don't make it they're simply going to be at the wrong place at the wrong time, because they're not on their train," he said.


The Things That Get Left Out In the Fight for the Wild Northwest
SOMETIME next month, President Clinton will release his plan for managing one of the last great American wilderness areas, the old-growth forests of the Pacific Northwest.
Then Rush Limbaugh will bash the spotted owl, again, and the Sierra Club will threaten to sue if the plan doesn't go far enough.
I grew up among clearcuts in the Northwest, big patches of scorched earth where there used to be a tangle of trees.
I've seen fishing holes choked to death by logging debris, and hillsides that have shed centuries of topsoil after the Forest Service had its way with the land.


Miss Gschwind, Mr. McCullough
Theresa Ann Gschwind, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
A.
Edward Gschwind of Summit, N.J., was married there yesterday to Andrew Cuyugan McCullough, a son of Lourdes F. McCullough of London and George M. McCullough of Jacksonboro, S.C.
The Rev.
John J. Paladino performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at St.
Teresa's Church.
Mrs.
McCullough, 29, was until recently an associate at the law firm of Pond, Shjeflo &amp; Wohl in San Mateo, Calif.
She and her husband graduated from Yale University and received law degrees from the University of California.
Her father is the president of American Royal Reinsurance Company in New York.


Eastward, Ho! The Great Move Reverses
This spring, 150 years after the first wave of immigrants waded through the Oregon Trail dust here on the way to the West Coast, a couple from California dropped into this sage-coated valley cut by the Snake River and pronounced it Eden.
Pulling up stakes from Orange County, Cindy and Marty Madden had explored the arid plateaus and alpine hideaways of the West in their small private airplane.
They settled on one of the most remote small cities in nation, a four-hour drive east of Boise.


Choosing the Right Fish for Grilling
SUCCESSFULLY grilling fish depends on two conditions.
First, the grill or the source of heat must be searingly hot so the fish can take on appetizing color before it is overcooked.
Second, the fish should have a firm enough texture so it does not fall apart.
Adequate preheating and sufficient coals should guarantee that the grill is hot when it is time to cook fish.
Placing the grate as close as possible to the heat source enhances intensity.
As for types of fish that are best for grilling, thick steak fish -- like tuna, swordfish and shark -- head the list.
Monkfish is also excellent, as is mahi-mahi, tilefish and salmon.
Softer fish like cod and halibut are more difficult to handle, and it is also not advisable to attempt fish that come in thin fillets, like flounder.


How to Sharpen Tools To Their Fine Points
EXCEPT for lawnmower blades and hedge clippers, yard and garden tools are seldom sharpened adequately.
Many owners of shovels, hoes and other digging tools may not be aware that the tools should be sharpened.
For sharpening most outdoor tools, all that is needed is a 10- or 12-inch mill-bastard file.
For finer-edged tools like pruning shears, also buy a 10-inch smoothing file, and for both tools buy a file card, a type of wire brush for cleaning filings from between files' teeth.
Using a file card is a key to keep files sharp.


Leichter, the Senate's Minority of One, Finds an Audience Beyond Albany
It sometimes seems that Senator Franz S. Leichter, Albany's lord of the gadflies, was destined to serve in the minority.
Mr.
Leichter, a liberal Democrat from the Upper West Side of Manhattan, first won election to the Assembly in 1968, the year that his party lost control of that house.
Six years later Mr.
Leichter won his seat in the Republican-controlled Senate while the Democrats were reclaiming the Assembly.


Amid a Job Shortage, Why Send Work Abroad?
To the Editor:
Regarding "In a Shaky Economy, Even Professionals Are 'Temps,' " (May 16), I have been placing software specialists on a temporary basis for five years.
One of the more satisfying aspects of my work is helping talented professionals find work in today's struggling economy.
However, there are just not enough jobs to go around.
Therefore, it troubles me greatly when I read that a company like UNUM hires temporary workers from India because it is cheaper.
I don't applaud companies that run their businesses on American soil but farm out the valuable jobs to workers overseas.
Companies like UNUM need to be educated about the value of American workers.
Otherwise, they will continue to hamper the economic recovery.
SUSAN HOVDESVEN Larchmont, N.Y., May 16


Serbian Barbarism -- and Ours
No one denies the facts.
In the midst of Europe, within sight and sound of Italy, Austria and Greece, a war is being waged with the explicit goal of driving out and destroying civilian populations.
The civilian victims are not just the necessary cost of carrying out military operations.
The aggressors view them as the real enemy they need to defeat.
They intend as best they can to "free" the conquered territories of undesirable minorities.
Night after night, television brings scenes of starving, maimed, raped, mangled civilians into the living rooms of Europe.
These images of war are even more horrific than those that sent millions of Europeans into the street 25 years ago.
Whatever the language, whatever the ideology, in those days the slogan was simple: Stop the war in Vietnam!
These days, the outrage is limited to a low sigh before the TV screen.


LONG ISLAND JOURNAL
Another Youthful Sound
FRANCES VAZQUEZ and her glockenspiel will have quite a workout this weekend.
Frances, 11, of Uniondale, has been associated with the glockenspiel for just two months.
"I know how to spell glocken," she said.
"I haven't learned spiel yet."
But she has learned "Kumbayah," which she can play on her glockenspiel while marching.
That is no mean feat.
Try singing, "Kooom-by-aaah, my Lord," with a left, right, left.


Parties, Parties Everywhere
A whirl of events signal an easing of the formal spring party season.
Now, black ties and long dresses will give way to less formal dress, for the most part, until September.


The Word 'Safety' Was Banned
NO BREATHING ROOM The Aftermath of Chernobyl.
By Grigori Medvedev.
Translated by Evelyn Rossiter. 213 pp.
New York: Basic Books.


POSTINGS: Razing or Reuse?; Sanctuary's Fate In the Balance
In 109 years, the Moorish Revival temple at 32 Prince Street has gone from the hands of Congregation Oheb Shalom, which built it, to Congregation Adas Israel to the Metropolitan Baptist Church, which has worshiped there since 1940, to the City of Newark, which acquired it for the University Heights redevelopment.
Preservationists hope that the story doesn't end there.


Catherine White, G. J. Flattmann Jr.
Catherine Louise White, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Joseph F. White of East Orleans, Mass., was married yesterday to Gerald Joseph Flattmann Jr., a son of Mr.
Flattmann of New Orleans and Gayle Christensen of San Bernardino, Calif.
The Rev.
James Clark performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at St.
Joan of Arc Church in Orleans, Mass.


She Sings and Plays a Bassoon, Too
HOLLI ROSS sings be-bop, swing, pop standards and esoteric show tunes like "Here's That Rainy Day." And she plays the bassoon, too.
The range of Ms.
Ross, but not the bassoon, will be heard at the Hampton Square Restaurant, 10 Beach Road, Westhampton Beach, on Thursday at 8 and 10 P.M.


Where Grim Willowbrook Stood, College Opens New Campus
By now, the transformation is almost complete: The once grim buildings that were a warehouse for the mentally retarded known as the Willowbrook State School are giving way to gleaming structures for learning that will open for classes in September as the new campus of the College of Staten Island.
The new campus, consisting of more than a dozen gutted and renovated neo-Georgian-style buildings on a 204-acre site, is the first totally new campus for a City University of New York college in several decades.
When it opens in September, it will also be the biggest college campus, private or public, in New York City.


Five Writers + One Star = A Hit?
In Hollywood, nearly every one dreams of the big score.
And, in the fall of 1991 when studios were making plans for the summer of 1993, the biggest imaginable scores would be a movie "directed by Steven Spielberg" or "starring Arnold Schwarzenegger."
Columbia Pictures got Mr.
Schwarzenegger by paying five screenwriters more than $2 million to create "Last Action Hero," a $70 million movie that opens June 18.
Since their work hooked Mr.
Schwarzenegger, the writers -- Adam Leff and Zak Penn, Shane Black and David Arnott, and the Academy Award-winner William Goldman -- were probably worth double that amount.


A Novelist Confronts 'Mental Apartheid'
BARBARA ROGAN'S first novel, "Changing States," was hailed by a reviewer in The New York Times in 1981 as "exceptionally evocative of character and place, and morally complex." Her next two novels also received acclaim, with a rave like "a warm, funny, near-magical novel" expressing the general tone.
But why was the writer from Farmingdale greeted by a resounding silence when she delivered her fourth novel, "A Heartbeat Away," to her publisher?
Apparently because she is a white woman, and her novel deals primarily with black characters.


'Lost in the Stars' Finds Its Way at Last
The accidents of travel find me writing about a new recording of Kurt Weill's last completed piece of musical theater in the city in which he made his reputation and in which, according to two related schools of thought, he did his only important work.
The score is "Lost in the Stars," a musical Weill wrote with his playwright friend Maxwell Anderson.
It was based on Alan Paton's novel about South African racial injustice and reconciliation, "Cry, the Beloved Country," and opened on Broadway in 1949.
After 273 performances there, it toured nationally and was revived on Broadway, on film and in opera houses.
The most notable operatic revival came in 1958, early in Julius Rudel's tenure as artistic director of the New York City Opera.
Mr.
Rudel here conducts the Orchestra of St.
Luke's in the score's first honest representation on records (Musicmasters 01612-67100; CD), in contrast to the stalwartly sung but brutually cut original cast album (MCA MCAD-10302; CD).


In Nuclear Tests, We All Live Downwind
To the Editor:
While it was heartening to read your May 6 and May 25 editorials in favor of banning nuclear testing, it was inaccurate to state that "the last American nuclear test explosion sent radioactivity into the atmosphere in 1962" (May 6).
Indeed, a partial test ban at that time sent tests underground into shafts and tunnels at the Nevada test site, but since then at least 100 of these explosions have sent radioactivity into inhabited areas, often in massive amounts.


Codys Key Strikes a $66 Note In Roseben
While many of the prize horses of two continents were primping backstage for Belmont Week yesterday, a less-illustrious field of six sprinters supplied an opening act that set a stirring tone when a 32-1 long shot won the Roseben Handicap in a three-horse photo finish.
The star was the 4-year-old colt Codys Key, who had won only one race in the last year and a half and none since last July.
But he took the lead at the start, stayed close through fast fractions and refused to concede anything when challenged in the home stretch.
At the wire, he poked his head in front of Sunnybutcold, who poked his nose in front of the even-money favorite Slerp, and he opened Belmont Week with a smash.


Clinton Mends Military Fences At West Point
Seeking to quell simmering doubts within the American military about his leadership, President Clinton assured the graduating class of West Point today that when it comes to cutting the military budget "there is a limit beyond which we must not go."
But the President also could not resist getting in a plug for his budget plans, cautioning the 1,003 members of the United States Military Academy class of 1993 that "just as our security cannot rest on a hollow army, neither can it rest upon a hollow economy." Speech Warmly Received
Standing erect in a cool morning breeze, moving stiffly, and keeping a somber look on his face at all times, Mr.
Clinton seemed to be trying to strike just the right demeanor for a Commander in Chief as he delivered his remarks, which were warmly received by the cadets and their families.


'PUT THEM ALL TOGETHER . . .'
What are you trying to do to the followers of your Sunday puzzle?
I, and everyone else I talked to, completed the May 9 puzzle "Put Them All Together . . ." correctly, according to the answers given in the May 16 issue, but not one of us could make any sense out of the six theme words.
Don't we deserve to have it explained to us?
GRACE K. LANINI Somers, N.Y.
Eugene Maleska replies:
Each "theme word" is part of a phrase or name using MOTHER, but one letter is missing.
For example, "Theme word #1" is ACHREE.
The M is missing from MACHREE.
Next comes GOSE.
The O is missing from GOOSE.
Now as you proceed through 3, 4, 5 and 6, you will find T-H-E-R.
As the title says, 'Put Them All Together . . .'


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
FIRE By Hazel Rossotti. Oxford University, $27.50.


IN SHORT: FICTION
FRIENDS AND ASSASSINS By Heather Ross Miller.
University of Missouri, cloth, $16.95; paper, $9.95.


Former Missouri Attorney General to Plead Guilty
The former Attorney General of Missouri, William L. Webster, who gained national recognition for arguing abortion and right-to-die cases before the United States Supreme Court, is planning plead guilty to charges of conspiracy and embezzlement, a Federal judge said Friday.
The judge, Russell G. Clark of Federal District Court, said he had been told by Federal prosecutors that Mr.
Webster would plead guilty in his court here on Wednesday.


Sports of The Times; Jordan Cool, But Starks Overheats
SOME of us were worrying about where Michael Jordan goes on his night off, but the Knicks had better start worrying about the strange and disruptive places John Starks goes during his working hours.
Starks got himself thrown out of the game yesterday for challenging Jordan in the fourth period, long after the Bulls had assured themselves of a 103-83 victory that makes this a series again.


Mariana Stockly, Benjamin Tupper
Mariana du Pont Stockly, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
A.
Holmes Stockly of Falmouth, Me., was married there yesterday to Benjamin Thomas Tupper, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Ansel N. Tupper of South Portland, Me.
The Rev.
Frederick Lipp, a Unitarian Universalist minister, performed the ceremony at the home of the bride's parents.


What You See Isn't What Barkley Is
A group of 35 teen-agers hopped up and down at the sight of Charles Barkley this week.
They pasted their noses and lips up to an arena window, leaving steam marks on the glass, and they chanted, "Here, here, here," as if he were an obedient 6-foot-5-inch puppy.
"Look at that," Barkley, the Phoenix Suns' star and National Basketball Association's most valuable player, said, not budging an inch.
"That is why the educational system is not working. All those suckers are here and not in school. I'm just glad none of them are my kids. If they were my kids, I'd be beating the hell out of them."


Your Home: Tax Appeals; The Group Challenge In a Condo
THE owner of a unit in a condominium or homeowner association is treated much like the owner of a one-family house when it comes to paying property taxes: He or she is assessed individually and is personally responsible for the tax bill.
But this doesn't mean such people have to go it alone when it comes to protesting their assessment and the level of taxes they pay in relation to other homeowners in the community.
On the contrary, they have the advantage of being able to operate as a group.


NEWS SUMMARY
International 3-17  FIRE KILLS 5 TURKS IN GERMANY  Five women and children, members of a Turkish family, burned to death in a home where they had lived for years in Germany in a fire that the authorities said was suspected arson by neo-Nazi extremists.  1  CLINTON IS CHEERED AT WEST POINT  Seeking to quell doubts within the military, President Clinton assured cadets at West Point that in cutting the military budget, "there is a limit beyond which we must not go." 1


Fun for Man And Beast
ON TUESDAY evening, Our Lady of the Garden Tools, Martha Stewart, gave a housewarming party at the airy, new offices of Martha Stewart Living magazine at 20 West 43d Street.
A purveyor of domestic apotheoses like flavored oils in ice cubes and sweet-pea twine, Mrs.
Stewart seems to have adopted the credo that the unexamined serving utensil is not worth using.
"I dreamt about the legs of this table," she was saying in her conference room, which featured vases of peonies plucked, of course, from her garden in Westport, Conn.
"I saw a raj table at an antiques store and I couldn't afford it, so I had this copy made. It has ebonized mahogany legs and a galvanized steel top. It's like me. It's indestructible."


Why Clinton Can't Go on TV and Fix Everything
To judge by some of the commentators who buzz around the Presidency like bugs in rainy season, Bill Clinton's parade is a washout because he has lost his television magic.
For several weeks the favored figure of speech on all channels for what is lacking in the White House has been "focus," a word associated with a camera.
That is appropriate enough, since many observers, especially those in the television trade, judge events by what they see on the tube.
They seem disappointed that the politician who used the medium so sharply in attaining the Presidency now presents so fuzzy an image.
If only he could be brought into the shop and put back on autofocus, everything would go well again.
But if President Clinton's current tribulations show anything, it is the limits of even so television-wise a politician when faced with conditions that cannot be powdered over in the studio dressing room.
To borrow a phrase from Irving Kristol, Mr.
Clinton is being mugged by reality.


Joan Marie Suter, Patrick Machan
Joan Marie Suter, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
George Suter Jr. of Cos Cob, Conn., was married yesterday to Patrick Alexander Machan, a son of Nadia Machanova of Zlin, the Czech Republic, and Alois Machan of Monroe, N.Y.
The Rev.
Robert Loftus performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at St.
Catherine of Siena Church in Riverside, Conn.
Mrs.
Machan, 26, graduated from Hamilton College, as did her husband, and she received an M.B.A. degree this month from New York University.
Her father is the area president of Pfizer Inc., the pharmaceuticals company in New York, for Central and Eastern Europe.


New York Times Begins a New Weekly List of Stock Options
THE New York Times introduces a new weekly listing of stock options today, consolidating coverage of stock options that trade on more than one exchange and providing comprehensive coverage of the most active options and the ones that rise and fall the most.
The table appears on page 22.


Moving Beyond 'Finlandia': A Haunted, Haunting Sound
It is the 1990's in America on a burning day in summer, in the stinking oven of the city, and for a few moments the opening melody of Merikanto's concerto holds all our attention like a very white and radiant curtain being slowly drawn aside.


Combating the Spread of Graffiti
AT the highly trafficked corner of Ashburton and Yonkers Avenues, on an abandoned building that was once the thriving Torante Cafe, the local gangs have left their mark for all the world to see.
On other buildings and on overpasses along crowded highways, in busy parks and on trucks that weave throughout the network of streets here, the elaborate designs of some of this city's gangs -- which are also called posses and crews -- have found a larger and more public forum than most artists, even those of great fame, can claim.


As 'Summer' Begins, Water Beckons
NO matter what the calendar says, Memorial Day weekend signals the start of summer to most people, and few activities are as suggestive of the season as swimming, boating or simply lazing away on a beach or the shore of a lake.
With Long Island Sound on the east, the Hudson River on the west and many lakes, ponds and streams scattered in between, Westchester residents don't need to venture to the Hamptons for the beaches or upstate to pursue fishing and canoeing.
Despite such outward trappings of the suburbs as shopping centers, multiplex movie theaters and fast-food outlets, the county is more connected to nature than many residents might suspect.
And the variety of outdoor activities extends far beyond a foray to a golf course or a visit to a nature center.


Blue Mountain Signs Keep Hikers Off Trails
THE trail beckons hikers off the dusty road, once used for logging, and up a cool, shaded path into the dense woods beyond, but hoof prints are the only evidence of visitors.
The deer trot up the trail, ignoring the bright white sign with red letters posted on a tree at the first bend.
"Danger! This area may be dangerous to your health due to the presence of lead. Unauthorized personnel keep out." The words are repeated in Spanish.


Woman, 77, Found Dead With Hatchet in Head
A 77-year-old Brooklyn woman was found dead in her apartment yesterday with a hatchet in her head, the police said.
The woman, Hilda Herbert, who lived alone at 499 Washington Avenue in Fort Greene, was found at 7:37 A.M. sitting in a chair with a blanket covering her from head to toe, said Detective Kim Royster, a spokeswoman for the Police Department.
A 15-inch hatchet was embedded in the left rear part of her head, the detective said.


Choosing the Right Fish for Grilling
SUCCESSFULLY grilling fish depends on two conditions.
First, the grill or the source of heat must be searingly hot so the fish can take on appetizing color before it is overcooked.
Second, the fish should have a firm enough texture so it does not fall apart.
Adequate preheating and sufficient coals should guarantee that the grill is hot when it is time to cook fish.
Placing the grate as close as possible to the heat source enhances intensity.
As for types of fish that are best for grilling, thick steak fish -- like tuna, swordfish and shark -- head the list.
Monkfish is also excellent, as is mahi-mahi, tilefish and salmon.
Softer fish like cod and halibut are more difficult to handle, and it is also not advisable to attempt fish that come in thin fillets, like flounder.


'Unplugged' in the Age of Electronics
Attention, pop stars! could you use a credibility boost?
Want to prove you're a real musician?
Would you like to get more mileage from your catalogue of hits?
Do you dream of reaching a new younger audience?
How about a new older audience?
Are you hoping for a shot at a Grammy Award?
And you don't want to pay a bundle to record your next album?
Well, now there's a handy one-step program to fulfill all of those desires.
Step right up to "MTV Unplugged," the most overloaded pop band wagon this side of grunge.
"Unplugged," a series of live concerts on acoustic instruments, is a great idea on its way to becoming a monster.
When Eric Clapton's "Unplugged" album swept this year's Grammy Awards, Hollywood phone lines were probably jammed with aging rockers calling their agents to place them on the show.
Rod Stewart has just released an album from his recent MTV session, "Unplugged . . . and Seated"; Arrested Development released its performance as a premature second album, padded by repeating seven songs as both vocal and instrumental tracks. (Guitar and turntables sound suspiciously plugged-in.)


Letting the Clips Fall Where They May
THERE is no way to stop it.
The green grass just keeps growing and growing, especially at this time of year.
Lawn mowers are always at the ready and the only way to keep this green carpet looking worth its name is to keep the blades humming.
Anyone worth his or her trowel knows that when the mowing ritual is not followed, a near hayfield ensues.
But keeping up the lawn ritual now can often be difficult, to say the least.
Those who mow only on weekends are at a disadvantage because grass knows no schedule and just keeps on growing.
Lawn grass seems to grow even when your back is turned.
Sometimes it means mowing twice a week.


Corrections
An article on May 16 about a type of retirement plan known as a salary reduction simplified employee pension, or Sarsep, misstated the maximum annual contribution.
The combined contribution from the employee and employer is limited to $30,000 or 15 percent of the employee's compensation, whichever is less.


Clinton's Future Is Hostage to Here and Now
THERE was something crazy about last week at the White House.
Between the travel office scandals, runway-haircut fallout, back-of-the-envelope budget deals and backpedaling on Bosnia, the place had a certain manic feel to it.
Virtually everyone caught up in it -- staff, reporters, lawmakers -- seemed to walk away dazed and exhausted.
But the good thing about crises is that they tend to throw things into stark relief, and if you sift through the zany events of last week, you can learn a lot about the current state of three of the most important institutions in Washington: the Congress, the press and the Presidency.


Sharyn Y. Jones, Rohan Gardener
Sharyn Yolanda Jones, a registered nurse at New York University Medical Center in New York, was married yesterday to Rohan George Gardener, a mental-health counselor at the Mental Health Association of Hempstead, L.I.
The Rev.
Edward Corley performed the ceremony at the Ebenezer Missionary Baptist Church in Flushing, Queens.


Movies Used to Be Really Good by Being Bad
From the very start of "Red-Headed Woman," Jean Harlow is looking for trouble.
Trying on a dress in a shop, she asks the saleswoman, "Can you see through this?"
"I'm afraid you can, ma'am," the clerk answers. Harlow snaps back, "I'll wear it."


Back Talk


Kathrine Clarke, Brian Reilly
Kathrine Lynn Clarke, a daughter of Mrs.
Robert L. Clarke of Pelham, N.Y., and the late Dr.
Clarke, was married yesterday to Brian Thomas Reilly, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Thomas P. Reilly of Farmington, Conn.
The Rev.
David S. Hoag performed the Episcopal ceremony at the Parish of Christ the Redeemer in Pelham.
Mrs.
Clarke-Reilly, 24, and her husband, 25, are graduates of Fordham University.
She recently graduated from the California Culinary Academy in San Francisco.
Her father was an associate professor of clinical surgery at New York Hospital.


Lael A. Stone, Daniel H. Schoonmaker
Dr.
Lael Anne Stone, the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Robert S. Stone of College Station, Tex., was married yesterday to Daniel Holt Schoonmaker, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert L. Schoonmaker of Middletown, N.Y.
The Rev.
Dr.
Vienna C. Anderson performed the Episcopal ceremony at the Washington National Cathedral in Washington.
Dr.
Stone, 33, is keeping her name.
She is a post-doctoral fellow at the National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke in Bethesda, Md.
She graduated from Stanford University, from which she also received a master's degree in biology.
She received a medical degree from Baylor College of Medicine.


Profile/Peter Munk; Lucky Gold Strike and Wise Hedging Help Keep His Shareholders Smiling
THE irony is he's no gold bug.
Peter Munk doesn't flaunt gold rings and chains or twirl gold coins.
He doesn't even wear a gold watch.
His 10-year-old company, the American Barrick Resources Corporation, has suddenly vaulted into position as North America's biggest gold enterprise and Canada's seventh-largest publicly traded company.
But gold, he says, is merely "a commodity, like cotton or wool."


Offering Help to Depression Sufferers
THOSE who break a leg or an arm will see a doctor immediately, but fewer than one-third of those who suffer from clinical depression, a far more severe malady, are likely to seek help.
Clinical depression strikes more than 12 million adults in the United States each year and costs $27 billion a year in worker absenteeism, lost productivity and health care.
Moreover, clinical depression is a leading cause of suicide.


Tickets in France
To the Editor: In France you may be fined for failing to date-mark both the train ticket and reservation form at the beginning and the return of your journey on the high-speed train, the Train a Grande Vitesse.
My daughter and I took the T.G.V. train from Paris to Brittany recently, stopping at Nantes to rent a car, then later boarding the T.G.V. at Rennes to return to Paris.


The House Hands a Budget To an Ungrateful Senate
HOUSE Democrats had to overcome a fright of problems to pass President Clinton's budget bill last week.
There was the basic unpopularity of taxes.
There was the declining popularity of the President himself.
And then there was the Senate.
Rarely have the deteriorating relations between the two houses of Congress cast such long shadows over a piece of legislation.
House Democrats were stung by the recent memory of the Senate's sinking of Mr.
Clinton's economic stimulus package, and the threats of Senator David Boren, Democrat of Oklahoma, and others to sink this budget package because of its $250 billion in taxes, nearly a third of it on energy.


Polish Prime Minister to Stay Until New Elections
President Lech Walesa said today that he would dissolve Parliament after the collapse of the Government, but that Prime Minister Hanna Suchocka would remain in power until new elections were held in the next three or four months.
Mr.
Walesa, the former Solidarity leader who was elected President in 1990, said he would not accept the Prime Minister's resignation, offered after her coalition Government lost a vote of confidence on Friday.
Under Poland's new Constitution, Miss Suchocka remains as a caretaker until a new government is elected.


U.N. Aides Cite Drawbacks To Bosnia Safe-Haven Plan
In a report to the Security Council, the United Nations Secretariat has spelled out some disadvantages to the proposal to protect safe havens for Muslims in Bosnia, angering two of the countries that drew up the plan.
Britain and France complained that the report, submitted to the Council on Friday night, went well beyond a factual account of conditions in the six designated safe areas, where more than a million Muslims have taken refuge from Bosnian Serb forces.


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
IN DEFENSE OF GARBAGE By Judd H. Alexander. Praeger, $22.95.


Man in the News; A Master of the Image: David Richmond Gergen
Back in March, when Bill Clinton seemed to be riding more or less high, David R. Gergen, the master salesman, sat on the sidelines and marveled at the cleverness of the new President's marketing plan.
"It is clear now, in contrast to how Clinton presented himself during the campaign, that the Democrats' true agenda is to reverse the direction set by Ronald Reagan," said Mr.
Gergen, who was the White House communications director in Mr.
Reagan's first term.
"And the irony is that they are attempting to do this by using the same techniques Reagan used."


Letting the Clips Fall Where They May
THERE is no way to stop it.
The green grass just keeps growing and growing, especially at this time of year.
Lawn mowers are always at the ready and the only way to keep this green carpet looking worth its name is to keep the blades humming.
Anyone worth his or her trowel knows that when the mowing ritual is not followed, a near hayfield ensues.
But keeping up the lawn ritual now can often be difficult, to say the least.
Those who mow only on weekends are at a disadvantage because grass knows no schedule and just keeps on growing.
Lawn grass seems to grow even when your back is turned.
Sometimes it means mowing twice a week.


DAVID GEFFEN, STILL HUNGRY
I was intrigued with David Geffen and his interest in Washington ("David Geffen, Still Hungry," by Bernard Weinraub, May 2).
What are we to make, however, of the fact that he got his start in Hollywood by lying on a job application and tampering with the mail to cover it up?
How does he feel today about that youthful transgression?
Does he regret it, think it insignificant or view it as a reflection of his early drive and industry?
And are we to believe that he now has integrity because the President's chief of staff regards him as someone who has "handled his immense success in a very exemplary manner"?
SARAH BENNETT CARR Silver Spring, Md.


Stop Using 'Fundamentalist' as an All-Purpose Negative Word
To the Editor:
I protest the increasing use in news reporting of "fundamentalist" to describe those of strong religious conviction.
"Fundamentalist" has become a code word with double meaning.
The denotation is "religiously conservative." Like it or not, the connotation is now "fanatical, potentially violent, possibly terrorist in political action." Compare the fall of the word "liberal" in the Reagan and Bush Administrations.
Once tarred, a word is no longer objective as before.


For Families: Special Summer Hotel Rates
HOTELS are doing better at filling their rooms, at least as of February, the most recent full month analyzed by Smith Travel Research of Gallatin, Tenn., which tracks the industry for the American Hotel and Motel Association.
That was the good news for them; the bad news was that the occupancy rate for hotels in the United States was still only 60 percent, with the increase mainly caused by a slowing of hotel-building.
This, in turn, is good for travelers, because it means there are many special summer rates, particularly ones designed to appeal to families that might otherwise stay with relatives to save money in tough times.
Many of the new rates go into effect this weekend and run into September.
Notable this year are the offers from high-priced resorts, including some in the Caribbean and elsewhere outside the United States.
And Club Med, which has usually had a family program at five of its clubs for specified periods between May and December, has added specials at two more clubs -- Caravelle on Guadeloupe and Huatulco in Mexico, for children 6 through 11, during July and August only.
Some other resort promotions focus on day camps for children, with T-shirts, trips and cookouts, usually for an added fee.
A Sampling of Programs
Here is a selection of the more interesting summer packages.
Ramada International Hotels and Resorts -- not the domestic Ramada Inns -- calls its promotion a Summer Sale.
Rates at all 11 of the group's hotels and resorts in the Caribbean and Latin America are reduced 30 to 50 percent through Sept. 30.
In the Caribbean, the rates range from $75 a night at the Yacht Haven Hotel and Marina in St.
Thomas, the Virgin Islands, to $100 a night at the Treasure Island Resort at Grand Cayman.
In Latin America, the rates are $55 to $80 a night.
Up to four people, children included, may stay in the room.
Ramada International, 2655 Le Jeune Road, Suite 800, Coral Gables, Fla. 33134; (800) 854-7854.
Marriott's Family Room promotion has a twist: The stay must be paid for in full by credit card 21 days in advance, and the reservation is nonrefundable and not changeable.
The rates for the 185 participating Marriott Hotels in the United States, Canada, the Caribbean and Mexico (not Marriott's Courtyard, Residence or Fairfield Inns) start at $49 a night on weekends, a discount of 55 percent off regular prices, and $59 a night on weekdays, and range up to $139 in Hawaii on the weekend and $192 in New York on weekdays.
Up to five people may occupy a room; one or two children aged 10 or younger may eat free from a children's menu for each adult entree ordered at breakfast, lunch or dinner.
The special offer extends from June 18 to Sept. 6.
Up to four rooms may be reserved. (The rate may not be available where there are conventions in town.) Marriott Hotels, Marriott Drive, Washington, D.C. 20058; (800) 228-9290.
Radisson is offering its Shades of Summer promotion for the fifth year.
This program, which continues until Sept. 6, applies to all Radisson hotels in the United States, Canada, Mexico, the Caribbean, London, Berlin and Australia.
The rates vary by hotel, with the lowest nightly rate $49; half the 277 properties are offering rates of $59 a night or less.
Reservations are required, to confirm availability; some resorts may have a policy of advance payment.
When there are local festivals or sports events, the rates may not be available.
Radisson Hotels International, Post Office Box 59159, Minneapolis, Minn. 55459; (800) 333-3333.
Inter-Continental Hotels is offering discounts of up to 50 percent in its Summer Options program at 11 hotels in the United States and Canada.
At the New Orleans Inter-Continental, the rate is $99 a night, single or double occupancy, with children under 14 sharing parents' rooms for free; the New York rate is $179 and the rate at the Mark Hopkins in San Francisco is $129.
Other options include an adjoining room at 50 percent of the Summer Options rate.
The program runs until Sept. 12.
Inter-Continental Hotels, 1120 Avenue of the Americas, New York, N.Y. 10036; (800) 327-0200.
Wyndham Hotels and Resorts offer a program called Kids on Us until Sept. 30 at Rose Hall, near Montego Bay, Jamaica; Elbow Beach, Paget, Bermuda; Heywoods at St.
Peter, Barbados; the Ambassador Beach Resort in Nassau, and the Morgan Bay in Choc Bay on St.
Lucia.
Under this program, in its second summer, children 12 and under eat free from a children's menu when they eat with parents, and children 18 and under stay free in their parents' room, or qualify for discounts on a second room.
Kids Klub activities are offered free from 10 A.M. to 6 P.M. for two groups: children 5 to 8, and those 9 to 12.
At Morgan Bay, where the price includes meals, the per-person charge for a three-night package with two paying guests in a room starts at $405.
A three-night package at Rose Hall starts at $174 a person when two paying guests share the room.
Wyndham Hotels and Resorts, 2001 Bryan Street, Suite 2300, Dallas, Tex. 75201; (800) 822-4200.
The 13 Hawthorn Suites in seven states, mostly in the South, are offering packages that may include tie-ins to nearby attractions -- a one-day pass to Sea World in Orlando, Fla., for example.
The two-room suites can sleep six people, and full breakfasts are included.
The rates start at $80 a night in Arlington, Tex., and run up to $118 for an Orlando offer that includes a minivan rental.
All Hawthorn Suites have pools except for the one in Charleston, S.C.
Hawthorn Suites, 400 Fifth Avenue, Waltham, Mass. 02154; (800) 527-1133.
On Hilton Head, S.C., Westin Resort's Family Fun package offers parents a room with balcony for two nights for $409; a children's room with balcony for two nights is $240.
Prices include one day of bicycle rental and free meals for children under 10 who eat with their parents. (Children 18 and under in families not buying the package may stay free in their parents' room.) The resort, for the second year, is also offering a recreation program for children 5 to 12 years old, Camp Wackatoo, through Labor Day.
This costs $35 a day for the first child, $20 for the second, but it is free for children under the package plan.
The Westin also provides strollers, car seats and playpens as well as cribs, free of charge.
The Westin Resort, 2 Grasslawn Avenue, Hilton Head Island, S.C. 29928; (800) 933-3102; (803) 681-4000; fax (803) 681-1087.
Until Oct. 31, rates at the Sandy Lane Hotel and Golf Club in St.
James, Barbados, begin at $395 a night for garden-view rooms and rise to $520 for the best ocean-view room.
Children up to 12 stay in their parents' room free.
Meals are included.
The hotel is starting a nanny service, available from 9 A.M. to 6 P.M., which is free for children up to 6 years old.
For children 7 and up, there is a $6-an-hour charge for the service.
The same fee is charged for other children's activities, including sports lessons, movies and excursions.
Sandy Lane Hotel and Golf Club, St.
James, Barbados, West Indies; (809) 432-1311; fax (809) 432-2954.
Camp With a Western Theme
The Pointe Hilton at Squaw Peak, one of three Pointe Hiltons in Phoenix, is offering a new program, Coyote Camp, which features a different Western theme each day.
A main attraction is meeting wranglers and learning about the care of horses.
Children 5 to 12 may participate from 9 A.M. to 5 P.M. daily, at a cost of $35 a day for each child.
At all three resorts, children under the age of 18 stay free in their parents' suites, which have two television sets and a refrigerator.
Until Sept. 15, the rate for suites is $69 a night.
The Pointe Hilton Resorts, 7500 North Dreamy Draw Drive, Suite 215, Phoenix, Ariz. 85020; (800) 934-1000; (602) 997-6000; fax (602) 997-2391.


Folk Art From Afar, in Santa Monica Shops
TO me, one of the great joys of traveling has always been the hunt for hidden treasure -- a Balinese carving, perhaps, or a quilt made of Thai silk.
So before a recent trip to Mexico, when a fellow traveler recommended that I stop in Tlaquepaque, a suburb of Guadalajara that supposedly sold some of the nation's finest handiwork, I was intrigued.
The guidebook promised 300 stores and galleries.
I carried the vision of Tlaquepaque (pronounced tlah-kay-PAH-kay) close to my heart through the earlier, less consumer-oriented part of our journey.
Unfortunately, when we finally arrived, I discovered what I immediately christened Schlocky-pocky, five blocks of pricey souvenir shops, selling the usual onyx chess sets, papier-mache clowns and brass Aztec calendars.
As for the handful of good artisans, I'd already seen the bulk of their wares for sale -- for not much more -- at a gallery of Mexican arts and crafts half a mile from my home.
"I can just go down the street and buy this stuff," I complained to my husband.


Stellar Students Crowd A Teacher's Schedule
"I WILL be 70 in January," Andy Anselmo announces at the top of his so-called cabaret act.
"And the minute I hit the stage, I feel like 7."
The act is not as well turned out as Mr.
Anselmo, a white-haired, slick model of preservation, in a black vest, white trousers and white tuxedo shirt with the top two buttons undone.
A red ruby in the center of a silver cross hangs on a silver chain around his neck.


Fire on the Right: Giuliani Spurned
Rudolph W. Giuliani, the Republican-Liberal candidate for Mayor, may have managed to win over some disgruntled Liberals and Democrats on his left flank, but he's facing an outright revolt on his right.
The Conservative Party, in a quixotic fit of idealism, last week nominated George Marlin, an unknown municipal bond expert, for mayor, rejecting a last-minute appeal from Mr.
Giuliani and almost certainly dooming the 26,000-member party's chances to back a winner.
Party delegates met at the Warwick Hotel in midtown and voted 3 to 1 for Mr.
Marlin, a towering man with round glasses and a zealously conservative air.
The delegates rejected pleas from some Giuliani supporters that principles are fine, but getting elected is more important.


Wall Street; A Small-Trade System Gone Awry
IT isn't easy to spark reform that helps the small investor.
You need a stock market crash, flagrant abandonment of responsibilities (stock dealers' refusal to pick up their ringing telephones would qualify) and a lot of red-faced securities industry executives before much gets done.
As it happens, just such a confluence of events took place in October 1987.
Regulators then concluded that the only way to reverse rock-bottom investor confidence would be to initiate a program so airtight that no investor would feel shaky about owning stocks.


Streetscapes: Upper Riverside Drive; When New Sidewalks Become a Path to Controversy
VISITORS to the new Riverbank State Park probably won't notice the long, narrow north-south scar made by new sidewalks in front of the buildings on Riverside Drive from 135th to 153d Street.
But to residents of the community it is yet another insult, along with the smells and sight of the sewage plant beneath the park.
Upper Riverside Drive was opened to development around 1908 after the completion of a giant viaduct across 125th Street and the IRT subway up Broadway.
The New York American called the new section, lined with apartment houses, "one of the sights of the town which no visitor out for an auto ride would think of missing."


INSIDE
Bulls Defeat Knicks
The Chicago Bulls, down two games, defeated the New York Knicks 103-83.
Some copies of SportsSunday went to press before the game ended.


Protest Intensifies Over Suspended Priest
Supporters of an Episcopal priest who was recently suspended from his South Bronx church have said they may try to block the attempts of the Diocese of New York to send a replacement to celebrate Mass, and church managers say the Bishop has instructed them to call the police if any attempt is made to disrupt services today.
The Rev.
Luis Barrios, the priest who had been in charge of St.
Ann's Church in the Mott Haven section, said he was suspended two weeks ago by Bishop Richard F. Grein over concerns about his ministry.
But Father Barrios says neither he nor his parishioners have been given a full reason, and he is consulting with a lawyer to determine if he has any recourse.


Recent Sales
Eastchester, N.Y.  $387,500
10 Gramatan Court  3-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 11-year-old condominium; dining room, fireplace, deck; common charges $392; taxes $9,208.
Greenburgh, N.Y.  $250,000
3 Carlyle Place  3-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 36-year-old split-level; eat-in kitchen, wet bar, fireplace, screened porch, 1-car garage; taxes $6,442.
Mount Pleasant, N.Y.  $175,000
134 Pleasantville Road  2-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 93-year-old colonial; dining room, powder room, deck, greenhouse, 1-car garage; taxes $3,181.
Cheshire, Conn.  $290,000
1200 Side Hill Road  5-bedroom, 3-bath, 28-year-old colonial; paneled family room, skylights, sprinkler system, 1.3 acres; taxes $4,457.
Simsbury, Conn.  $145,000
114 Farms Village Road  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 51-year-old colonial; formal dining room, wainscoting, screened porch, 0.75 acre; taxes $2,384.
Stamford, Conn.  $286,000
11 De Nicola Place  4-bedroom, 3-bedroom, 12-year-old raised ranch; family room with fireplace, h/w floors, in-law setup, 0.5 acre; taxes $4,200.
OTHER AREAS Cresskill, N.J.  $256,000
7 Woodland Road  4-bedroom, 2-bath, 40-year-old colonial; 2-car garage, w/w carpeting; taxes $4,214.
Hillsdale, N.J.  $235,000
270 Pascack Road  3-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 33-year-old colonial, h/w floors, finished basement, circular driveway; taxes $4,454.
Dix Hills, L.I.  $332,500
3 Plymouth Road  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 31-year-old farm ranch; family room with fireplace, Florida room, den, 1.3 acres, 2-car garage; taxes $6,000.


Caroline M. Minter and Blair G. Hoxby
Caroline Marie Minter, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Steven A. Minter of Shaker Heights, Ohio, was married yesterday in Cambridge, Mass., to Blair Gerald Hoxby, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
H.
Gerald Hoxby of Cincinnati.
The Rev.
Dr.
Peter J. Gomes performed the Anglican ceremony at the Memorial Church at Harvard University.
Mrs.
Hoxby, 27, is a doctoral candidate in economics at Massachusetts Institute of Technology.
She graduated summa cum laude from Harvard University.
Both she and her husband, 27, studied as Rhodes Scholars at the University of Oxford, from which she received a master's degree in economics and he received a master's degree in English.
Her father is the executive director of the Cleveland Foundation.


Itinerant Musicians Find Home at a Street Fair


Garbo, by Any Other Name
FIRST NIGHTS By Susan Fromberg Schaeffer. 636 pp. New York: Alfred A. Knopf. $25.


How Big Is Epson? It's Time to Find Out
THE biggest sport and leisure event in the world is listed by the Guinness Book of World Records as the Epson Worldwide Bridge Contest.
A year ago there were about 102,000 contestants playing simultaneously out of about 700,000 individual members of the World Bridge Federation.
There is some ambiguity about the 102,000 number.
There are two games, played on Friday evening and Saturday afternoon in North America.
But it is unclear how many players have played twice.


E. A. Gibbens, Mark J. Epley
Elizabeth Ann Gibbens, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Wayne Gibbens of Arlington, Va. was married yesterday to Mark Jeffrey Epley, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Marion J. Epley 3d of Millbrook, L.I.
The Rev.
Anne G. Amy performed the ceremony at St.
John's Episcopal Church in Washington.
Mrs.
Epley, 26, is a curatorial assistant at the Whitney Museum of American Art in New York.
She graduated from Southern Methodist University.
Her father is the president of the Mid-Continent Oil and Gas Association, a trade association for oil and gas companies in Washington.
Her mother, Beth Gibbens, was a founder and a former owner of Treetop Toys, Inc., a toy store in Washington.


From Muffin Shop to Salon
Hard-core Philadelphia foodies might disagree, but some of the best fare served up at the White Dog Cafe is talk.
Last Monday evening, for instance, Dr.
Thomas Naff, a professor of modern Middle Eastern studies at the University of Pennsylvania, strolled the few blocks from his campus office to the restaurant and ate a dinner of grilled tuna with tomato and black-olive vinaigrette, accompanied by crisp anise-flavored polenta fries.
He then rose to offer his theories about the Middle East peace talks, particularly the role that hydropolitics play in the complicated process.


American Art Through European Eyes
Over the last year there was talk of a monumental survey of 20th-century American painting and sculpture that was to start in Berlin and address an ever-open question: "What is American about American art?" As to what would be in the show, and what answers would be forthcoming, all bets were open.
When the show in question arrived in Berlin earlier this month, the auguries were good.
The once-and-future great city was showing its carefree face.
The sun shone, the chestnut trees were in full bloom, the pleasure boats were out in force, and the shaded acres of the Tiergarten were turned at weekends into a vast and hospitable picnic area.


Teen-Ager Has Time to Win and Wink
Ever since he decided to fall in love with this event and the Parisians who people it, it's become almost impossible to resist Andrei Medvedev, the towering teen-ager who today reached the French Open's round of 16 by pummeling Gabriel Markus, 7-6 (7-4), 3-6, 7-5, 6-4.
Certainly his opponents have been unable to handle him as he grunts, groans and guns his way through match after match, one eye on the ball, the other on whichever pretty face in the crowd happens to have captured his fancy that day.


Taking Care Of Your Hair With Herbs
Most people believe you have to make mountains of suds to get your hair really clean.
Not so, says Lorraine Massey Wong, a co-owner of Nymph.
She has invented a soothingly scented herbal cleansing tonic that doesn't lather and is good for the scalp, too.


Dear Mr. Lipsyte: A High School Class Responds on Glen Ridge
As an exercise for her sophomore English class at Arcata High School in Arcata, Calif., Pamela Ford Cavanaugh asked students for their impressions of Robert Lipsyte's column about the Glen Ridge sexual-abuse case ("Will the Moral Court Please Come to Order," The Times, May 19), in which Lipsyte noted that "all the boys, the innocent and the guilty, come through the same SportsWorld culture of violence." What follows are some of the students' responses.
Dear Mr.
Lipsyte:
I agree that there seems to be a lot more slack given to boys, athletes especially, in what they can get away with.
Although I am not a feminist, I believe that females deserve a little more freedom, and people need to take a little more pride in the actions of males.
But how can pride be taken in males if they don't realize what they're doing is wrong?


Sun Ra, 79, Versatile Jazz Artist; A Pioneer With a Surrealist Bent
Sun Ra, one of the great big-band leaders, pianists and surrealists of jazz, died yesterday at Baptist Medical Center-Princeton in Birmingham, Ala.
He was 79 and lived in Philadelphia.
A hospital spokesman said he had been suffering from chronic circulatory problems and a series of strokes.


Bonilla's Hot Hand Loses to a Full Glove
Bobby Bonilla blasted a home run into the visitors' bullpen on his second at-bat yesterday.
He did it again in the sixth inning, this time with a runner on base.
And so when Bonilla came to the plate with two outs, the bases loaded and the Mets down three runs in the bottom of the seventh inning, the Shea Stadium masses rose to their feet.
They expected nothing less than another homer from their prodigal son.


Julie Kim, S. P. DesJardins
Julie Yungjoo Kim, until recently an assistant buyer at Lord &amp; Taylor in New York, was married yesterday to Stephen Paul DesJardins, an investment banker.
The Rev.
Dr.
Young Han Kim performed the ceremony at the Buffalo Korean Presbyterian Church.
Mrs.
Kim DesJardins, 24, graduated from the University of Pennsylvania, where her husband graduated magna cum laude.
She is a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Kang Soo Kim of Fredonia, N.Y.
His father is the chairman of the department of anesthesia at Brooks Memorial Hospital in Dunkirk, N.Y.
Her mother, Jung Hye Kim, is the office manager of Dunkirk-Fredonia Anesthesia, an anesthesia practice.


A Few Less Words Of Thanks for the Tonys
And now, live from Broadway, it's the 30-second acceptance speech.
That's the planned marching order, at least, for this year's Tony Awards show, which will be broadcast Sunday at 9 P.M. on CBS.
Gary Smith, the show's new executive producer, has announced that for the first time the winners' thank-yous will be cut to half a minute.


Patricia Dowell, Michael Scimeca
Patricia Dowell, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Hughlon E. Dowell of Farmersville, Tex., was married yesterday to Dr.
Michael Mariano Scimeca, the son of the late Dr. and Mrs.
Michael Scimeca.
The Rev.
Vic Casad, a United Methodist minister, performed the ceremony at the First Christian Church in McKinney, Tex.
Mrs.
Dowell Scimeca is an executive assistant at the Hearst Corporation in New York.
She is also an operatic sporano.
She graduated from the University of North Texas.


New Proxy Rules Embolden Shareholders
Just as big institutional shareholders were raising a ruckus at General Motors and Westinghouse last fall, the Securities and Exchange Commission enacted new proxy rules to make it even easier for shareholder advocates to challenge Corporate America.
Now, as proxy season has begun, a time when shareholders gather in annual meetings and vote on important corporate matters, the impact of the new rules is being felt.
For the first time, the S.E.C. has allowed these big shareholders to talk among themselves -- to conspire and plot, in the eyes of many corporate executives -- without having to make cumbersome and expensive proxy filings that made proxy battles difficult.


Michelle Brause, Steven E. Litt
Michelle Beth Brause, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Louis S. Brause of Larchmont, N.Y., was married yesterday to Steven Edward Litt, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Peter Litt of Highland Park, Ill.
Rabbi Irving Koslowe performed the ceremony at the Pierre in New York.
Mrs.
Litt, 28, is a director of development at Tishman Realty Corporation in New York.
She and her husband graduated from the University of Pennsylvania.
Her father is the president of Brause Realty Inc. in New York.
Her mother, Ruth A. Brause, is a real-estate broker at Burbank/Whittemore in Larchmont.


Patents
AN administrative law judge at the International Trade Commission has granted summary judgments in favor of half a dozen United States companies that a former Silicon Valley patent lawyer had accused of patent infringement.
In his complaint to the trade commission, the lawyer, Harry E. Aine, contended that 20 companies -- 10 domestic and 10 foreign -- were infringing a patent he received in 1987 for a process used to manufacture the metal disks found in hard disk drives.
Mr.
Aine left his law practice in 1988 to become a cattle rancher in Sumrall, Miss.


Roger W. Jones, 85, A Deputy Secretary Of State for Kennedy
Roger Warren Jones, a Deputy Secretary of State in the Kennedy Administration and a chairman of the Civil Service Commission in the Eisenhower Administration, died Friday at the Valerie Manor Nursing Center in Torrington, Conn.
He was 85 and had lived in New Hartford, Conn., since 1975.
He died of complications from Parkinson's disease, said his daughter, Cynthia Hodges, of Wilmington, Del.


Cameron Snell, Edward Boyle
Cameron Sue Snell, the daughter of Susan G. Harwood of Boulder, Colo., and Michael Snell of Truro, Mass., was married yesterday to Edward James Boyle, a son of John J. and Dolores S. Boyle of Wayland, Mass.
The Rev.
Ed Boyle, the bridegroom's uncle, performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at Our Lady of Pompei Church in New York.
Mrs.
Boyle, 28, is the owner of Worldwares, an arts and crafts trading company in New York.
She graduated from Stanford University.


Ukraine Asks Russia for Talks on Black Sea Fleet
President Leonid M. Kravchuk of Ukraine asked President Boris N. Yeltsin today for a meeting soon to resolve a growing and dangerous dispute over the former Soviet Black Sea Fleet.
Mr.
Kravchuk's appeal followed a formal Ukrainian protest on Saturday after some 80 percent of the ships -- though no warships -- raised the Russian naval flag in a rolling dispute over pay and allegiance.


Review/Dance; Ballet Theater Tries the Theatrical 'Manon'
Thanks to operas by Massenet and Puccini, films and even the original tale, the world is hardly unfamiliar with Manon, the virginal heroine turned courtesan of Abbe Prevost's 18th-century French novel.
In 1974, Sir Kenneth MacMillan took the same sordid story of love, lust and greed and choreographed an unexpectedly grand ballet: a spectacular three-act costume drama that roamed with panoramic scope over a decadent era in amazingly minute detail and also zoomed in on the amorality of its principal characters.


Richard Briffault And Sherry Glied
Dr.
Sherry Glied and Richard Briffault, professors at Columbia University in New York, were married yesterday.
Chezi Zionce performed the Jewish ceremony at the home of the bride's parents in Toronto.
Dr.
Glied, who is keeping her name, is an assistant professor of public health and economics and is a senior economist on the President's Council of Economic Advisers in Washington.
She is also a member of the President's Task Force on National Health Care Reform.
She graduated from Yale University and received a Ph.D. in economics from Harvard University.
She is a daughter of William and Marika Glied.
Her father, now retired, was a wholesaler of lumber and building materials in Toronto.


One Man's Endless Summer: Five Decades as a Lifeguard
At the beach, everything is in flux.
The tides rise and fall.
The currents turn.
The dunes shift.
The crowds come and go.
In big and small ways, the vistas change.
Nothing, it seems, is forever.
Except, maybe, for that silver-haired guy over there on the lifeguard stand.


Bronx Church Protests Ouster Of Its Leader, Canceling Mass
About 30 parishioners of St.
Ann's Church in the South Bronx rushed the altar yesterday, chanting loudly and forcing the cancellation of Mass, to protest the suspension of the church's leader by the Episcopal Diocese of New York.
The police were called to the Mott Haven church during the protest, but the parishioners locked the gates, temporarily preventing officers from entering the church's grounds.
A half-hour later, they opened the gates and the police left.
There were no arrests.


Vatican Under Attack Along With Nominee
To the Editor:
The "feminists and population control advocates" who oppose the appointment of Boston's anti-abortion mayor, Raymond L. Flynn, as ambassador to the Vatican give a lot more reasons than appear in your May 14 news article.


NEWS SUMMARY
International 2-7 RUSSIAN FORTRESS OPENS UP
Vladivostok, for decades a virtually sealed military fortress at the point where Russia runs up against China, North Korea and the sea, has opened up with a vengeance.  1


Low Rates: A Limited Blessing
With Government spending rejected as a stimulus, Americans have become dependent on low interest rates to revive the economy -- and this has helped.
But low rates alone cannot expand the economy any faster than the slow pace at which it is now growing.
Housing and car sales have risen as a result of low rates, which make financing more affordable, and retail sales have also benefited.
But a wide range of economists, executives and industry experts say that low rates cannot alone squeeze much more out of these key industries, unless obstacles like wage stagnation and the high prices of some homes are overcome. 'In the Very Long Run'
"It will be very hard to get the economy to grow more rapidly than it now is growing," said David Wyss, chief economist at Data Resources Inc., a consulting and data-gathering company.
"Can low interest rates generate enough jobs and income to offset the work lost in defense and other industries? Maybe they can in the very long run, but not now."


Dance in Review
Michael Mao Florence Gould Hall


Do Something About Superfund
To the Editor:
President Clinton has said of Superfund, our country's toxic waste cleanup program, "I'd like to use that Superfund to clean up pollution for a change and not just pay lawyers." The President's recognition of the program's problems is music to my ears as a business owner trapped in the bureaucracy of Superfund.


A Jump Ball on Starks's Next Move
Sometimes John Starks is good. Sometimes he is bad. But John Starks is never boring.
The day after Starks was ejected for drawing two technical fouls in a fourth-quarter altercation with Michael Jordan, the Knicks' shooting guard was something less than apologetic.


Abroad at Home; 'A Part Of the Main'
A year after Robert Kennedy was killed I tried for the first time to describe what we had lost in American politics.
It was hard to pin him down, because he had such contradictory qualities.
He was a realist and a dreamer, an activist who gave people hope by caring rather than by promising.
In the end I thought what mattered most was his effort to give a divided society a common vision.
Somehow he convinced those outside the system, the dispossessed and disaffected, that they could find a place inside.
He told those who were inside that they had a responsibility for the whole.


Dance in Review
"A Midsummer Night's Dream"  New York City Ballet  New York State Theater


Board of Education Must Now Move Ahead
To the Editor:
Because of the intemperate times we live in, I expected no more than a relatively brief honeymoon period upon being elected president of the New York City Board of Education on May 12.
"A School System -- For the Kids" (editorial, May 15), however, took me by surprise.


CHRONICLE
First she took Manhattan, and then the state.
Now she is setting her sights on the whole country.
MARCIA LAURA CILLAN, a Georgetown University graduate from Manhattan, won the Miss New York State beauty pageant on Saturday night in Watertown, N.Y, the Associated Press reported.
Miss Cillan, 23, who is also Miss Manhattan, will represent New York in the Miss America pageant in Atlantic City this fall.


Sheik Adi Journal; Satan's Alive and Well, but the Sect May Be Dying
At dusk, in the remote valley of Lalish, with its cascading springs and ancient mulberry trees, Baba Shaweesh, one of the last ceremonial eunuchs in the Middle East, hobbled up weathered stone steps clutching a string of cotton wicks soaked in olive oil.
Moving from one blackened niche to the next, some carved into rock fronts and others built into stone walls, the 73-year-old monk lit tiny flames before returning to his stone cell for evening prayers.


Caroline Griffin, Douglas H. Ellis
Caroline A. Griffin, an associate at the Baltimore law firm of Irwin, Kerr, Green, McDonald &amp; Dexter, was married yesterday to Douglas H. Ellis, the president and owner of Tip Top Financial Management Inc., in Hunt Valley, Md.
The Rev.
Frank Haig performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at the Loyola College Alumni Chapel in Baltimore.
Mrs.
Ellis, 30, graduated summa cum laude from Loyola and received her law degree from the University of Maryland.
She is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Joseph G. Griffin of Randallstown, Md.
Her father, now retired, was a proposal coordinator at the Bendix Corporation in Columbia, Md.


Telephone Race Is on In Europe
After years of fierce resistance, the European Community is slowly opening its telecommunications market to greater competition, setting off a race for survival among long-sheltered national phone companies and creating opportunities for rivals from the United States.
The changes would bring to Europe the same kind of upheaval in telecommunications already under way in the United States, with the aim of benefiting both consumers and businesses by bringing down strikingly high rates and improving less-than-stellar service.
Open Markets
State-controlled phone companies in Germany, France, Belgium and other countries would presumably be forced to go head to head for the first time on their home turf with the likes of British Telecom, the lone major European phone company to have completed the transformation to market competitor, and the American Telephone and Telegraph Company, which is investing heavily in the region, as are other American companies.


Robyn Levy, James Weisz
Robyn Madeleine Levy, a daughter of Dr.
Lester M. Levy of Syosset, L.I., and the late Renee M. Levy, was married in Syosset yesterday to Dr.
James Matthew Weisz, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
George Weisz of Lido Beach, L.I.
Rabbi Daniel Fogel performed the ceremony at the North Shore Synagogue.
Ms.
Levy Weisz, 30, is a freelance television production assistant in New York.
She graduated from Duke University.
Her father is a professor of nuclear medicine at Albert Einstein College of Medicine in the Bronx.


Rose Goes From Charlie Hustle to Charlie Horsepower
There is a new Pete Rose now -- still the same old Charlie Hustle from his 24 years of remarkable play for three major league teams, but different.
The 52-year-old Rose has exchanged the baseball cap and jersey for a white fireproof jumpsuit, an orange helmet and a bulging life vest.
And instead of running the bases, he is driving a monster of an offshore powerboat, a red 40-footer that will take him to speeds approaching 120 miles an hour.
The 2,200-horsepower boat, Hit King, is one of many new diversions in the life of a man who rewrote the record books with 4,256 career hits.
Rose's gambling led to his banishment from baseball in 1989.
And in 1990, his failure to file proper income tax returns sent him to prison for five months.
The abrupt and brutal end of an extraordinary career sent him searching for other competitive outlets.


Robyn Kundin, Hillel Kuttler
Robyn Anne Kundin, a daughter of Sharon Kundin and Leonard Kundin, both of Schenectady, N.Y., was married there yesterday to Hillel Kuttler, a son of Judith Kuttler of Kew Gardens, Queens, and the late Norman Kuttler.
Rabbi Leonid Feldman officiated at Agudat Achim Synagogue.


Nancy Kolodny, Ralph Lieberman
Nancy Kolodny, an environmental consultant, was married yesterday to Ralph M. Lieberman, a management consultant.
Rabbi Samuel Chiel and Rabbi Harry Sinoff jointly officiated at Temple Emanuel in Newton, Mass.
Mrs.
Lieberman is employed by Arthur D. Little Inc., a management and technology consulting company, in Cambridge, Mass.
She graduated magna cum laude from Harvard University, as did her husband, and received a master's degree in environmental engineering from Johns Hopkins University.


CHRONICLE
The estranged PRINCE and PRINCESS OF WALES made a rare appearance together yesterday at a service in Liverpool, England, marking the 50th anniversary of the Battle of the Atlantic.
Charles and Diana chatted and joked for a few minutes, in sharp contrast to their glum public dealings before their formal separation last year.
They traveled from the royal yacht Britannia, moored at Liverpool's Pier Head, to an Anglican cathedral for the ceremony, which honored those who fought in the maritime battle from 1939 to 1945.


In Bonn, Less Room at the Inn
One can understand the pressures that last week caused the German Parliament to revoke its constitutional guarantee of asylum.
But to understand is not to condone.
A proud emblem of Germany's moral rebirth is being sacrificed because a rich and powerful country seems helpless to deter hooligan attacks on foreigners.
Article 16 offered the right to asylum to the world's politically oppressed.
As of July 1, an amendment will permit Germany to close its borders to refugees from countries deemed by Germany to be safe.
Thus asylum seekers can be judged by their place of origin, rather than their specific circumstances.
That will surely reduce a massive influx.
In the first four months of 1993, 161,000 asylum seekers arrived, the largest number from Romania, compared with 124,000 during the same period a year ago.


Lauren Abelson, Brian Goldenberg
Lauren Meredith Abelson, a daughter of Dr.
Charles B. and Joan S. Abelson of Lutherville, Md., was married yesterday to Brian Martin Goldenberg, a son of Joe and Roberta Goldenberg of Merrick, L.I.
Rabbi Mark Loeb officiated at the Harbor Court Hotel in Baltimore.
Mrs.
Goldenberg, 25, is an account executive at the Jonathan Martin Fashion Group, a women's clothing manufacturer in New York.
She graduated from Tulane University, as did her husband.
Her father is an oral and maxillofacial surgeon in Lutherville and the chief of oral and maxillofacial surgery at Greater Baltimore Medical Center in Towson, Md.
Her mother is a communications consultant in Lutherville.


Review/Television; Praises for Bluegrass's Grand Ole Operator
TNN, the Nashville Network, calls itself "The Heart of Country." That heart expresses itself best in periodic specials celebrating veteran superstars of the country-and-western scene.
Several months ago, Minnie Pearl was the center of deserved attention.
Tonight at 9, with a repeat at 1 A.M., it's "Bill Monroe: The Father of Bluegrass Music."
Born in Kentucky in 1911, Mr.
Monroe got started in radio in 1930.
He and his brother Charlie billed themselves as "The Monroe Brothers." Bill later formed his own group, the Bluegrass Boys, and in 1939 took up a decades-long residency at the Grand Ole Opry.
This television tribute, produced by Steve Gebhardt Film and Video, traces the extraordinary influence Mr.
Monroe has had not just on country music but also on rock and other popular music.


Memories in the Making


Judith Brous, Joffrey Poss
Judith Brous, a founding partner of Judaic Creations, a New York gallery of contemporary art, was married yesterday to Jeffrey R. Poss, a lawyer.
Rabbi Barry Friedman officiated at the home of the bride's parents in South Orange, N.J.


Alydeed at Stage Center in Metropolitan
New York's grandest week of racing this year will reach an early peak today with the 101st running of the Metropolitan Handicap, and the star of the cast stands ready to take the stage.
He is Alydeed, the dark-brown monster from Canada known around the barns as "Alydude," the grandson of the renowned Alydar, and the horse his jockey, Craig Perret, calls "a stick of dynamite."
He will carry more weight and pay less money than his 10 rivals in the race, and he will be shooting far beyond the fame and the $500,000 purse.
He will be aiming to stake out his claim to the prize of the year, the title Horse of the Year.


Lori Roth, Kenneth Egol
Lori Jill Roth, a daughter of Anita and Robert Roth of Bardonia, N.Y., was married yesterday to Dr.
Kenneth Andrew Egol, a son of Edward and Tema Egol of Plainview, L.I.
Rabbi David Berkman performed the ceremony at the New City (N.Y.) Jewish Center.
Mrs.
Egol, 24, is an account executive for Curbell Inc., a plastics distributor, in New York.
She and her husband graduated from the State University at Binghamton, N.Y.
Her father is sales staff development director at The New York Times.
Her mother teaches kindergarten at Public School 78 in the Bronx.


2 Questioned in German Arson Deaths
As Turkish residents of Germany demonstrated angrily today in Solingen against an arson attack there early Saturday that killed five Turks, the police questioned two young German men but said they had no firm suspects.
The Bonn Government, its relations with Turkey under severe strain, offered a 100,000 mark ($62,500) reward for information leading to the arrest of those responsible for the deaths.
The Turkish Embassy asked the 1.7-million-strong Turkish community in Germany to remain calm, but officials in Istanbul and Ankara charged that Bonn had not done enough to protect the Turks.


S. R. Bernstein, 86, Former Editor And Publisher of Advertising Age
Sidney Ralph Bernstein, chairman of the executive committee of Crain Communications Inc. and the former editor and publisher of Advertising Age magazine, died on Saturday at Weiss Memorial Hospital in Chicago.
He was 86.
He had suffered a heart attack at his Chicago home a week ago, the magazine, a Crain publication, reported.


Jennifer Wolsk, James A. Bain
Jennifer Melinda Wolsk, the daughter of Paul M. and Dr.
Vivien D. Wolsk of New York, was married yesterday to James Alexander Bain, the son of Yvonne Bain and James A. Bain, both of Erie, Pa.
Rabbi A. Bruce Goldman and the Rev.
H.
Scott Matheney, a Presbyterian minister, officiated at the Gipsy Trail Club in Carmel, N.Y.
Mrs.
Wolsk Bain, 25, graduated from Stanford University.
She will begin graduate studies in social work at the University of Pittsburgh in September.
Her father is a lawyer in New York.
Her mother is a clinical psychologist and the executive director of the Gestalt Center for Psychotherapy and Training, a post-graduate psychotherapy institute in New York.


Mansell Takes On the Indy Wall and Wins
What the two right-side tires on Nigel Mansell's Lola-Ford didn't say after the Indianapolis 500 today said a lot about his fortitude.
Each tire was supposed to have the words "Goodyear Eagle" on it, but the tires did not.
Mansell had erased the words against the concrete wall outside Turn 2 at over 200 miles per hour.


Mr. Marino Trips
Let's be candid: For most travelers, Albany may not have quite the same allure as, say, Rome or Venice in the spring.
So one can understand why Ralph Marino took off for parts European.
But Mr.
Marino isn't an ordinary traveler.
He's the majority leader of the New York State Senate.
With the legislative session entering its final stage, and lots of pressing public business to conduct, he belonged on the job in the state capital last week, not in Italy with his wife and friends on a 10-day pleasure trip.


Dance in Review
Jazz Tap Ensemble Joyce Theater


Forbidden City No Longer, Vladivostok Is Wide Open
After decades as a virtually sealed military fortress at the point where Russia's endless expanse finally runs up against China, North Korea and the sea, Vladivostok has opened up with a vengeance.
Merchant sailors come off the sea loaded down with loot and cars.
Already four of every five cars is a used Japanese sedan, and another 260 arrive daily, all with the standard Japanese right-hand drive, creating a traffic hazard of murderous proportions on the hilly, potholed streets.


Lord Gormley; British Miners' Leader, 75
Lord Gormley, who as Joe Gormley led the 240,000 members of Britain's National Union of Mineworkers in strikes that jolted the country in 1972 and 1974, died Thursday at his home in Wigan, 17 miles north of Liverpool.
He was 75.
He had been suffering from cancer, the British newspaper The Independent reported.


Offspring of Indians and Settlers Edit Histories of the Oregon Trail
Up to 10 million Americans will visit the old Oregon Trail this summer, walking a few steps in the West's best-known path, touching the hardened dirt of the deep wagon ruts like Braille readers of history.
As people look for clues to their common past, many will arrive at this quiet place on a rye-grass plain just west of town.
It was here that for nearly 12 years two Presbyterian missionaries, Dr.
Marcus Whitman and his wife, Narcissa, tried to bring Christianity and New England-style agriculture to a once-prosperous band of Cayuse Indians.


Albania Chief Urges West to Send Troops to Kosovo to Prevent War
President Sali Berisha has urged the United States and NATO to send troops to Kosovo Province in Serbia to prevent a spread of "ethnic cleansing" to the Albanian population of the region.
More than 85 percent of Kosovo's population of 2.1 million are ethnic Albanians.
Under President Slobodan Milosevic of Serbia, the ethnic Albanians have been deprived of most of the autonomous status that they had achieved under Tito after World War II.


Why Can't English Straighten Up?
To the Editor:
"Turning Loopy Over Language" (editorial, May 18) suggests that "monolingual America," most of whose inhabitants resist the divisiveness of a multilingual nation, "trails virtually all industrial countries in language skills."


Rivera and Cilento Win Astaire Dance Awards
The 1993 Astaire Awards, presented for achievement in dance in the Broadway theater, are to be presented on June 14 to Chita Rivera, for her performance in "Kiss of the Spider Woman," and Wayne Cilento, the choreographer for "Tommy." The Theater Development Fund, which administers the awards, announced the winners last week.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
Senator Boren said the odds had improved that a compromise could be worked out so that he could support the President's economic plan.
The Oklahoma Democrat holds a crucial swing vote, and his new stance almost guarantees enactment of legislation to lower the budget deficit, according to Senator Moynihan, the Finance Committee's chairman.  [ Page 1. ]
David Gergen will handle a lot more than communications at the Clinton White House.
As counselor to the President, he seems destined for a role similar to that of Theodore C. Sorenson in the Kennedy Administration -- as principal all-purpose adviser.
News Analysis.  [ 1. ]


Liran Gordon and Karen Appelbaum
Karen A. Appelbaum and Liran A. Gordon, both lawyers in Washington, were married yesterday in Roslyn, L.I.
Rabbi Aaron Petuchowski performed the ceremony at Temple Sinai.
The bride, who works in the office of the general counsel at the Federal Reserve Board, graduated from the University of Pennsylvania and received her law degree from American University.
She is the daughter of Barbara and Robert Appelbaum of Roslyn.
Her father is a director of apparel and mill marketing at Cotton Inc., a marketing and research organization in New York.
Her mother is the program coordinator at North Shore Child and Family Guidance, an outpatient mental-health clinic in Manhasset, L.I.


Surge in Sarajevo Combat Kills 20 and Wounds 150
In the deadliest round of fighting here in months, with daylong artillery fusillades and gun battles between Muslim and Bosnian Serb forces, 20 people were reported killed today and more than 150 wounded.
At the same time, Bosnian Serbs pressed their fiercest assault so far on the eastern enclave of Gorazde despite its designation as a United Nations "safe area," the Sarajevo radio said.


Markets Closed
All financial and commodity markets in the United States will be closed today for the Memorial Day holiday.
Government offices, banks and many businesses will also be closed.
There will be trading in many overseas markets.


Katherine Barker, C. A. Swindell
Katherine Dushane Barker, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
George Penniman Barker of Columbia, Md., was married yesterday to Christopher Andrew Swindell, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Murray J. Swindell of Concord, Mass.
The Rev.
Harry E. Brunett performed the Episcopal ceremony at the Waverly Mansion in Marriotsville, Md.
Mrs.
Swindell, 25, graduated from the University of Vermont and received a master's degree in social work this month from Boston College.
Her father is a senior vice president and general counsel at the Howard County General Hospital in Columbia.
Her mother, Anne VandeGrift Barker, is a surgical nurse at Johns Hopkins Hospital in Baltimore.


Books of The Times; Comic Novellas on Metamorphoses
Cock &amp; Bull By Will Self  310 pages. Atlantic Monthly Press. $20.


Martha Winnick, Jeffrey Blue
Martha Ann Winnick, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Edward B. Winnick of Woodbridge, Conn., was married yesterday to Jeffrey Todd Blue, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Hugh Blue of Laguna Beach, Calif.
Rabbi Charles Davidson and the Rev.
Michael Pecharich officiated at the chapel of the Choate Rosemary Hall school in Wallingford, Conn.
Mrs.
Blue, 30, is the licensing manager at Reebok International Ltd. in Stoughton, Mass.
She graduated from Harvard University.
She and her husband received M.B.A. degrees from Dartmouth College.


Police Arrest Man Accused Of Killing Boy
After eluding New York City detectives in a five-state manhunt, a sanitation enforcement agent was arrested on a Texas highway on Saturday in the death of a 4-year-old boy whose body was found -- strangled and beaten -- in a Brooklyn trash compactor more than a week ago.a
The man, Stephan David Poole, 31, was driving alone on Interstate 45 in Huntsville, Tex., about noon on Saturday when his 1988 Subaru, with New York license plates, was stopped by a Texas state trooper, the police said yesterday.
The trooper had pulled over Mr.
Poole's car in response to a felony alarm broadcast by New York authorities to police agencies throughout Texas.


D. L. Freedman, Steven Shapiro
Deborah Lynn Freedman, an associate at the New York law firm of Schulte Roth &amp; Zabel, was married yesterday to Steven Todd Shapiro, an associate at the New York law firm of Stroock &amp; Stroock &amp; Lavan.
Rabbi Melvin Sirner performed the ceremony at the Mamaroneck (N.Y.) Beach and Yacht Club.
Mrs.
Shapiro, 26, graduated magna cum laude from Tufts University.
She and her husband received their law degrees from the University of Pennsylvania, from which Mr.
Shapiro graduated cum laude.


Benefit for Joyce Theater
Ten dance groups and performers are to participate in a benefit tomorrow at 7 P.M. for the Joyce Theater, 175 Eighth Avenue, at 19th Street, Chelsea, to celebrate the theater's 10th anniversary.
The performers include the Erick Hawkins Dance Company, Garth Fagan Dance, the Ralph Lemon Company and Pilobolus.
The program will also feature a piece choreographed for the event by Molissa Fenley, and a performance by children from the New Ballet School of the finale from Eliot Feld's "Half Time." Tickets are $75 for the performance alone; $300 includes a post-performance dinner at the Rainbow Room.
Information: (212) 691-9740.


Corrections
The "At the Bar" column on Friday, about former Senator Abraham Ribicoff and the judges he recommended for the Federal bench, referred incorrectly to Judge Jose A. Cabranes of the Federal District Court in Connecticut.
Judge Cabranes is the first Puerto Rican Federal judge in the continental United States; he is not the first Hispanic Federal judge.


Rosalin Hermes, Marc A. Landis
Rosalin Hermes, a daughter of Dalia Hermes of Los Angeles, was married yesterday to Marc Andrew Landis, the son of Sigmund E. and May Landis of Huntingdon Valley, Pa.
Rabbi Simeon J. Maslin officiated at Reform Congregation Keneseth Israel in Elkins Park, Pa.


Bridge
A year ago the Greater New York Bridge Association set a precedent for North America by organizing a Green Point game, with bidding boxes, table screens, large entry fees, master points and substantial cash prizes.
The second event, again popular with the experts, was played Friday at the Sheraton New York Hotel, Seventh Avenue and 53d Street, and the winners, collecting $2,135, were Michael Becker of Tenafly, N.J., and Michael Kamil of Teaneck, N.J.
Second were Debbie Zuckerberg of Manhattan and Richard Pavlicek Jr. of Fort Lauderdale, Fla., who will be members of a favored United States squad in the World Junior Team Championships in Denmark in August.


Mr. Buchanan And Ms. Kid
Debra Ann Kid, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John R. Kid of Peekskill, N.Y., was married yesterday to Van Dyk Buchanan, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Russell C. Buchanan of Mendham, N.J.
The Rev.
David Farley, a Lutheran minister, performed the ceremony at the American Boy Choir School in Princeton, N.J.
Mrs.
Buchanan is a senior systems analyst with Consolidated Edison in New York.
She graduated magna cum laude from the State University at Albany.
Her father is a lieutenant in the New York City Police Department.


Heady Fittipaldi Picks Right Time to Step on It
On a day that required smart driving as well as aggressive driving, Emerson Fittipaldi blended both with such skill this afternoon that he was able to win his second Indianapolis 500 in a race that may have been the most competitive in the event's 77 runnings.
Fittipaldi, a 46-year-old Brazilian who lives much of the time in Miami, took the lead in his Penske-Chevy on a restart on the 185th lap, out-accelerating Nigel Mansell of England and Arie Luyendyk of the Netherlands, both in Lola-Fords, into Turn 1.
Fittipaldi held it from there, even on another restart with five laps to go.


Karyn Wienski, L. V. Calcano
Karyn Elizabeth Wienski, an assistant vice president in private banking at the Bankers Trust Company, was married yesterday to Lawrence V. Calcano, an associate in the investment banking division of Goldman, Sachs &amp; Company.
Both work in New York.
Msgr.
Edward Surwilo performed the ceremony at Our Lady Star of the Sea Church in Stamford, Conn.
Mrs.
Calcano, 28, graduated from Dartmouth College, from which she also received an M.B.A.
She is the daughter of Mrs.
John C. Wienski of Stamford and the late Dr.
Wienski.


Corrections
Because of a processing error, a picture with the Art Market column in Weekend on Friday, showing the Caspar David Friedrich painting "Walk at Dusk," was reproduced in mirror image.
The man's figure actually appears at the left.


Stephanie Singer, Stephen Fischer
Stephanie Frank Singer, a daughter of Maxine and Daniel Singer of Washington, was married yesterday to Stephen Douglas Fischer, the son of Robert and Arlene Fischer of New York and Bedford, N.Y.
Judge Ruth Bader Ginsburg of the United States Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit performed the ceremony at the home of the bride's parents.
The bride graduated from Yale University and received a Ph.D. in mathematics from New York University.
She teaches mathematics at Haverford (Pa.) College.
Her father is of counsel to the law firm of Fried, Frank, Harris, Shriver &amp; Jacobson in Washington.
Her mother, a molecular biologist, is the president of the Carnegie Institution of Washington, a research organization.


Taking the Challenge As City College Chief
In nearly two decades as a university administrator, Yolanda T. Moses, the next president of City College in New York, has succeeded remarkably in keeping people from being angry with her.
Colleagues say she has reorganized departments, promoted women and members of minorities, and made a series of painful cutbacks with a minimum of recriminations.
"She has a very good style in dealing with conflicts," said Dr.
Sheila McCoy, a colleague from California Polytechnic University in Pomona, where Dr.
Moses worked before taking her current post as a vice president at California State University, Dominguez Hills, in this suburb of Los Angeles.
"She was always a very patient listener and would really pay close attention to people's concerns, even their angry concerns." Facing a Stern Test
Such qualities are likely to get a stern test at City College, which has been without a president since September.
Her predecessor, Dr.
Bernard W. Harleston, resigned after years of turmoil over finances, tuition increases, and the security problems that led to the deaths of nine young people at a celebrity basketball game in December 1991.


Miriam Gross, Ronald Schulman
Miriam Eva Gross, a daughter of Sara G. Pfeiffer of Teaneck, N.J., and the late Dr.
Barry C. Gross, was married yesterday to Ronald Warren Schulman, a son of Beverly Schulman of Jeffersonville, N.Y., and Richard Schulman of Cochecton, N.Y.
Rabbi Lester Polansky performed the ceremony at Congregation Ahavath Sholom in Jeffersonville.
Mrs.
Schulman, 24, is a financial analyst and programmer at Salomon Brothers in New York.
She graduated from Dartmouth College and received a master's degree in civil engineering from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology.


Graduates at Cornell University Are Encouraged to Live Life to the Fullest
Frank H. T. Rhodes, president of Cornell University, delivered the 125th commencement address to 30,000 people, including graduates, family members, faculty and other guests at the university yesterday .
The ceremonies were held outdoors at Schoellkopf Field.
In his speech to the graduates of Cornell's 11 schools and colleges, Mr.
Rhodes spoke of the importance of living life to the fullest and urged the graduates to "drink in the grandeur of existence."


Review/Cabaret; Vincent Minnelli's Work, Through Story and Song
Midway through Jeff Harnar's delightful new cabaret act, "Dancing in the Dark -- Vincente Minnelli's Hollywood," a show that has been pleasantly ebullient suddenly takes wing.
Singing a medley of "Cabin in the Sky," "Stranger in Paradise," "Angel" and "I'll Build a Stairway to Paradise" -- four songs from Minnelli-directed films -- Mr.
Harnar and Alex Rybeck, his pianist and musical partner, introduce a rock-and-roll flavor.
Expertly supported by Mark Minkler on stand-up bass, the pair weave traditional pop singing and 1950's-style rock-ballad falsetto into an irresistibly playful celebration of things celestial.


S. C. Dangelmajer, S. C. Rubenstein
Susan Chai Dangelmajer, a daughter of Dr.
Rudolph C. Dangelmajer of Berkeley Heights, N.J., and the late Kathleen G. Dangelmajer, was married yesterday to Dr.
Sidney Charles Rubenstein, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Joseph L. Rubenstein of Fair Lawn, N.J.
Rabbi Henry Glazer officiated at the Bretton Woods Inn in Morris Plains, N.J.
Mrs.
Rubenstein, 34, is a nurse in the intensive care unit at Beth Israel Hospital in Boston.
She graduated from Boston University.
Her father is an orthopedic surgeon at Overlook Hospital in Summit, N.J.
Her mother was a nurse at Lenox Hill Hospital in New York.


In Bonn, Less Room at the Inn
One can understand the pressures that last week caused the German Parliament to revoke its constitutional guarantee of asylum.
But to understand is not to condone.
A proud emblem of Germany's moral rebirth is being sacrificed because a rich and powerful country seems helpless to deter hooligan attacks on foreigners.
Article 16 offered the right to asylum to the world's politically oppressed.
As of July 1, an amendment will permit Germany to close its borders to refugees from countries deemed by Germany to be safe.
Thus asylum seekers can be judged by their place of origin, rather than their specific circumstances.
That will surely reduce a massive influx.
In the first four months of 1993, 161,000 asylum seekers arrived, the largest number from Romania, compared with 124,000 during the same period a year ago.


Memorial Day
Memorial Day is today.
Here are holiday schedules.
NEW YORK  GOVERNMENT OFFICES: Closed.
POST OFFICE: Express Mail and special delivery only; main post office open at 33d Street and Eighth Avenue.
BANKS: Closed.
PARKING: Sunday rules in effect.
SANITATION: No pickups, recycling or street cleanings.
SCHOOLS: Closed.
FINANCIAL MARKETS: Closed.
TRANSPORTATION: Buses and subways on Sunday schedule.
Long Island Rail Road on weekend schedule, with extra trains this afternoon.
Metro-North on weekend schedule.
NEW JERSEY  GOVERNMENT OFFICES: Closed.
POST OFFICES: Express Mail and special delivery only.
BANKS: Closed.
SCHOOLS: Local option.
TRANSPORTATION: N.J.
Transit on Sunday schedule.
CONNECTICUT  GOVERNMENT OFFICES: Closed.
POST OFFICES: Express Mail and special delivery only.
BANKS: Closed.
SCHOOLS: Closed.
TRANSPORTATION: Metro-North on weekend schedule.
Traffic Alert MONDAY  MEMORIAL DAY PARADE, Manhattan.
Broadway between 72d and 86th Streets; 86th Street between Broadway and Riverside Drive; and Riverside Drive between 86th and 90th Streets will be closed from 8 A.M. to early afternoon  MEMORIAL DAY PARADE, Staten Island.
Forest Avenue from Victory Boulevard to Decker Avenue from 11 A.M. to 4 P.M.
ASTORIA-BROADWAY FESTIVAL, Queens.
Broadway between Steinway and Crescent Streets from 10 A.M. to 7 P.M.


Sihanouk Role Seems Crucial to Cambodia's Fate
When Cambodians voted last week in what is likely to be remembered as the first free election in the history of this tormented nation, many admitted that they did not really understand the concept of a secret ballot or political parties or democracy.
They said they wanted to vote simply because they knew that this was their chance to demonstrate loyalty to Samdech -- the King.
They were referring to Prince Norodom Sihanouk, who is still called the King by millions of his former subjects, and who may be on the verge of reclaiming at least some of the power that was stripped from him in a coup 23 years ago.


Diane Rosenthal, Mark Wood
Diane B. Rosenthal, the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Stephen A. Rosenthal of Woodbury, L.I., was married yesterday to Mark E. Wood, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
I.
Robert Wood of Geneva, N.Y.
Rabbi Irwin Lowenheim officiated at the Harbor Club in Huntington, L.I.
Mrs.
Wood, 25, is the human resources manager for Advent Software in San Francisco.
She graduated from the University of Pennsylvania, and she and her husband received master's degrees in industrial and labor relations from Cornell University.


Graf Sees the Future And She's 15 Years Old
Steffi Graf looked across the net at the French Open this afternoon and got a glimpse of a tennis nightmare of the present and the future: 15-year-old Iva Majoli of Croatia may still wear braces on her teeth, but her tennis game is no longer under wraps, and she's already exhibiting all the ruthless aggression of the player she mirrors most, the perhaps not-so-inimitable Monica Seles.
Today, Graf sent her opponent off to vacation in Zagreb, the hometown Majoli left three years ago to replace Seles as the Yugoslav prodigy-in-training at Nick Bollettieri's Florida tennis tank.
But the top-seeded German, now only two matches away from seizing the No. 1 ranking from the injured Seles, was not cavalier about her 6-4, 7-6 (7-3) dismissal of this ambitious teen-ager.


Kristin Marting, Gerhard Skutsch
Kristin Roselle Marting, the daughter of Leeda Marting of New York, was married yesterday to Carl Walter Skutsch, the son of Gerhard Skutsch of San Francisco and Barbara Skutsch of Tucson, Ariz.
The Rev.
Dan Shenk, an American Baptist minister, officiated at the Rushmore Estate in Woodbury, N.Y.


CHRONICLE
ANDREW TOBIAS, the financial writer who gave the world best-selling books like "The Only Investment Guide You'll Ever Need" and "Auto Insurance Alert!," has begun a new crusade.
He showed up in Moscow yesterday to promote one of the first anti-smoking advertising campaign in Russia.
He has his work cut out for him.
More than a third of Russia's 150 million people smoke.
Cigarette shortages touched off some of the worst civil unrest in the last days of Communism.


Driver's License Gives Veterans Lease on Life
Ernest Parrish survived two years as an Army medical corpsman during some of the worst fighting of the Vietnam War.
But contend with the state Department of Motor Vehicles?
Uh-uh.
Years of alcoholism and homelessness, Mr.
Parrish said, had left him unable to face this.
The stress, the bureaucracy, the long lines, not to mention the lack of a permanent address, all made the thought of regaining the driver's license he let expire upon entering the service seem unattainable.


Stacy Kramer, David M. Kramer
Ellen Stacy Kramer, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Arthur Kramer of Pittsburgh, was married there yesterday evening to David Michael Kramer, a son of Elaine Kramer of New York and the late M. Eli Kramer.
Rabbi Mark Mahler performed the ceremony at Temple Emanuel.
The families of the bride and bridegroom are not related.
Mrs.
Kramer, 28, is known as Stacy.
She is a producer with Stephen Chau Productions, independent feature film producers in Los Angeles.
She graduated from the University of Michigan.


Dance in Review
Dance Africa Brooklyn Academy of Music


Let Tobacco Companies Bear the Burden
To the Editor:
The decision by a Mississippi judge declaring cigarettes defective and unreasonably dangerous ("Judge Says Hazards Make Cigarettes Defective by Law," news article, May 13), might signal the loosening of the tobacco industry's half-century chokehold on the American judiciary.


Sports of The Times; The Squad That Wins Is Called Team Jordan
THE contention here is that Michael Jordan had been getting too much rest, and that he just finally woke up.
The controversy over whether Michael Jordan had been getting so bleary-eyed at the gaming tables that he couldn't see the basket right was overblown.


Essay; Return of The Old Clinton?
A couple of weeks ago, White House chief of staff "Mack the Nice" McLarty invited me over because he was concerned about a phrase in this space: the "lurch to the left" that dismayed Republicans and centrist Democrats who had voted for Clinton.
Apparently White House polls were registering an alarming discontent with a President who had promised tax cuts and then proposed tax increases; who had adopted the rhetoric of deficit reduction but put off spending cuts for years; who had come up with "stimulus" spending that was a porcine payoff to big-city mayors.


K. R. MacDonald, D. G. Wasserman
Katherine Richmond MacDonald, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Daniel W. MacDonald 3d of Sands Point, L.I., was married yesterday to Daniel Gary Wasserman, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Jack Wasserman of Old Bethpage, L.I.
The Rev.
Kurt von Raushlaub, an Episcopal priest, and Rabbi Bennett Hermann officiated at the gardens of the Nassau County Museum of Art in Roslyn, L.I.
Mrs.
MacDonald-Wasserman, 30, is to join Karco-Davis Inc., a New York architecture and construction firm, as an interior designer on June 21.
She graduated from Bates College and the Parsons School of Design.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  American League
BOSTON RED SOX -- Activated Jose Melendez, pitcher, from the 15-day disabled list.
Placed Jeff Richardson, infielder, on the 15-day disabled list.
MILWAUKEE BREWERS -- Activated Angel Miranda, pitcher, from the 15-day disabled list.
Sent Josias Manzanillo, pitcher, to New Orleans of the American Association.


Joshua Hornick and Lisa Abend
Lisa Noel Abend, a daughter of Jody U. Abend of Scarsdale, N.Y., and Dr.
Sander M. Abend of New York, was married yesterday to Joshua Hornick, a son of Joy G. Hornick of New York and the late Dr.
Edward J. Hornick.
Rabbi Joseph H. Gelberman officiated at the Belvedere Castle in Central Park.
Ms.
Abend, who is keeping her name, is an actress and a doll artist in New York.
She graduated from Sarah Lawrence College.
Her father is a psychoanalyst in New York.
Her mother is an indexer with Sydney Wolfe Cohen &amp; Associates, a book indexing company in New York.
The bride is also a stepdaughter of Dr.
Carol L. Abend of New York.
The bride's previous marriage ended in divorce.


Game 3-Peat? The Knicks Hope Not
Perhaps the Knicks simply had a bad day. Perhaps they are in trouble.
In either case, the Chicago Bulls' dominance of New York on Saturday afternoon set up a pivotal confrontation Monday afternoon, when the Knicks and the Bulls will play Game 4 of the Eastern Conference finals here at Chicago Stadium.


Sharon S. Witherell, Thomas Hager
Sharon Summers Witherell, the assistant director of development and public affairs at the Institute of International Education, a nonprofit organization in New York, was married yesterday to Thomas Hager, the president of Gateway Computer Solutions Inc., a software marketing concern in Greenwich, Conn.
The Rev.
Thomas Stiers performed the ceremony at the First Congregational Church of Greenwich.
Mrs.
Hager, 29, graduated from Amherst College.
She is the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
James Summers Witherell of Winnetka, Ill.
Her father is the president of JSW Holdings Ltd., an acquisition corporation in Chicago.
Her mother, Susan Witherell, is a consultant at the Travex Corporation, a travel agency in Winnetka.
Her paternal great-grandfather, the late Dr.
John W. Summers, was a Republican Congressman from Washington.


In Bonn, Less Room at the Inn
One can understand the pressures that last week caused the German Parliament to revoke its constitutional guarantee of asylum.
But to understand is not to condone.
A proud emblem of Germany's moral rebirth is being sacrificed because a rich and powerful country seems helpless to deter hooligan attacks on foreigners.
Article 16 offered the right to asylum to the world's politically oppressed.
As of July 1, an amendment will permit Germany to close its borders to refugees from countries deemed by Germany to be safe.
Thus asylum seekers can be judged by their place of origin, rather than their specific circumstances.
That will surely reduce a massive influx.
In the first four months of 1993, 161,000 asylum seekers arrived, the largest number from Romania, compared with 124,000 during the same period a year ago.


With Mayoral Election, More Meanings for Race
IN the new math of tribal politics in New York, the margin between ethnic or religious pride and unacceptable racial chauvinism has finally been quantified: it's 20 percent.
Four years ago, that was the differential between the 95 percent or so of blacks who voted for David N. Dinkins, who is black, and the roughly 75 percent of Jews who voted for Edward I. Koch, who is Jewish, in the Democratic primary (as well as the approximately 75 percent of Italian-Americans who voted for Rudolph W. Giuliani that November).
It is the difference, Mr.
Koch recently suggested, between blind loyalty based largely on race and a more discriminating affinity inspired by a record of accomplishment.


Trevino Has Stomach for Victory
Although he benefited from Raymond Floyd's sick stomach, Lee Trevino had to overcome the butterflies in his own stomach today to win the Cadillac N.F.L.
Golf Classic for his first victory in more than a year.
The 53-year-old Trevino did what he had to do to maintain his two-stroke advantage, taking command early in a solid, if unspectacular, round of par 72 that gave him a 54-hole total of seven-under 209 and a two-stroke victory over Floyd, whose challenge was blunted by food poisoning, and Bruce Crampton.


Susan Hunter, Gary Garyfallou
Susan Jennifer Hunter, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Morgan V. Hunter of Vero Beach, Fla., was married yesterday to Dr.
Garyfallos Thomas Garyfallou, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Thomas G. Garyfallou of Beaverton, Ore.
The Rev.
John Tavlarides performed the ceremony at the Greek Orthodox Cathedral of Saint Sophia in Washington.
Mrs.
Garyfallou, 25, graduated from Duke University.
She was until recently a manager at the Susquehanna Antique Company, a store in Washington.
Her father, who was a president of the Scott Paper and R. J. Reynolds Tobacco companies, , retired as a managing partner of Marketcorp Ventures, a Westport, Conn., venture capital concern.


Suzanne Rosencrans, Michael Novicoff
Suzanne Rosencrans, the daughter of Dr.
Martin and Sandra Rosencrans of Roslyn Heights, L.I., was married yesterday to Michael Louis Novicoff, the son of George and Betty B. Novicoff of Brea, Calif.
Rabbi Mark Winer performed the ceremony at Tappan Hill in Tarrytown, N.Y.
Ms.
Rosencrans, who is 30, is keeping her name.
She is an entertainment lawyer at Hansen, Jacobson, Teller &amp; Hoberman in Los Angeles.
She graduated magna cum laude from Brown University and received a law degree from Columbia University.


METRO DIGEST
OLD MAN AND (GUARD OF) THE SEA
His name is Reggie Jones, and his is truly a love story about an older man and the sea.
On Saturday morning, as he walked onto the damp sand at Robert Moses State Park at the western end of Fire Island, Mr.
Jones began his 50th summer supervising beachgoers -- the longest continually serving lifeguard in New York, officials say.
It is a full-time summer pursuit that began for Mr.
Jones on the beaches of Long Island the same summer that Allied forces hit the beaches of Normandy.
Page 1.
NEW YORK CITY  A TEAM ONLY AN OPPONENT CAN LOVE
It has been 31 years since Casey Stengel threw up his hands and complained, "Can't anybody here play this game?" But his lament is once again echoing across Queens as the Mets have sunk into last place in the National League East with a style as thrilling as a pitching change midway through a lopsided game between two losers on a lazy afternoon in late September.
Page 27.


Ukraine Acts on Naval Dispute
President Leonid M. Kravchuk of Ukraine asked Russia for a meeting about a growing dispute over the former Soviet Black Sea Fleet.
Page 4.


World Economies


Newspapers' Adoption of Color Nearly Complete
American newspapers, which once told the daily story of the world in black and white, now increasingly tell it in color.
On Sunday, a noticeably green serpent on the cover of The New York Times Book Review will play a bit part in that decades-long journalism shift.


Alison Winer, David Dinerstein
Alison Deborah Winer, a daughter of Margery S. Schab of New York and James P. B. Winer of Briarcliff Manor, N.Y., was married yesterday in New Marlboro, Mass., to David Ian Dinerstein, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Fred Dinerstein of East Hills, L.I.
Rabbi Deborah Zecher performed the ceremony at Gedney Farm.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Television; Timing can be everything for a show's success as networks tailor schedules to hold onto audiences.
AS with running a successful dating service, putting together a successful network schedule requires a keen instinct for the compatible.
Over the last two weeks, in glitzy presentations at Avery Fisher Hall, Carnegie Hall and the Waldorf-Astoria, the major networks have presented their new fall schedules to advertisers.
And now researchers for advertising agencies are preparing forecasts of how each show will do.
Despite the remote-control pad, which has made holding onto audiences from one show to the next much more difficult, these researchers say the best predictor of how well a show will do is still how well it fits in the overall schedule.


Alice Kriz, Mitchell Warren
Alice Kriz, the executive director of the French-American Chamber of Commerce in Washington, and Mitchell Joseph Warren, the program director of Medical Education for South African Blacks, also in Washington, were married yesterday.
Rabbi Ramie Arian officiated at the home of the bride's parents in Palisades, N.Y.
The Rev.
Laurie Ferguson, a Presbyterian minister, took part in the ceremony.
Ms.
Kriz, 29, is keeping her name.
She graduated from Georgetown University.
She is a daughter of John and Oriel Kriz.


Hobart's 9-Goal Run at End Wins Division III
Hobart sustained its dominance over Ohio Wesleyan today, winning the Division III championship game of the National Collegiate Athletic Association's lacrosse tournament here by 16-10.
The Statesmen from Geneva, N.Y., outscored the Battling Bishops from Delaware, Ohio, by 9-0 in the final 19 minutes 10 seconds of the contest.


Genevieve Spielberg, Armin Frey
Genevieve Spielberg, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Frank E. Spielberg of Summit, N.J., was married there yesterday to Armin Frey, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Rene Frey of Basel, Switzerland.
Rabbi William Kraus performed the ceremony at the Grand Summit Hotel.


Central Park Reservoir: Some Young Thoughts
[ The following letters, from Nancy L. Robbins's third-grade class at Public School 230, Brooklyn, respond to "What to Do With the Central Park Reservoir," a May 9 photo feature. ] To the Editor:
I would turn the Central Park Reservoir into a lake.
I would tear down the fence and gatehouse.
Boating and fishing would be allowed.
So would swimming.
I would leave the trees and other surrounding alone.
People would enjoy it for having parties and picnics there.
DANIEL CASNER Brooklyn, N.Y., May 21, 1993


Central Park Reservoir: Some Young Thoughts
[ The following letters, from Nancy L. Robbins's third-grade class at Public School 230, Brooklyn, respond to "What to Do With the Central Park Reservoir," a May 9 photo feature. ] To the Editor:
I think the Central Park Reservoir should be a testing lab for purifying water.
NATHAN HURWITZ Brooklyn, N.Y., May 21, 1993


Even Women at Top Still Have Floors to Do
Alice M. Rivlin, the deputy director of the Office of Management and Budget, shops at her local Safeway, where she often runs into people who seem surprised to see her there.
She's just as surprised at their reaction.
"How else do they think I'm going to get food?" she said as she sat in her office in the Old Executive Office Building.
"Do they think I have a staff? I don't know what they think. All of us run households."


Dance in Review
June Watanabe in Company Sylvia and Danny Kaye Playhouse Hunter College


China Is Trying to Stifle Scandal Over Reused Hypodermic Needles
The authorities are quietly investigating a major medical scandal involving a rural factory that washed more than one million used disposable hypodermic needles and then sold them as new.
The Government is desperately trying to keep the matter quiet, but internal documents indicate that since 1988 the factory has supplied hospitals with contaminated needles that were never sterilized.
Two dozen peasants simply washed the hypodermics under a hand pump, laid them outside to dry and then sealed them in plastic bags with Red Cross Blood Center labels.


In Bonn, Less Room at the Inn
One can understand the pressures that last week caused the German Parliament to revoke its constitutional guarantee of asylum.
But to understand is not to condone.
A proud emblem of Germany's moral rebirth is being sacrificed because a rich and powerful country seems helpless to deter hooligan attacks on foreigners.
Article 16 offered the right to asylum to the world's politically oppressed.
As of July 1, an amendment will permit Germany to close its borders to refugees from countries deemed by Germany to be safe.
Thus asylum seekers can be judged by their place of origin, rather than their specific circumstances.
That will surely reduce a massive influx.
In the first four months of 1993, 161,000 asylum seekers arrived, the largest number from Romania, compared with 124,000 during the same period a year ago.


When Discrimination Means Despair
Last week four women and one man sat before the Senate Governmental Affairs Committee and spoke of sexual harassment, racism and sexism.
Several of them wept, and understandably so.
The humiliations they described were their own.
Suzanne Doucette, an F.B.I. agent, and Diana Miller, a former Army civil engineer, talked of being assaulted by a superior.
Ms.
Doucette also accused the F.B.I. of retaliating for her charge by claiming, falsely, that she gave a classified document to her lawyer.
Sandra I. Hernandez, an agent with the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms, claimed a supervisor promised her promotion in exchange for sex.
Curtis Cooper said he'd been denied promotions in early years of his career with the same agency because of his race.
And Marilyn Hudson, a Federal prosecutor, reported losing her job because a new supervisor didn't want women in high-level jobs.


Fittipaldi at Indy


Arrest in Shooting Of Off-Duty Officer
A Brooklyn man was arrested last night and charged with attempted murder in the early morning shootings of an off-duty police officer and his brother at a Brooklyn bar, the police said.
The officer, Michael J. Panzera, 30 years old, was not armed when he and his brother, Gerald, 42, were shot in Johnny's Too Tavern at 8122 Seventh Avenue in the Bay Ridge section shortly after 1:30 A.M., a police spokesman, Sgt.
John McCluskey, said.


KEY FOE OF BUDGET SUGGESTS OPTIMISM OVER A COMPROMISE
Senator David L. Boren of Oklahoma, who holds the crucial swing vote that could make or break President Clinton's economic plan, said today that the odds had greatly improved that a compromise he could support could be worked out.
Senator Boren's new position almost guarantees enactment of legislation to lower the budget deficit, said Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan, chairman of the Finance Committee, which has jurisdiction over much of the Clinton plan.


Travel Industry Looks at Approach of Summer, and Smiles
As more than 28 million Americans traveled 100 miles or more from their homes this Memorial Day weekend, the traditional start of the summer vacation season, the travel industry is looking hopefully at the weeks ahead.
Even in the face of sluggish signals in the economy generally, "nearly every indicator we checked points to a strong summer travel season," said Paul R. Verkuil, president of the American Automobile Association.


Deborah Epstein, Gordon M. Henry
Deborah Ann Epstein, a daughter of Drs.
Stanley and Sylvia Epstein of Scarsdale, N.Y., was married yesterday to Gordon Mitchell Henry, a son of Dr.
Edward Henry and Mrs.
Sondra Henry of Great Neck, L.I.
Rabbi Arnold Turetsky performed the ceremony at the Nassau County Museum of Art in Roslyn, L.I.
Mrs.
Henry, 25, is a law student at Brooklyn Law School.
She and her husband graduated from Yale University, he cum laude.
Her father is a cardiologist in Tuckahoe, N.Y.
Her mother is a psychologist in Scarsdale.


An Alternative to Cash, Beyond Banks or Barter
NO matter how the gross national product is faring, enterprising residents of this small city have a way to keep the goods and services in motion.
The secret?
An alternative currency.
Since November 1991 this community scrip whose name is Ithaca HOURS has extended the local economy beyond the borders of cash and credit trading.


Review/Music; Anthrax Brings the Noise, but Now With Melody
"What do you think of the new guy?" the guitarist Scott Ian asked fans when Anthrax performed at the Grand on May 24.
The new guy was John Bush, Anthrax's new lead vocalist, who also co-wrote the songs on the band's new album, "Sound of White Noise" (Elektra).
To break him in, Anthrax was finishing up a six-date club tour before returning to its usual arena circuit.
With Mr.
Bush, Anthrax's music shifts just slightly from the speed-metal that has sold millions of Anthrax albums since the mid-1980's.
The band used to touch on slow heavy-metal riffing on the way to doubletime speed-metal blitzes with fast, one-note chanted lyrics.
Now the slow passages are longer, and there's often a melody within the crashing, churning, pounding guitars and drums.
The transformation of Anthrax isn't as drastic as Metallica's was, but both have decided to use just enough outside elements to break free of the speed-metal genre and crash the rock mainstream.


Jennifer Rosenfeld And D. C. Frankel
Jennifer Wendy Rosenfeld and David Cory Frankel, lawyers in San Francisco, were married yesterday.
Judge Thomas Kelly of Santa Cruz County Municipal Court performed the ceremony at the Cocoanut Grove, a ballroom, in Santa Cruz, Calif.
Ms.
Rosenfeld, who is 28, is keeping her name.
She is an associate in the San Francisco law firm of Marron, Reid &amp; Sheehy.
She graduated cum laude from Yale University.
She and her husband received law degrees from New York University.
She is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Jerome E. Rosenfeld of Monmouth Beach, N.J.


Review/Dance; A Storm via Stravinsky And Etiquette via Japan
Watching "Movements for Piano and Orchestra" is like watching bolts of lightning.
But because this lightning is choreographed by George Balanchine, everything is always under control, and the electrical storm is awesome without also being threatening.
Gestures are jagged and patterns are restless throughout the work, which was offered by the New York City Ballet on Thursday night at the New York State Theater as part of the Balanchine Celebration.
Balanchine obviously listened closely to the Stravinsky score that serves as the ballet's title.
What he heard inspired him in several ways.
The choreography's nervous energy is obviously a response to that of the music.
Yet the score never grows hysterical; Stravinsky created an ultimately orderly wildness.
So did Balanchine.


For a Broker, Tokyo Is Now Passe
Richard Greer, a broker here, has spent a lot of time recently in Latin America and will soon move to London.
In some ways, his departure may be a better indicator of the state of the Tokyo stock market than the recent surge of the Nikkei index after its three-year collapse.
These days in the world of global investing, where fashions change as fast as hemlines, Latin America and China are hot and Eastern Europe is getting warm.
Tokyo, however, has lost that certain something that made it one of the hottest, if not the hottest, investment stages of the 1980's.
It is a subjective feeling, but it is hard to miss for someone who, like Mr.
Greer, saw Tokyo rise from obscurity into a sort of Coney Island of investing, and then collapse.


Stacy L. Levy, Henry D. Jackson
Stacy Liane Levy, the daughter of Michael and Florrie Levy of Montreal, was married there yesterday to Henry Daniel Jackson, a son of Irene Hempling of Boynton Beach, Fla., and Derek Jackson of White Plains.
Rabbi Dr.
Wilfred Shushat performed the ceremony at Congregation Shaar Hashomayim.


RESULTS PLUS
COLLEGE BASEBALL  St.
John's, Fordham and Rutgers Are Out  Todd Cady had a grand slam and another homer as top-ranked Arizona State beat St.
John's, 12-2, to win the West Regional in Tempe, Ariz., and reach the College World Series.
The Sun Devils scored 40 runs in their four regional games.
The Redmen, with their second loss in the double-elimination tournament, ended their season with a 28-20 record. (AP) Arizona 18, Fordham 7: Arizona hit three of its four homers in one inning as the Wildcats crushed Fordham in an elimination game in the Midwest Regional in Stillwater, Okla.
Fordham finished the season with a 32-27 record. (AP)


Sonics Win One At Close Range
George Karl, whose eyes normally bug out by the fourth quarter, took a seat instead today.
His SuperSonics did something unusual with their open shots -- they made them -- and split-personality Seattle evened its series with Phoenix with a 120-101 victory.
The four-of-seven-game Western Conference finals, tied at two games apiece, goes back to Arizona Tuesday night, and the Suns might want to run a play or three for Charles Barkley.
This afternoon, he poured an entire game into the first half, with 23 points through two quarters, but was largely ignored thereafter.
By game's end, his totals were 27 points, 7 rebounds, 4 assists, 2 long passes intercepted, 1 airhead defensive play and a fist thumped emphatically on his seat.
It left a slight indentation.


Stephen Nettler and Gayle Abrams
Gayle Helene Abrams, a manager in the Mastercard/Visa division of Citibank in Long Island City, Queens, was married yesterday to Stephen Mark Nettler, the director of finance at the Russian-American Broadcasting Company in Fort Lee, N.J.
Rabbi Norman Kahan officiated at Temple Beth Shalom in Cherry Hill, N.J.
Mrs.
Nettler, 25, graduated from Carnegie Mellon University, from which she also received an M.B.A.
She is a daughter of Larry and Sylvia Abrams of Cherry Hill.
Her father is the manager of process engineering at Hydrocarbon Research Inc., a designer of chemical processing plants in Princeton, N.J.


Review/Performance Art; Chaplin Daughter Stars In a Zany Family Circus
"The Invisible Circus," in common with its predecessor "Le Cirque Imaginaire," is an intimate family cavalcade of variety acts.
The family in the show at the Union Square Theater is related to Charlie Chaplin, and the picture of the Little Tramp at the circus gives the amiable vest-pocket entertainment its sustaining imagery.
When Victoria Chaplin, the third of Chaplin's daughters, becomes intricately involved with mechanical objects, a theatergoer may also think of "Modern Times." While Chaplin was enmeshed in cogs and conveyor belts, his daughter acts as her own machinator.
It is at her behest, or autosuggestion, that wheels begin to spin and catch her in a whirligig.


Polly J. Derow and Jon D. Litner
Polly J. Derow, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Peter A. Derow of Bedford, N.Y., was married yesterday to Jon D. Litner, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Conrad Litner of Peabody, Mass.
Rabbi Richard Rheins performed the ceremony at the home of the bride's parents.
Mrs.
Litner, 24, is the special markets coordinator at Little, Brown &amp; Company, publishers in New York.
She graduated from Harvard University.
Her father, a former chairman and president of Newsweek Inc. and former president of the CBS Publishing Group, is president of Institutional Investor Inc., publishers, and president of the Financial Services and Medical Group of Capital Cities/ABC Inc.
Publishing, both in New York.


Central Park Reservoir: Some Young Thoughts
[ The following letters, from Nancy L. Robbins's third-grade class at Public School 230, Brooklyn, respond to "What to Do With the Central Park Reservoir," a May 9 photo feature. ] To the Editor:
I think we should make the Central Park Reservoir into a fish-stocked area, then let the fish grow and then make the reservoir into a fishing and boating area.
RACHEL GREENE Brooklyn, N.Y., May 21, 1993


Harold B. Gores, 83; Headed Nonprofit Lab
Harold B. Gores, who headed the Educational Facilities Laboratories, a not-for-profit foundation in New York, from 1958 to 1976, died Friday at Falmouth Hospital in Falmouth, Mass.
He was 83 and lived in East Falmouth.
Dr.
Gores, who received his doctorate in education from Harvard University, died of pneumonia, said his wife, the former Helen E. Boothroyd.


Seized Property In Crime Cases Causes Concern
The bounty from America's war on crime sits in building lots and parking lots, in marinas and airfields and bank vaults around the nation: billions of dollars' worth of cars, boats, planes, jewels, homes and other valuables seized by state and Federal agents from people accused of high-profile crimes.
To many prosecutors, the laws that allow them to confiscate the assets of suspects are both a powerful weapon against drug trafficking, illegal immigration, racketeering and white-collar crimes and a way to raise money for schools, libraries, police departments and prisons.


Central Park Reservoir: Some Young Thoughts
[ The following letters, from Nancy L. Robbins's third-grade class at Public School 230, Brooklyn, respond to "What to Do With the Central Park Reservoir," a May 9 photo feature. ] To the Editor:
My suggestion for the Central Park Reservoir is that they should leave it the way it is, just turn it into a pond and put a bike path around it.
And put fishing piers around it.
It would be very pretty.
JESSICA SCHUMER Brooklyn, N.Y., May 21, 1993


In Politics, Residency Prompts Scrutiny
New York City politicians are carefully gauging the political impact of accusations that three City Council members do not live in the districts they represent, with rivals hoping to gain an advantage from the controversy and at least one party leader seeking a potential replacement for a politically wounded Councilman.
Last week, the Bronx District Attorney's office said it was investigating allegations that Rafael Castaneira Colon and Israel Ruiz Jr., both Democratic Council members from the Bronx, provided false information about where they live.
And articles last week in Newsday raised anew questions about Susan D. Alter, the Democratic Council member from Brooklyn running for Public Advocate on both the Democratic and Republican tickets, suggesting that Ms.
Alter actually lives on Long Island.


E. W. Blackmon, R. J. Woodcock Jr.1
Elizabeth Wallace Blackmon, the daughter of Drs.
Charles M. and Margaret V. Blackmon of Fredericksburg, Va., was married there yesterday to Richard Joseph Woodcock Jr., the son of Richard J. and Estelle G. Woodcock of Potomac, Md.
The Rev.
James Baker performed the ceremony at the Presbyterian Church.


Jets' Lageman a Willing Slave to the Stairmaster
The middle of the iron bar that is carrying 405 pounds digs into the muscles across Jeff Lageman's shoulders as he squats under the load.
When he bends his legs under the weight, he sucks in a load of air.
When he rises, he blows it out like steam.
Lageman, the Jets' defensive end, looks like a 6-foot-5-inch, 260-pound human bellows.


Margaret C. Long, D. Mark Gooding
Margaret C. Long, a daughter of Margaret E. Comes of Delmar, N.Y., and the late Frank J. Comes, was married yesterday to D. Mark Gooding, a son of Barbara and David Gooding of Schenectady, N.Y.
The Rev.
Terrance O'Neil performed the ceremony at McKnownville United Methodist Church in Albany.
Mrs.
Gooding is an associate with the law firm of Peckar &amp; Abramson in River Edge, N.J.
She graduated from Smith College and received a law degree from the College of William and Mary.
Her previous marriage ended in divorce.


McDonald's Joins the Ranks Of the Videocassette Giants
Few are the mysteries at McDonald's, but here is something many people may not know about the country's largest fast-food chain: during the 1992 holiday season, McDonald's was the country's third-largest seller of videocassettes, based on the number of units sold.
What's more, McDonald's earned that rank by selling only three movies -- one was the hugely popular "Dances With Wolves" -- and selling them only in November and December.


Marla Krell, Steven Cohen
Marla Pearl Krell, a daughter of Rita and Mortimer Krell of Tenafly, N.J., was married yesterday in Fair Lawn, N.J., to Steven A. Cohen, the son of Hyman Cohen of Hollis, Queens, and the late Ethel Cohen.
Rabbi Arthur Hertzberg performed the ceremony at the Fair Lawn Jewish Center.


Leigh Finer, Daniel Waxman
Leigh Victoria Finer, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
David J. Finer of Cedarhurst, L.I., was married yesterday to Daniel Philip Waxman, a son of Marilyn Margolius of Chicago and Leonard Waxman of Montreal.
Rabbi Kenneth Hain performed the ceremony at Temple Beth Sholom in Lawrence, L.I.
Mrs.
Waxman, 25, is an associate at the New York law firm of Lord Day &amp; Lord.
She graduated magna cum laude from Queens College and received her law degree from Columbia University.


Jennifer Corwin And David Glick
Jennifer Beth Corwin, the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Martin E. Corwin of Livingston, N.J., was married there yesterday to David Jay Glick, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Joseph A. Glick of Wilmington, Del.
Rabbi Barry Friedman officiated at Temple B'nai Abraham.
Mrs.
Corwin Glick, 30, is an associate in the Washington law firm of Van Ness, Feldman &amp; Curtis.
She graduated from Johns Hopkins University and received a law degree from George Washington University.


An Expert on Cities, at Home in the World
Jane Jacobs is lost in Toronto.
Among the world's pre-eminent "foot people," as she termed urbanites like herself in "The Death and Life of Great American Cities," she is riding in the passenger seat of a car, looking uncharacteristically puzzled.
More than three decades have passed since Mrs.
Jacobs, now 77, wrote "The Death and Life of Great American Cities." Many books are hyped as "seminal." Few books, certainly few books written in the second half of this century, can be said to have truly affected the way large numbers of people think and live.
"Death and Life" is one.


The Sights, Sounds and Smells of Memorial Day Weekend


Stephanie Jones, Matthew Buckley
Stephanie Margaret Jones, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Maitland Jones Jr. of Princeton, N.J., was married there yesterday to Matthew Stefan Buckley, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
John J. Buckley Jr. of Lewisberry, Pa.
The Rev.
Dr.
Joseph C. Williamson, the dean of religious life at Princeton University and a United Church of Christ minister, performed the ceremony at Prospect House, a faculty club on the university campus.
Ms.
Jones, 23, is keeping her name.
She graduated from Barnard College, where she is a research assistant in the psychology department.
Her father is the David B. Jones professor of chemistry at Princeton.
Her mother, Susan Hockaday Jones, is a painter.


It's Going to Be a Long Season
There are some in Queens who would rather not talk about it.
There are those who now bemoan "the STEMs." And there are others, of course, who utter uglier things not fit to repeat here -- except to say, paraphrasing Ross Perot, there's a certain sound coming from Flushing Bay and it's the Mets going down the drain.
It has been 31 years since Casey Stengel threw up his hands and complained, "Can't anybody here play this game?" But his lament is once again echoing across Queens as the Mets have sunk into last place in the National League East with a style as thrilling as a pitching change midway through a lopsided game between two losers on a lazy afternoon in late September.


INSIDE
Medical Scandal in China
China is investigating a medical scandal involving a factory that rewashed disposable hypodermic needles and sold them as new.
Page 3.
Hopes for Summer Travel
The travel industry is expecting record numbers of Americans to travel this summer.
Page 8.
Arrest in Compactor Death
Texas troopers arrested a New Jersey man in the death of a boy found in a Brooklyn trash compactor.
Page 25.


Yanks Able to Turn Messy Situation Into Clean Sweep
The Yankees were survivors yesterday, overcoming the twists and turns that the day and the injury-plagued season had cast upon them.
They made three errors, got an erratic outing by Bob Wickman and had a lineup laden with players who, before the season began, were expected to spend most of their time chomping on sunflower seeds in the dugout.


Sandra Gail Fine, Dan L. Rosenbaum
Sandra Gail Fine, a daughter of Myrna Ulberg of Syosset, L.I., and Howard L. Fine of Bellmore, L.I., was married yesterday to Dan Leonard Rosenbaum, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Lester Rosenbaum of Yorktown Heights, N.Y.
Rabbi Jonathan Perlman performed the ceremony at the Bayside (Queens) Jewish Center.


Bulls' Silence Is Golden, In Form of $25,000 Fine
The simple logic the Bulls take into Game 4 of the Eastern Conference finals against the Knicks is this: Michael Jordan shot 3 for 18 in Game 3 and the Bulls won by 20.
"I expect Michael to play a lot better," said John Paxson, the one Bull who spoke to the news media today following a three-hour practice.
The team was fined $25,000 by the National Basketball Association for the silence of the other players.


K. R. Kaufman, Michael Narotsky
Katherine Riemer Kaufman, a policy analyst for the Federal Environmental Protection Agency in Durham, N.C., was married yesterday to Michael Gershon Narotsky, a senior scientist at Mantech Environmental Technology Inc. in Research Triangle Park, N.C.
Rabbi Norton Shargel officiated at the Jewish Center of Harrison, N.Y.
Ms.
Kaufman, 28, is keeping her name.
She graduated from Yale University and received a master's degree in public policy from the University of California at Berkeley.
She is the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Howard R. Kaufman of Somers, N.Y.


Corrections
A picture caption on May 21 about the old Smallpox Hospital on Roosevelt Island described its architecture incorrectly.
It is Gothic Revival, not Greek Revival.


Review/Concert; Chamber Ensemble Vs. Noise: Music Wins
It's getting to be the time of year when music goes outdoors to play.
Tanglewood, Caramoor and the like are yet to begin, but in the middle of Manhattan the concert and performance series at Bryant Park has acted as a kind of spring harbinger for the summer.
The latest in these brief al fresco events was a collection of three short comic operas put on by the New York Chamber Ensemble for a few hundred sun-drenched listeners and passersby on Saturday afternoon.
The pieces were Hindemith's "Hin und Zuruck"; "The Telephone" by Gian Carlo Menotti, and Douglas Moore's soap-opera opera, "Gallantry."
Previous events in Bryant Park, at least the ones this writer has attended, have faced some pretty stiff competition from traffic along the Avenue of the Americas and on 42d Street.
But whether it was the weekend slowdown or the placing of the small stage at the east rather than the west end of the park, music held its own against city noise more effectively than I can remember it ever doing so.


Barbara Kramer, David Rosenfeld
Barbara H. Kramer, an associate in the law firm of Guerrieri, Edmond &amp; James in Washington, and David M. Rosenfeld, a policy analyst in the Congressional Office of Technology Assessment there, were married yesterday.
Rabbi Alan Fuchs officiated at Temple Rodeph Shalom in Philadelphia.
The bride, 27, graduated from Columbia University and received a law degree from Georgetown University.
She is the daughter of Mitchell A. and Judith Kramer of Jenkintown, Pa.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article on Friday about Gay Men's Health Crisis referred incorrectly in some copies to a former lawyer with the agency.
She is Ilka Tanya Payan.


Ms. Boghossian, Mr. Staples
Nancy Pamela Boghossian, a computer software marketing director in Watertown, Mass., was married yesterday to David Murray Staples, the owner of Doyle Offshore Sails, a sail maker in St.
Philip, Barbados.
The Rev.
Dr.
George Peters, a Congregational minister, performed the ceremony at Hammersmith Farm in Newport, R.I.
The bride works at Tom Snyder Productions, a software maker.
She graduated from Harvard University.
She and her husband received master's degrees from Harvard, she in education, he in public administration.


Public Access TV Gets Communities Involved
To the Editor:
I was pleased to see in your May 23 article about fringe groups that appear on public access television a reference to Manhattan Neighborhood Network's intention to explore the scheduling of hate-mongering, violent or explicitly sexual programs late at night.


Roger MacDougall, A Screenwriter, 82, And a Playwright
Roger MacDougall, a screenwriter and playwright, died on Thursday at Denville Hall, a residence and nursing home in Northwood, England, outside London.
He was 82.
Mr.
MacDougall, John Dighton and Alexander Mackendrick wrote the screenplay for the 1951 comedy "The Man in the White Suit," which starred Alec Guinness.
Reviewing the film in The New York Times, Bosley Crowther wrote that the three writers "concocted a most ingenious fable of the mischief that scientists can do with their test tubes and curiosity in disturbing the status quo." It was based on a play script by Mr.
MacDougall.


Julie B. Orent, Scott G. Luchs
Julie Beth Orent, the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Herbert H. Orent of Convent Station, N.J., was married yesterday to Dr.
Scott Glenn Luchs, a son of Marjorie Luchs of Englewood, N.J., and Dr.
Saul Luchs of Cliffside Park, N.J.
Rabbi Richard Levine officiated at the Headquarters Plaza Hotel in Morristown, N.J.
Mrs.
Luchs, 24, graduated from Tufts University, where she also received a master's degree in special education.
She plans to join the faculty at the Westchester Day School in Mamaroneck, N.Y., in September.
Her father is a senior engineering associate at the Exxon Research and Engineering Company in Florham Park, N.J.
Her mother, Judith Orent, a teacher of mathematics, is the chairwoman of the mathematics department at the Montclair Kimberley Academy in Montclair, N.J.


Jordan Turns Silence Into Rallying Cry
WITHIN the invisible borders of Bulls-Knicks World, where Armageddon is currently being waged at a furious pitch, the great news media boycott of '93 continued yesterday as Michael Jordan maintained his silence and all but one of his teammates followed his lead right out the door after the Bulls' afternoon practice.
However, in the midst of the historical chroniclers of Bulls-Knicks World, appeared Mr.
James Jordan, father of Michael, in the role of paternal peace offering to the press.
He stood outside the lobby of the Bulls' workout facility, under a steady drizzle, wearing a tan cap, black shirt and gray slacks.
He puffed a cigarette.


Jodi Beth Riffkin, Robert B. Klass
Jodi Beth Riffkin, the daughter of Maxine and Leslie Riffkin of Scarsdale, N.Y., was married yesterday to Dr.
Robert Bruce Klass, the son of Marsha and Carl Klass of Hauppauge, L.I.
Rabbi Elliot Spar officiated at the Huntington (L.I.) Townhouse.


Selling Magazines by the Causes They Sponsor
To draw attention to environmental concerns two years ago, Times Mirror Magazines said that it would donate to environmental causes part of the revenues from any advertisements that included an environmental message.
At that time, advertising revenues were at a low point throughout the magazine industry, and many people wondered how long it would be before pragmatism overcame idealism and the company scrapped the program.


Mystery Illness Takes 10th Life In the Southwest
A 13-year-old Navajo girl who died Saturday was the latest victim of a mysterious illness that has claimed the lives of at least nine other people near the Navajo Reservation, health experts say.
So far, eight Navajos and two other people have died after developing symptoms similar to those of flu and a cough that quickly progressed to a severe respiratory ailment, said C. Mack Sewell, epidemiologist for the New Mexico Department of Health.
He and other health officials say they do not know what the illness is or how to prevent it.


Kenneth Kennerly, Kelly McKenna
Kelly Ann McKenna, a daughter of Patrick A. McKenna of Savannah, Ga., and Jean M. Doyle of Barrington, Ill., was married yesterday to Kenneth Robertson Kennerly, a son of Albert Kennerly of Oxford, Md., and Celeste Cheatham Weisglass of New York.
The Rev.
Stuart Kenworthy performed the Episcopal ceremony at Christ Church in Washington.
Mrs.
Kennerly, 28, is the director of sales of the Hyland Group, a hotel and resort marketing company based in Fairfax, Va.
She graduated from Columbia College in Chicago.
Her father is the general manager of Landings-on-Skidaway Island, real estate and private club developers in Savannah.
Her mother is an executive assistant at Household International, a financial services company in Northbrook, Ill.


An Offering To the Wolves
It is one of the oldest rites of government: when things are not going well, when the leader is in trouble, a member of his retinue must be sacrificed.
At least the wolves will be silenced for a while, and with a bit of skill and a lot of luck, the direction of the whole enterprise can be changed.
So it was with President Clinton this weekend.
The problem, the President has been saying for weeks, is that his program has not been effectively communicated to the public.
So there was a certain logic in shoving aside George Stephanopoulos, the young communications director, in favor of David R. Gergen, the old Nixon and Reagan hand, however embarrassing such a symbol of the established order must have been to an apostle of change.


Germany Links Iran to Kurds' Killing
Prosecutors have charged that Iran ordered the assassination of prominent Kurdish leaders who were killed in a hail of bullets at a Berlin restaurant eight months ago.
New indictments assert that an agent of the Iranian intelligence service, Kazem Darabi, received orders from superiors in Teheran to kill the Kurds during their visit to a meeting of the Socialist International here.
He is said to have planned and carried out the shootings with the help of four Lebanese confederates.
All are under arrest.
Four people were killed in the attack.


A Surge in Fighting in Bosnia and Herzegovina


Pressure Mounting on Guatemalan in Power Grab
President Jorge Serrano Elias's hold on the almost dictatorial powers he seized last week appeared to be weakening today as the pressure against him mounted at home and abroad.
The country's electoral court threw a major obstacle into Mr.
Serrano's path late Saturday, announcing that until he restored constitutional order it would not sanction the new elections he has called.


No Headline
I think women always keep house; it comes with the gender.
Every career woman with a family does the wash, the laundry, scrubs floors, cleans the bathrooms, changes the beds.
The man generally does not. -- SENATOR DIANNE FEINSTEIN of California.  [ 11:1. ]


Big City Budget Reality
New York City's fiscal watchdogs have no teeth, officially, but they can bite nonetheless.
And bite they did last week.
In an extraordinary public critique, the three private-sector members of the Financial Control Board told the world what they have been telling Mayor David Dinkins for some time now -- that the city must stop living beyond its means, and do it quickly.
Their timing was politically inopportune for the Mayor, seeking re-election this year.
But, in politics, when is fiscal belt-tightening ever opportune?
Better embarrassment now than deeper trouble later.


Dance in Review
"Furnished/Unfurnished" John Jasperse St. Mark's Church


Handicapping a G.O.P. Primary by the Ads
A poll isn't necessary to figure out who is leading in the race for the Republican nomination for Governor of New Jersey.
Take a look at the paid political advertisements now appearing on New York and Philadelphia television stations.


