Saberhagen Likely to Remain a Met
Bret Saberhagen, saying he couldn't care less whether Manager Dallas Green liked him, insisted yesterday that he wanted to remain with the Mets, and that he thought he could finally begin to earn the enormous dollars invested in his right arm and in his reputation as one of the game's elite pitchers.
Saberhagen, though, said he could not responsibly speculate on whether he had fatally compromised his future with the club over his part in several clubhouse pranks that, he said, "backfired in my face" and damaged his public image.
The right-hander signed a three-year contract extension worth $15.4 million last spring.
The club holds an option on a fourth season.


Food Notes
An Organic Market Guide
"The Organic Market Guide: New Jersey Region, 1993-94" has just been released by the Northeast Organic Farming Association of New Jersey.
The 190-page book provides detailed listings of farmers, food manufacturers, wholesalers and retailers that make or sell organic foods or farm and gardening supplies.
Some restaurants that use organic ingredients are also listed, as are support and information groups that address issues relating to organic cultivation.
And while much of the information in the book concerns New Jersey, there are also listings for companies in 17 other states, including New York, Connecticut and Pennsylvania.
There are several useful cross-indexes in the back of the book and a thoughtful essay, "Think Globally, Eat Locally," by Eryn Paul Sackmann, who sums up the basic arguments in favor of organic food.


No Headline
"We've got a 10,000-square-foot warehouse that is  stacked to the ceiling with mail that still hasn't been opened. There's no way to stop it. Everyone keeps  saying quit, and people  ignore the pleas." -- ARTHUR STEIN, who is trying to end a flood of cards to an English boy who had cancer.  [ A1:2. ]


Hitchcock Stumbles, but Relief Is on Way for Yankees
Sterling Hitchcock was in the visiting clubhouse at Cleveland Stadium last Friday, one day after pitching seven shutout innings over the Indians to win his 1993 debut.
He had fielded telephone calls until 4 o'clock that morning, reviewing each pitch and savoring each memory.
Standing in the clubhouse, the rookie finally realized something.
"I was the man for a day," Hitchcock said. "Now I have to wake up."


Reeves Doesn't Ask Anderson, Bahr Back
With one hand, Coach Dan Reeves continued to shuffle the Giants' roster today, while at the same time making some tough personnel decisions.
Decisions like cutting the ties with veteran running back O. J. Anderson and veteran place-kicker Matt Bahr, who were not asked to rejoin the team after being waived on Monday.
Decisions like picking up former Jets safety David Tate and former San Diego Chargers defensive lineman George Thornton, as well as kickers David Treadwell and Brad Daluiso off waivers.


Vote Is Split, 4-3, for New Chancellor
Its divisions deeping, the New York City Board of Education last night voted to hire Ramon C. Cortines, the former superintendent in San Francisco, as the new Schools Chancellor, after a raucous public hearing focusing largely on AIDS education, condom distribution in the schools and other social issues.
In a 4-to-3 vote, the board authorized a $195,000-a-year contract with Mr.
Cortines through June 1995, and use of a $1 million city-owned row house in Brooklyn Heights purchased for his ousted predecessor, Joseph A. Fernandez.


What's the Buzz? In New York, It's Coffee
IT was happy hour in Times Square, and James Ramos, a luggage salesman, was heading for the subway.
On a whim, he decided to stop off for a cold one.
"What's yours?" said a man drawing brews behind the bar.


Fire Commissioner Quits and Joins Giuliani Camp
The New York City Fire Commissioner, Carlos M. Rivera, suddenly resigned yesterday, accusing unnamed senior mayoral aides of being anti-Hispanic and of trying to dismantle the Fire Department through budget cuts.
Within hours of submitting his letter of resignation, Mr.
Rivera endorsed Rudolph W. Giuliani, Mayor David N. Dinkins's Republican-Liberal challenger, and signed on as an adviser to the Giuliani campaign.


School Year's Beginning Marks Summer's End


Close a Bit Weaker in Volatile Day
In a volatile day of trading, the bond market ended slightly weaker yesterday with yields rising.
Only the price of the 30-year bond managed to eke out a small gain, which pushed its yield down from 6.11 percent Monday to 6.09 percent, just above the 20-year low reached last week.
The report that the economy grew at a revised 1.8 percent annual rate in the second quarter, after adjustment for inflation, had little impact, although the economic pace was higher than many forecasters had expected.


Metropolitan Diary
DEAR DIARY:
Just as the 8:29 from Newark reached the daylit stretch in Manhattan between the tunnel and Penn Station, the P A system crackled on.
We heard the engineer or conductor intoning "M-I-C," and that was all.
But in the car, heads bobbed to the same rhythm as commuters silently completed the phrase: ". . . K-E-Y M-O-U-S-E." IVAN BERGER
. . .
Dear Diary:
About 12 years ago -- when our grandchildren were born -- I began picking up coins from the street.
Ever since, I've thought a lot about the mechanics, the psychology and the fiscal aspects of lost coins.


Sports of The Times; Young Yanks Out Quickly At the Open
WE Yanks don't do royalty and there are surely no duchesses out where the No. 7 elevated train rumbles.
But Andre Agassi and Jennifer Capriati were badly in need of an American equivalent of the Duchess of Kent yesterday, to console them on the wreckage of a summer.
The two young Americans were bounced from the United States Open in the very first round, and another Yank, Mary Joe Fernandez, had to default from her first-round match because of a stomachache.
The United States delegation could have used a Duchess of Kent, who comforted a Czech player named Jana Novotna after the Wimbledon final on July 3.


Chandler Brossard; Prolific Writer, 71, Was Self-Educated
Chandler Brossard, a writer, an editor and an educator, died on Sunday at Calvary Hospice in the Bronx.
He was 71 and lived in Manhattan.
The cause was cancer, his family said.


CHRONICLE
JAMES CARVILLE, President Clinton's campaign strategist, is thinking of taking his winning ways abroad.
He said this week he was "looking very seriously" at the prospect of doing some consulting for the New Democracy Party in Greece, which is currently in power.
Parliamentary elections are expected to be called before May of next year, and if he does sign on, Mr.
Carville will probably be involved in the shortest political campaign of his career: campaigning in Greece is limited to 30 days.
"That's very attractive about foreign elections, having just gone through what seems like a 30-year election," he said.


John Lockwood, 89; Advised Rockefellers
John E. Lockwood, a lawyer who was formerly chief legal adviser to the Rockefeller family and chairman of the New York Public Library, died yesterday at his home in Bedford, N.Y.
He was 89.
He had been in declining health in recent months, said Squire N. Bozorth, a friend who is a partner in Mr.
Lockwood's Manhattan-based law firm, Milbank, Tweed, Hadley &amp; McCloy.


Corrections
An article in Business Day yesterday about the resignation of the president and chief executive of Visa U.S.A. gave an incorrect title in some copies for Charles T. Russell at Visa International.
He is president and chief executive, not chairman.


Review/Television; New Time, New Network, New Set, Same Humor
The gap between 11:35 and 12:35 turns out to be one that can be measured only in minutes, not in light-years.
David Letterman's new "Late Show," the version of his talk show reinvented for a larger, presumably more wide-awake audience, turns out to be as savvy and caustic as its NBC incarnation.
Although Mr.
Letterman began his new stint on Monday night with obviously rekindled energy, the show's actual format was remarkably close to its predecessor's.
Actionably close, as a matter of fact, and of course Mr.
Letterman made his legal skirmish with NBC one of the night's main sources of fun.
Striding onto the stage of a handsomely refurbished Ed Sullivan Theater, to an introduction wittily patched together from old Ed Sullivan clips (Mr. Letterman was variously "a fabulous boy prodigy," "my handsome Italian paisano" and "the most amazing of all the chimp acts ever to come on the show"), CBS's new star wickedly took aim at his old employers.
"Legally, I can continue to call myself Dave," he explained, while also claiming to have found a peacock's head in his bed.
Along came the NBC News anchor Tom Brokaw, obviously a man who enjoys living dangerously, to wish Mr.
Letterman "reasonably well" and to confiscate a couple of cue cards, saying they were the intellectual property of NBC.
Not surprisingly, Mr.
Letterman found a lot to work with there, too.


One-Year Dolphin Contract for Humphrey
Running back BOBBY HUMPHREY signed a one-year contract with the Miami Dolphins yesterday, ending six months of offers, counter-offers, threats and ultimatums.
"Any time you have negotiations, you have difficulties." Humphrey said.
"I'm just happy to be back."


Krone, Date for Return Uncertain, Awaits Further Surgery
Belmont Park will open its fall season this afternoon but one of the stars of the cast won't be there: Julie Krone, who suffered multiple fractures of the right ankle and severe cuts on the left elbow in a violent spill Monday on Saratoga's final day.
The 30-year-old jockey, who ran second to Mike Smith for the riding title at Saratoga, was transferred yesterday from Saratoga Hospital to the Staten Island University Hospital nearer her home in Colts Neck, N.J.
She was listed in good condition after a surgical procedure was performed Monday night to stabilize the ankle joint, alleviate pain and splint the punctured left elbow.


Looking to an Accord in Mirer Dispute
The dispute over RICK MIRER's highly creative contract may be settled before it reaches an arbitration hearing next Tuesday.
PAUL TAGLIABUE, the commissioner of the National Football League, said yesterday that the Seattle Seahawks and Mirer's representatives hope to work something out before the hearing is held in Minneapolis before Federal Judge DAVID DOTY.


EASTERN COLLEGE REPORT
Big East Preview
The third football season for the Big East opens tomorrow night when Pittsburgh, once again coached by John Majors, plays Southern Mississippi at Hattiesburg, Miss.
The conference's first round-robin schedule begins on Saturday with Miami at Boston College.
The Eagles and six other teams are playing catch-up to Miami, which has never lost a conference game.


Corrections
The Advertising column and its picture caption in Business Day yesterday reversed the dimensions of the Sony Jumbotron video screen in Times Square.
It is 32 feet wide by 23 1/2 feet high.
In some copies, the pictures carried an incorrect credit line.
They were by the Sony Corporation, not The New York Times.


Review/Film; A Flight of Fancy, Physical and Historical
In depicting kung fu fighting as a kind of big top aerial ballet, the films of the Hong Kong director Tsui Hark are far more abstract than the choreographed clashes of American martial arts films.
Where in American movies, such combat is grounded in a muscle-flexing machismo, the adversaries in Mr.
Tsui's spectacles zip around like Peter Pans attached to invisible wires.
During the protracted fight sequence that is the climax of "Once Upon a Time in China, Part 2," the combatants exhibit the grace and timing of trapeze artists as they fly through the air with what seems like the greatest of ease, often landing in the oddest places.
A typical perch is a stack of wooden chairs arranged into a precarious tower.
From here the fighter dives back into the fray, then swoops up to alight like Superman on another shaky foothold.


Loan Had a Higher Interest Rate Than Reported, Holtzman Says
Trying to put to rest questions about a campaign loan that have become an issue in the Comptroller election, the incumbent, Elizabeth Holtzman, has asserted that the loan she accepted from Fleet Bank last year carried a much higher interest rate than election records indicate.
But one of her opponents accused her of misrepresenting the facts in the case.
Ms.
Holtzman's campaign for United States Senate took out a $450,000 loan from Fleet Bank in late August last year.
Ms.
Holtzman secured the loan by promising to raise about $680,000 at a fund-raising dinner in early September, and the campaign agreed to repay the debt by Sept. 30.


Critic's Notebook; When the World Really Is a Stage
A friend of mine, a former dancer from another country, loves to spend summer weekends at Lincoln Center absorbing the atmosphere and events of the center's annual Out of Doors festival.
She doesn't go for the dance, she says.
Instead, she sees the free festival as a celebration of the city and its arts, especially for those who are unable to afford the price of theater tickets.
But does one get an authentic artistic experience at the festival, or at any outdoor theatrical event?
If not, does it matter?


How Can Murdered Girl Be Missed by No One?
FOR nine days now, Sgt.
Michael Garvey has been waiting for someone to call his detective squad in the Bronx about the little girl whose slashed, broken and burned body he first saw lying on a patch of gravel between a highway and an elevated railroad track.
"You would have thought that someone would know about her," said the 48-year-old, silver-haired commander of the 41st Precinct detective squad, who has a daughter of his own.
"We still don't know why she died or exactly what the cause of death was -- stabbing, choking or burning. But we know more about the way she died than about the way she lived."


Asbestos Tests May Postpone School Year
With eight days to go before classes in New York City's public schools are scheduled to resume, officials said yesterday that they could not complete the emergency inspection program for asbestos in time to open all schools.
The officials, who insisted on anonymity, said that at best they would be able to declare only some of the city's 1,069 schools free of asbestos hazards and ready to open on the first day of school, Sept. 9.


RESULTS PLUS
SOCCER  Late Arrival Lifts U.S.
Team to Victory  Ernie Stewart, who flew in from the Netherlands 24 hours earlier, scored with three minutes left last night to give the United States a 1-0 victory over Iceland in Reykjavik, Iceland.
Before a crowd of 3,700 on a chilly, drizzly night, Stewart took a feed from Alexi Lalas and drove the ball into the net from 10 yards out.
It was Stewart's second goal in his last two games with the United States (7-9-10 this year).
Stewart played Sunday for Willem II Tilburg in the Dutch First Division and was unable to practice with the United States team in Iceland.
The game was the first for the United States after a four-week layoff after the U.S.
Cup.
Iceland tied the United States, 1-1, on April 17 at Costa Mesa, Calif. (AP) ROWING  Two American Crews Advance  Two of nine United States crews advanced from qualifying races yesterday at the world championships in Roudnice, the Czech Republic, one directly to the finals.
The United States men's eight team won a spot in Sunday's finals by capturing its heat against Germany, Britain, Australia and the Czech Republic.
In the women's single sculls, Cynthia Ryder of Townsend, Mass., won her heat to advance to tomorrow's semifinals.
Seven United States crews will try to qualify today, the last day of repechage races. (AP)


New Escape Heightens Town's Fears About Prison
A man convicted of trying to kill a police officer escaped from the maximum security prison here Monday night and remained at large today.
Another man who escaped at the same time was captured a few hours later in the nearby woods.


Letterman Draws A Crowd For CBS
David Letterman's opening night broadcast drew millions of unaccustomed viewers for late-night television and set records in that time period for his new network, CBS.
But Jay Leno had reason to be happy with his results from the first confrontation between the two late-night hosts Monday night: the ratings for Mr.
Leno's "Tonight" show didn't experience much of a decline from their recent levels.
Neither, apparently, did the ratings for "Nightline" on ABC, all of which led most television industry analysts to conclude that Mr.
Letterman's first 11:35 P.M. show was an event that drew many people who usually aren't watching at that hour.


New Library Head


A New Face Enters The Revolving Door
Two-fifths of the Yankees' rotation -- Domingo Jean and Sterling Hitchcock -- are shipping out to Class A Prince William.
Another two-fifths -- Jim Abbott and Melido Perez -- continue to be lost in New York.
So the Yankees took a major step toward fixing their pitching problems last night.
In a deal swung just shy of midnight, the Yankees acquired Lee Smith from St.
Louis, asking one of baseball's last larger-than-life pitchers to stop here on his way to Cooperstown and convert the biggest save opportunity of his career.


Braves Don't Let Up on Reeling Giants
The San Diego Padres' frenzied fire sale continued to fuel the Atlanta Braves' drive toward a third consecutive division championship tonight.
It's too early to proclaim the second-place Braves the winners, but the trend is clear.
David Justice, whose bat and mind were unshackled by the arrival of Fred McGriff six weeks ago, drove in four runs with a single to left field and a home run to right field as the blossoming Braves battered the sagging San Francisco Giants, 8-2, tonight.


Lageman Is Ready, Jets Are Cautious
Since he went down in the second game of last season with a severe injury to his right knee, defensive end Jeff Lageman has been working toward the goal of hitting the field for the team's regular-season opener.
It now looks as if Lageman has reached his goal.
When the defense takes the field against Denver on Sunday, Lageman will line up at the starting left end position.
He will play in a brace that will protect his reconstructed knee.


Corrections
A brief article in Business Day yesterday about ways of connecting to the Internet, the network of personal computer networks, misstated a telephone number for a data base provider, Advanced Network Services Inc. of Elmsford, N.Y.
Its numbers are (914) 789-5300 and (800) 456-8267.


N.H.L. Fills No. 2 Post
Brian Burke, the 38-year-old general manager of the Hartford Whalers, will be named today as second in command to National Hockey League Commissioner Gary Bettman, according to a league official.
Burke will be the senior vice president and director of hockey operations.
He will conduct disciplinary hearings, advise Bettman on rules changes, serve as a liaison to team general managers and supervise the planning for neutral-site games.


Books of The Times; When U.S. Citizens Were Rounded Up in Camps
Prisoners Without Trial  Japanese-Americans in World War II  By Roger Daniels  Illustrated. 146 pages.
Hill &amp; Wang. $22.95.
American concentration camps?
"Prisoners Without Trial," by Roger Daniels, recounts the story of the imprisonment of nearly 120,000 Americans of Japanese ancestry who were removed from their homes, fields and businesses and put behind barbed wire in 1942.
Mr.
Daniels, a professor of American History at the University of Cincinnati and the author of respected books on immigration and ethnicity, calls these internment camps concentration camps.


Christie Gets 100 Meters Date in London
LINFORD CHRISTIE has been granted his wish to run the 100 meters at next week's Grand Prix final.
Track's governing body confirmed yesterday that the race has been added to the schedule for the end-of-season meet at the Crystal Palace in London on Sept. 10.
Christie, the world and Olympic champion, had asked for the 100 to be included, even though it is not a designated Grand Prix event this year. (AP)


Corrections
Because of a mechanical error, some copies yesterday included a duplicate of page A12 in place of page C12, which carried the crossword puzzle and the continuation of a Critic's Notebook article about the Festival of Contemporary Music at Tanglewood.
Readers wishing copies of the omitted page may write to Production Quality Control, The New York Times, 229 West 43d Street, New York, N.Y. 10036.


TRANSACTIONS
Football  National Football League
ATLANTA FALCONS -- Re-signed Tim Green, defensive end; Jesse Solomon, linebacker; Jason Phillips, wide receiver; Elbert Shelley, cornerback; Jeff Donaldson, safety, and John Buddenberg, tackle.
Signed Shannon Baker, wide receiver; Robbie Tobeck, center, and Martin Hochertz, defensive end, to their developmental squad.


Hilgenberg Replaces Hilgenberg
How does a team replace a Pro Bowl-caliber center like JOEL HILGENBERG?
Get his seven-time Pro Bowl brother, JAY.
"I guess we think the only thing better than one Hilgenberg is two Hilgenbergs," said the New Orleans Saints' offensive line coach, PAUL BOUDREAU.
Jay Hilgenberg, cut by Cleveland Aug. 24, was signed yesterday by the Saints after injuries left Joel Hilgenberg sidelined for a month. (AP)


Kean Says He'll Pass Up Senate Race
Former Governor Thomas H. Kean said today that he would not be a candidate for the United States Senate next year.
For several weeks Mr.
Kean, a Republican and one of the state's most popular public officials, had been mulling over a run against Senator Frank R. Lautenberg, the Democratic incumbent.
Mr.
Kean's willingness to seriously consider becoming a candidate had sidelined several other potential Republican candidates while he made up his mind.


AT LUNCH WITH: Barbara Kingsolver; Termites Are Interesting But Books Sell Better
BARBARA KINGSOLVER arrived for lunch so promptly as to be early, a refreshing gesture from someone who was soon casually confessing that her writing career began with an enormous white lie.
The lie occurred some years ago, before Ms.
Kingsolver had published her three novels and one book of short stories, and before her latest book, "Pigs in Heaven," made its gently opinionated author a bona fide literary success.
Back then, Ms.
Kingsolver was a graduate student at the University of Arizona, studying the social life of termites.


Molitor Boosts Jays Over A's in the 10th
Blue Jays 3, A's 2
Paul Molitor hit a sacrifice fly in the 10th inning as Toronto increased its lead over the Yankees to one and a half games in The American League East.
It was the Blue Jays' third straight victory after opening their West Coast trip 0-3 at Seattle.


CHRONICLE
ALISON SHAW, a photographer on Martha's Vineyard, found herself wearing two hats last week.
As a staff member of The Vineyard Gazette, a local newspaper, she was assigned to photograph the President and his family on their vacation.
But she was also hopeful that she could meet him on a more personal basis to give him some of her artistic photos, which she had signed and had framed for him.
When the Clintons arrived at the Granary Gallery in West Tisbury, Mass., on Sunday for a visit and a portrait-taking session with Alfred Eisenstaedt, the 94-year-old photographer, Ms.
Shaw was waiting outside.
Coincidentally, she had a show of her work in the gallery; her photos are also on view at Bergdorf Goodman in New York.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article yesterday about single fathers who head households referred incompletely to an expert on child-custody arrangements and omitted his affiliation.
He is Herbert Jacob, professor of political science at Northwestern University.


Personal Health; The promise and the pitfalls of gene therapy.
IT is not surprising that gene therapy is getting mixed reviews.
Although hailed by many as the most exciting medical development since the discovery of antibiotics, it is also a source of concern and even fear among some intelligent people who know what evil can lurk in the human mind.
For gene therapy involves a kind of manipulation that in theory can give doctors and scientists the tools to make changes in the genetic blueprint that is the physical essence of all living things.


Groff Named Aggies' Athletic Director
WALLY GROFF, a part of the Texas A&amp;M University athletic administration since 1966, was named athletic director yesterday, replacing JOHN DAVID CROW, who resigned in May.
Groff has been associate athletic director since 1988 and serves as the athletic department's chief fiscal officer. (AP)


Once-Dominant Swedes Staging a Mini-Revival
With only Stefan Edberg ranked in the top 10, it seems Sweden is not the superpower in tennis it once was.
So far, seven Swedes have played in the men's draw at the United States Open, and as a group they have done surprisingly well: all three Swedes won their matches on Monday, and three of four won yesterday, including Henrik Holm, who upset sixth-seeded Michael Stich, and Thomas Enqvist, who defeated No. 16 Andre Agassi.
Four more will play today.


Beliveau Retires as Canadiens Executive
JEAN BELIVEAU retired yesterday after four decades with the Montreal Canadiens, first as one of hockey's greatest players and later as the club's goodwill ambassador.
Beliveau's last day as vice president for corporate affairs coincided with his 62d birthday.
Beliveau, a center, retired as a player in 1971 with 507 goals, 712 assists and 10 Stanley Cup titles. (AP)


A Cancer Drug May Help Heart Ills
A DRUG commonly used after surgery to treat women at an early stage of breast cancer may also significantly reduce their risk of coronary heart disease, a new study suggests.
The drug, tamoxifen, is thought to be effective in preventing recurrence of the cancer, which will be diagnosed in more than 1.5 million American women in this decade, the National Cancer Institute estimates.


Bridge
Three American teams have begun well in the NEC World Team Championships here, but the fourth has had trouble.
After four rounds of play in the Bermuda Bowl Competition for open teams, the United States No. 1 team, which includes Michael Becker of Tenafly, N.J., is languishing in seventh place in its eight-team qualifying group with 50 victory points.
They have lost to Norway, Venezuela and China while narrowly defeating India.
Leaders in their group are: 1.
Denmark and China tied, 71 victory points; 3.
Australia 68.5; 4.
Norway 62.


60-Minute Gourmet
ONE of my vivid memories of working in New York in the late 1930's is of the abundance of sparkling, sweet crab meat that was available.
We had crab in France, of course, but it was smaller, more delicate and quite expensive.
When I cooked at the 1939 World's Fair, fresh crab-meat salad was a staple of the lunch buffet, a towering mound of snowy crab meat swathed with homemade mayonnaise and fresh herbs.
The recipe below reminds me of those sumptuous days at the World's Fair.
This salad combines crab meat with shrimp for a different texture and flavor.
The dressing is made with Dijon mustard, lime juice, vinegar, honey, olive oil, scallions and jalapeno peppers.
The mustard brings mild heat and a creamy texture; lime juice brightens the flavors and invigorates the palate; vinegar and hot peppers are counterbalanced by honey.
Scallions add a lovely texture.


Indictment Is Awaiting Councilman
City Councilman Rafael Castaniera Colon, who has represented the South Bronx for 11 years, will be indicted today on charges that he paid one or more no-show workers from his City Council budget, Mr.
Colon's lawyer and city officials said yesterday.
Mr.
Colon is expected to surrender today at State Supreme Court in the Bronx, where the indictment was to be unsealed, said the lawyer, Murray Richman.
He said that he had yet to see a copy of the indictment and was uncertain of the exact charges, but that the indictment was handed up last week.


Former Staten Island School Damaged in Fire


Agassi and Capriati Bounce in Wrong Direction
It happened to Jennifer Capriati in broad daylight, and it happened to Andre Agassi in a gauzy twilight, but regardless of its timing, the unforgiving reality of a first-round exit from the United States Open yesterday dealt a homely blow to the reputations of the two most glamourous young American tennis prodigies in the business.
Capriati was numbed by a three-set loss to Leila Meskhi.
And Agassi could hardly comprehend the unflattering implications of the arduous and fruitless 6-4, 6-4, 3-6, 6-7 (3-7), 6-2 marathon in which he was undone by the latest implacable import from Sweden, 19-year-old Thomas Enqvist.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A2-9  SEPARATE TABLES, SEPARATE TALKS  Mideast peace negotiations resumed in Washington, but the real action was in Europe, where Israel and the P.L.O. worked secretly on statements of mutual recognition.
A1  THE VIEW FROM THE BENCH  In Beit Shemesh -- or House of Sun -- the Israeli-Palestinian peace agreement was the talk of the town, which is considered evenly divided among Likud and Labor Party supporters.
More park-bench commentators seemed to favor the plan that to denounce it.
A9


Man in the News; A Descendant of the Enlightenment: Paul LeClerc
If anyone knows the power that a book has to change a life, it is Paul LeClerc, who yesterday was named president of the New York Public Library.
The book was a slim one, Voltaire's "Candide," and it came into his life through an unusual messenger, a Jesuit priest who taught at Holy Cross College in Worcester, Mass.
"He read excerpts from the episode in which Candide and Cacambo fled the Jesuits, putting on the robes of the Jesuits as a disguise," said Mr.
LeClerc.
"They are caught and put in a cauldron of boiling water by savages, who say, 'Let's eat some Jesuit.' I thought that was extraordinarily clever as a text."


Faked Print May Widen Extent Of Trooper Evidence-Tampering
State law-enforcement officials said today that they had uncovered evidence that a state police investigator in Orange County falsified a fingerprint in 1991, expanding an evidence-tampering investigation that has resulted in the conviction of three state troopers in central New York State.
The new case involves Troop F in Middletown, which covers Orange County and four others.
Previous allegations of evidence tampering have focused on Troop C, based in Sidney, which covers seven counties in the Finger Lakes region.


Yankees Ordain Smith As Closer
Their bullpen has been beleaguered and maligned since April and the Yankees have searched for months for a remedy.
They might have found it last night when they obtained Lee Smith, the major league career saves leader, from St.
Louis for a Class AAA reliever minutes before the midnight deadline for completing their post-season roster.
The 35-year-old Smith, who has 398 career saves, will assume the closer role that had been held by Steve Farr for the past three seasons as the Yankees attempt to overtake the Blue Jays in the American League East by improving one of their serious weaknesses.
Farr was placed on the 15-day disabled list last night because of inflammation of his right elbow.
The Yankees said that did not influence their decision to acquire Smith.
General Manager Gene Michael said the trade would have been made even if Farr were healthy.


Confident Whitaker Is Two Parts W.B.C., and One Part N.B.A.
His eyes stare at his opponent and his mouth curls into a grin that is almost evil.
Pernell Whitaker is about to head-fake, twist his body, double-pump and snake out his left as he trains for the defense of his World Boxing Council welterweight title against Julio Cesar Chavez in the new Alamodome in San Antonio on Sept. 10.


METRO DIGEST
A BOY'S WISH GROWS ON ITS OWN
A very sick little boy recovered, but his request for cards lives on through a flurry of chain letters making the rounds of offices in Manhattan and other cities around the country.
And as thousands of cards continue to pour in, those who publicized the boy's appeal have replaced "Thank you" with "Enough already." A1.
COSTLY CABLE-RATE REDUCTION
Cable television rates change under Federal formulas intended to save consumers more than $1 billion a year.
But some cable customers in the New York metropolitan region are discovering that their bills are going up, not down.
A1.


Wine Talk
ALL chardonnays are white wines, but not all white wines are chardonnays.
Thank goodness.
Sometimes it's hard to believe that there's any other kind of white wine.
About a thousand wineries pump it out in this country alone.
All good white Burgundies -- and most of the bad ones -- are chardonnays.
The chardonnay grape has become a fixture in the vast vineyards of the French Midi; Italy now has thousands of acres of it, and Spain is planting as fast as it can.
It's the most prestigious white-wine grape in Australia and New Zealand and one day will probably predominate in the white-wine vineyards of Chile and Argentina.


For Pierce, a Tough Day in a Tougher Life
There were no Jim Pierce sightings out on Court 17 at the United States Open yesterday, but his presence was nonetheless felt, like a cloud over the head of his tennis-playing daughter.
Watching Mary Pierce battle her opponent, herself and the specter of her banished father was at times almost painful, a fascinating psychodrama stretched out over 3 hours 12 minutes.
But just when Pierce seemed on the verge of total meltdown, letting the anticipation of victory leaden her fluid and powerful strokes, Natalia Baudone served up exactly what the 18-year-old child of the soap-opera family needed.
The Italian baseliner, ranked 90th in the world, double-faulted on match point to hand Pierce a 6-0, 6-7 (2-7), 7-6 (7-5) victory and an escape into the second round.


John S. Lampe, 65, Securities Executive
John S. Lampe, a senior vice president and director of advertising for Paine Webber Inc., the securities concern, died on Monday at his house on Nantucket Island.
He was 65 and lived in Short Hills, N.J.
The cause was a heart attack, said Jeffrey Z. Taufield, a spokesman for Paine Webber.


New Addiction Approach Gets Results
SOBERED by high rates of failure in helping people quit addictions ranging from smoking to narcotics, psychologists are reporting better luck with a new approach.
The method tailors the way a psychologist approaches a patient according to exactly where in the cycle of addiction the person is at the moment.
It even allows for counseling people who deny that their addiction is a problem.
This fine-tuned strategy is proving more effective than most large-scale campaigns or fixed treatment programs that send a single message to everyone, psychologists say.


Ah, the Perfect Cup, at Home
THE coffee-bar business is a boon not only to cappuccino and espresso drinkers, but also to those who just want a really good cup of coffee.
But is it possible to brew an equally good cup at home?
Yes -- if a few basic principles are followed.
BEANS: Freshness is everything.
Once green coffee beans are roasted, their shelf life drops to about a week.
Get roasted coffee from a store that does a brisk business.
Never buy beans that are kept in open sacks; they promote staleness.
Closed containers are better.
That goes for storing beans at home, too.


Healy Finally Winds Up With Ranger Pact
When the Rangers play the Islanders this season, they will not have to worry about facing GLENN HEALY in goal.
That's the Islanders' problem now.
Healy, a free agent whose rights were acquired by the Rangers on June 25, signed with his new club yesterday.
With the trading of JOHN VANBIESBROUCK, Healy figures to split goaltending duties with MIKE RICHTER.
Healy, who earned $250,000 with the Islanders last season, signed a four-year deal worth more than $3 million, according to a person familiar with the negotiations.
Under Healy's free-agent status, the Rangers were able to match any offer by another team.
But no other offers were received by Healy.


Gooden, In Pain, Leaves The Game
No incident involving Dwight Gooden's right shoulder can be considered minor.
And no early diagnosis can be accepted as accurate.
Thus it was hardly a long shot that Gooden, who desperately wanted to salvage a record of respectability in this obscene Mets season, ended his year last night at Shea Stadium.
Gooden, who would later raise public questions about the wisdom of his dugout superiors, removed himself from the game after four innings, complaining of pain and fatigue in his shoulder.
A preliminary examination of the shoulder, which underwent rotator cuff surgery in 1991, revealed significant inflammation.


Ismail Signs Contract With the Raiders
Ragib (Rocket) Ismail signed a two-year, $3 million contract yesterday and practiced with the Los Angeles Raiders for the first time.


Corrections
A picture caption yesterday about New York City's tentative contract agreement with public-school teachers misidentified Harvey Garner.
He is interim Schools Chancellor, not a member of the Board of Education.


Judge Says Trenton Spending Fails Mandate to Aid Schools
A state judge said today that New Jersey's plan to close the gap between rich and poor school districts, mandated by the state's highest court but then weakened by a series of political compromises, was falling hundreds of millions of dollars short.
The judge said the state would have to spend an additional $450 million by the 1995-96 school year to satisfy an order by the New Jersey Supreme Court to eliminate the disparities among the districts.
But he left to the Supreme Court a final decision on whether to accept his reasoning and order a specific remedy.


CHRONICLE
Gov.
ANN W. RICHARDS of Texas turns 60 today and will get her birthday wish: a motorcycle license.
"She took the written test and driving test and passed with flying colors," BILL CRYER, her press secretary, told The Associated Press.
He said she planned to go to a Texas Department of Public Safety driver's license testing station today to be photographed and complete the paperwork.


Graham Will Backup Simms
And the winner to become the No. 2 quarterback is . . . Kent Graham.
Normally, being No. 2 is usually nothing to get too excited about, but in the competition between Graham and David Brown for the coveted backup spot to Phil Simms this is indeed a cause for excitement.
Simms is a tough 15-year veteran, but he he has missed a lot of action recently because of injuries.


A Last Goodbye to Camp, and to Just Being a Girl
For most of the 29 girls of Senior Bunks A, B and C, this was probably the last summer without boys.
They were 7 and 8 years old when they first rode down the dirt road through the woods and arrived at the big lodge, the tennis courts, the grassy field and the row of pine cabins beside the lake.
There are other places like it in the world, but this was theirs: Camp Fernwood for girls.
Sure, they can visit, or return as counselors, and they will keep up by telephone from New York, Boston, Philadelphia, Greenwich and Baltimore.
But Annie Pinkert, Brooke Alexander, Alex George, Ellyn Weinstein, Nathalie Pierre-Louis and the others can never again be campers together at Fernwood.
At 14 and 15, about to start their sophomore year in high school, they are too old.


James T. Griffin, 60, Officer and Counsel Of MacArthur Fund
James T. Griffin, vice president and general counsel of the John D. and Catherine T. MacArthur Foundation, one of the nation's richest, died on Saturday at Lutheran General Hospital in Park Ridge, Ill.
He was 60 and a resident of Chicago.
The cause was complications related to cancer therapy, the foundation said.


Top Library Post Goes To Hunter President
The New York Public Library has named as its new president Paul LeClerc, the president of Hunter College.
The announcement was made yesterday afternoon by Marshall Rose, the chairman of the library.
Mr.
LeClerc, 52, a Voltaire scholar and professor of French, will take over as head of the library on Jan. 1, one year and one day after his predecessor, Timothy S. Healy, fell dead of a heart attack at Newark International Airport.
"The members of the search committee came to a unanimous conclusion, after many meetings with Paul, that the sum of his parts was equal to the mission of the library that lies ahead of us," said Mr.
Rose.
The committee began its work in February, he said, looking at a field of more than 100 candidates.


Indians' Casino Money Pumps Up the Volume; Plan to Annex 8,000 Acres to a Connecticut Reservation Has Some Non-Indians Upset
This week, the Mashantucket Pequot Indians will open a new building that will double the size of their Foxwoods casino.
But even before the expansion, the tribe has become the region's clear center of gravity, with influence that extends from town halls to the State Capitol in Hartford.
In a small town used to small business, the casino's numbers speak for themselves.
The Pequots made $26 million in gross profits in July, just on slot machines.
By year's end, they expect to be one of the largest employers in the state, with 9,000 workers.
Their new building will give the tribe 139,000 square feet of gambling space.
They say this will give them the largest gambling operation in the Western Hemisphere, edging out the Taj Mahal in Atlantic City, which claims to be the largest casino in the world.
The power of all that money to buy up land has non-Indian residents worried.


For Tourists or Purists, Curries of Many Colors
CURRY is the chameleon of the table.
It not only comes in assorted colors -- yellow, red and green -- but also can transform an ordinary dish into something aromatic and exotic.
Shuffle the seasonings and an Indian dish can take on a Thai, Burmese or Caribbean personality.
It can even taste French.
Now, as Americans hanker for ever-spicier foods, curries of all sorts are becoming more common here.
Since 1987, according to the American Spice Trade Association, sales of cumin and turmeric, the two main components of curry, have risen strikingly, up 65 percent for cumin, which gives curry its aromatic, slightly bitter intensity, and 40 percent for turmeric, the dried root that gives yellow curry its color.
Curry's heat comes from pepper and chilies, and their sales are also skyrocketing.


CABLE TV FORMULA RAISES SOME RATES
Cable television rates change today under Federal formulas intended to save consumers more than $1 billion a year.
But some cable customers in the New York metropolitan region are discovering that their bills are going up, not down.
Who saves and who pays depends on where a customer lives and what cable services he or she uses.
Cable industry analysts say that in most cases, customers with several television sets will get the biggest price breaks.
Subscribers who take basic service -- in most places, broadcast channels and a package of services like C-Span and the Arts and Entertainment Network -- are more likely to get higher bills.


Richard Jordan, Actor, Director, Producer and Writer, 56, Is Dead
Richard Jordan, an award-winning actor who appeared in more than 100 plays on and Off Broadway and in a score of Hollywood films, died on Monday at his home in Los Angeles.
He was 56.
The cause was a brain tumor, said his daughter, Nina.


Tribe Cautioned on Request for U.S. Recognition
The Indians who have claimed large portions of Fairfield County must document their history more effectively in their application for Federal recognition as a tribe, a preliminary review by the Bureau of Indian Affairs states.
Members of the tribe, the Golden Hill Paugussetts, say they want to open a casino in the Bridgeport area if they win Federal recognition.


Culinary Secrets of a Chef and a Captain on a Turkish Cruise


Arthur J. Katzman, 88, Member Of New York's Council 29 Years
Arthur J. Katzman, who was sometimes called "the conscience of city government" during 29 years as a member of New York's City Council, died on Sunday at his home in Mountain View, Calif.
He was 88 years old.
He died in his sleep after a brief illness, his family said.


Eating Well
"EAT soup. Lose weight."
Although that sounds like the cover line on a supermarket tabloid, some research done in 1980 at the University of Pennsylvania indicated that overweight people who had soup as an appetizer ate fewer calories during the course of a meal than those who did not -- maybe because soup takes longer to eat than most foods and the liquid is quite filling.


Corn With India's Flair
AS the corn season begins to fade, there is a sense of urgency about savoring it at every possible moment.
Although corn would not ordinarily appear in an authentic dish of curried chicken, it fits perfectly, adding a pleasing sweetness and crunch.
If you wish, serve the chicken over plain rice.
To cool the heat of the curry, a yogurt-cucumber dish called raita is traditional.
And when summer is long past, this dish can still be enjoyed.
Just make it with frozen corn.
Indian Summer Chicken
8 ounces whole onion or 7 ounces chopped ready-cut onion (1 1/2 cups)  1 tablespoon canola oil  1 large clove garlic  1 tablespoon fresh or frozen ginger  1 teaspoon cumin  1/2teaspoon ground coriander  1/2 teaspoon cinnamon  1/4 teaspoon turmeric  1/8 to 1/4 teaspoon hot chili flakes  1 pound ripe field tomatoes  6 ounces skinless, boneless chicken breast  2 ears corn  1/2 cup nonfat plain yogurt  1 teaspoon cornstarch  1/8 teaspoon salt  Freshly ground black pepper to taste.
1.
Chop whole onions and saute in hot canola oil in nonstick skillet large enough to hold all the ingredients.
2.
Mince garlic and coarsely grate ginger.
Add to onion along with cumin, coriander, cinnamon, turmeric and hot chili flakes.
Stir well and continue cooking over medium heat.
3.
Wash and trim tomatoes and cut into medium chunks; stir into onion and continue cooking.
4.
Wash and dry chicken and cut into thin strips; cut strips in half and add to skillet.
5. Scrape kernels off corn and add to skillet.
6.
Stir a little yogurt into cornstarch until smooth, and blend with remaining yogurt.
Stir into skillet, and cook until mixture thickens, just a couple of minutes.
Season with salt and pepper and serve over rice.
Yield: 2 servings.
Approximate nutritional analysis per serving: 370 calories, 10 grams fat, 50 milligrams cholesterol, 275 milligrams sodium, 30 grams protein, 45 grams carbohydrate.


Alaskan Bonds Are Priced for Sale
North Slope Borough, Alaska, tentatively priced for sale to the public yesterday $173.8 million of tax-exempt general obligation bonds through George K. Baum &amp; Company.
The maximum yield is 4.60 percent for a bond due in 2000, with another due in 1998 priced to yield 4.50 percent.
For investors in a 31 percent tax bracket, the taxable bond equivalent yield is 6.67 percent for the bond due in 2000 and 6.52 percent for the issue due in 1998.


Playing Chess Against a Computer
FOR captivated fans of the new movie "Searching for Bobby Fischer" or for those long intrigued by chess but put off by the imposing reputation of the game of kings, chess computers are ideal tutors.
They are available 24 hours a day, never get tired and often play a far better game than would a dragooned friend, reluctant spouse or many a human instructor.
Some even play a mean game of speed chess, the manic form of the game that has the wild intensity of a mountain-bike race.


Investigation Of Troopers Is Widened
In recent weeks, the investigation into evidence-tampering by the New York State Police appeared to be winding down, ending an embarrassing chapter in the department's history.
But with the announcement on Tuesday that fingerprints may have been faked at a second state police barracks, the investigation is beginning anew, officials said yesterday.


Ramirez Loses Luggage, but Not His Way to Majors
Manny Ramirez hurried through the bowels of the Metrodome, late on his first day in the major leagues.
It was only 55 minutes to game time.
"Which way?" he asked a companion.


Near Miss Revives Debate Over Building on Islands
The residents of this thin sliver of sand southwest of Cape Hatteras awoke today to find their world miraculously intact, their damages limited to a few days of lost tourism business.
But if North Carolina's Outer Banks largely dodged a bullet on Tuesday, when Hurricane Emily grazed it and headed out to sea, few areas in America exemplify the knotty issues surrounding coastal development more than this string of islands jutting into the Atlantic.


Giant marketers up the ante in their coupon promotions, a nickel at a time.
A PROMOTIONAL ploy that can save consumers nickels is turning to the "double nickel."
For those whose recollection of citizens' band radio argot has grown hazy, double nickel is the number 55, as in the speed limit of 55 miles an hour.
It is also a number being seen more frequently as a face value on the estimated 310 billion cents-off coupons distributed each year in print media and by mail.


The Unobtrusive Kitchen
A KITCHEN where appliances are nearly invisible is high style nowadays.
Following this trend is General Electric's new Monogram built-in microwave oven (in picture, below), which can slip flush into any cabinet without additional space around it and has a pull-down door.
The Monogram ($749 to $1,049) also comes as a convection or combination oven.
Information is available from (800) 626-2000.
Next year, Whirlpool plans to introduce a chlorofluorocarbon-free refrigerator that will cause less ozone depletion than current models.
Recent reports that the buildup of chlorofluorocarbons has slowed worldwide should encourage many who are looking for ways they can decrease ozone-layer damage.


Emily Spares Fire Island, But Uneasiness Remains
Only hours after the foaming Atlantic waters lapped at Arlene Cohn's house and left her wondering whether it was about to crash into the ocean, Mrs.
Cohn climbed the steps to her roof deck and raised two brightly colored beach flags.
"This is to let people know that we're alive and kicking," she said this morning as she choked back tears and did her best to put a brave face on what clearly had been a stomach-churning 24 hours.


Agency Gets Miller's Hispanic Account
The Miller Brewing Company of Milwaukee said yesterday that it had selected Marti, Flores, Prieto &amp; Wachtel of Chicago to handle its Hispanic advertising account in the United States, previously at Casanova Pendrill Publicidad Inc. of Irvine, Calif., for almost three years.
Billings were estimated at $8 million.


IN HER FIRST CASE, GINSBURG DISSENTS
In her first official act as a Supreme Court Justice, Ruth Bader Ginsburg was a dissenter today, joining two other members of the Court in voting to grant a stay of execution for a condemned Texas murderer who is scheduled to die on Friday.
A majority of six Justices voted to deny the stay in an unsigned order, with Justice Harry A. Blackmun and John Paul Stevens joining Justice Ginsburg in opposition.
While Justice Ginsburg's vote did not affect the outcome, it provided the first indication that she may take a different approach to questions on the death penalty that did her predecessor, Justice Byron R. White.


Climate Change Makes Our Hurricanes Worse; Human Contribution
To the Editor:
"From Uncle Smoke to Mr. Clean" by Gregg Easterbrook (Op-Ed, Aug. 13), on the Rio de Janeiro Earth summit accords, notes that the United States has indeed initiated a stronger follow-through on the treaty than our European critics at Rio.


Newest N.H.L. Official Looking at Officiating
Brian Burke, named yesterday as a National Hockey League vice president, said one of his priorities would be to explore possible changes in how the games are officiated.
Burke, who will be the top aide for hockey operations to Commissioner Gary Bettman, said "there's a notion out there that there's got to be a better way to do it."


In an Unspared Village Morning Reveals Ruins
The air reeked of spilled gasoline and decaying fish today as people cleaned up the debris left by the surging waters and 100-mile-an-hour-plus winds of Hurricane Emily.
While the hurricane only casually brushed most of North Carolina's Outer Banks on Tuesday, it battered this tiny village nestled in the bulging crook of Hatteras Island.
Roofs were torn off more than two dozen homes, and a score of boats, both large and small, were driven aground.
Here and there, felled trees and a house toppled from its pilings littered the landscape.


Timber Country Sees a Vacation Land
When Senator Patty Murray ventured into the heart of timber country here today, she expected something less than the customary courtesy given legislators on home-state tours.
As the only Senator from the Pacific Northwest to support President Clinton's broad plan to reduce logging on Federal land, Ms.
Murray was prepared for jeers and worse.
To her surprise, she found a community trying to transform itself from one based on cutting down giant trees to one where visitors would come to spend money to see the standing forest and nearby sea life.


Bench-Warmer Brings Game-Winning Blow
Before tonight, the batted ball John Patterson was best known for was the 1992 spring training foul ball that screamed into the California Angels' dugout and hit Matt Keough in the head, forcing brain surgery.
Tonight, Patterson hit a ball that gave San Francisco a critical 3-2 victory over the Atlanta Braves and gave the Giants more breathing room atop the National League West.


Yankees Straying Farther Away From Blue Jays
Bob Wickman did not enter last night's game in an enviable position.
Paul Assenmacher had left a mess.
The bases were loaded with White Sox, there were two outs and Frank Thomas was batting.
It was the eighth inning of a 2-2 game and it was the most pivotal at-bat of the night.
The Yankee right-hander wanted to throw fastballs on the inside corner to Thomas and not let the Chicago slugger extend his arms, as he had done when he homered to right field off of Scott Kamieniecki in the third.
But Wickman followed his instructions too literally.
His second fastball tailed inside and glanced off of Thomas's left hand to force home Bo Jackson with the lead run.


Accounts
*
Randalls Food Markets Inc., Houston, to Fogarty &amp; Klein/Winius Brandon, Houston, to handle advertising and public relations for its newly acquired Tom Thumb supermarket chain in the Dallas, Fort Worth and Austin, Tex., areas, previously handled by the Richards Group, Dallas.
Fogarty, which already handles the Randalls supermarkets account, was awarded Tom Thumb, with billings estimated at $7 million to $10 million, without a review. *
Scientific American Inc., New York, to Dorritie Lyons &amp; Nickel Inc., New York, as the first agency to handle advertising and promotion for a new bimonthly publication, Scientific American Science and Medicine.
Billings were not disclosed.


AT BOOT CAMP WITH: Staff Sgt. Glenn Hill; He Who Barks Also Listens
NOT long ago, Staff Sgt.
Glenn Hill rented a video of "A Few Good Men" for the 69 men he supervises at boot camp on this storied marsh island, where for 78 years young recruits have come in raw and scared and gone out marines.
"I loved that movie, I really did," said Sergeant Hill, the senior drill instructor in charge of First Batallion, Delta Company, Platoon 1069 here.
"And I know guys like the Jack Nicholson character. But we're not all like that. You have guys who are willing to sit down and listen, and the ones that will sit down and listen can get a lot more accomplished than the ones who say it's my way or no way."


Topics of The Times; After Bell Bottoms, What?
Back in the 60's Bob Dylan proclaimed that the times they were a-changin'.
Anybody with the temerity to write an anthem about the years that followed would have to observe that the times they are a-recyclin'.
Ever since that exuberant burst of chutzpah called the counterculture, new ideas about how to dress have been dredged up from earlier times.
"Bonnie and Clyde" led to a craze for Depression-era fashion, complete with longer skirts, funny hats and double-breasted suits.
Then came 40's fever, as vintage clothing stores cashed in on the manic search for ever-more-frumpy flowered housedresses.
The 50's had their day too.
Poodle skirts were a hot item; ties narrowed down, and goofy-looking pointy shoes appeared on the feet of the trendy.


No Bail in Gang Case
The 27-year-old reputed leader of the powerful Fuk Ching gang, Guo Liang Chi, who was arrested in Hong Kong last week in connection with two murders in New York's Chinatown in January, asked today to be released on $64,000 bail.
But Michael Hill, the Hong Kong magistrate, simply shook his head and chuckled.
Mr.
Guo responded with an angry outburst and indicated that he would renew his request next week.
But the magistrate warned Mr.
Guo the request would be "a complete waste of time."


Review/Pop; A Serene Voice on the Quiet Side of Jazz Tradition
Comfort and security are not qualities one ordinarily associates with jazz singing.
But Carol Sloane, a superb and underappreciated performer who has been plowing along steadily for more than three decades, projects the sort of serene musical overview and common sense that many better-known singers struggle for a lifetime to attain without ever finding.
Ms.
Sloane, who is appearing at Fat Tuesday's (190 Third Avenue, at 17th Street, Manhattan) through Sunday, has a warm, smoky alto with some pleasingly rough edges and a delicately spinning vibrato.
Utterly without pretension, she tends toward the quiet side.
Everything she does seems shaped by experience and by a cleareyed appreciation of the jazz vocal tradition.


Corrections
The Campus Journal article on the Education page on July 21 referred incorrectly to an incident that touched off a dispute over the handling of rape allegations at the University of California at Santa Cruz.
As the article reported, a Santa Cruz student said she had been raped by two male students after a party in December; contrary to the article, she did not tell the authorities that she had willingly had sex with a third.


CHRONICLE
DEE DEE MYERS was talking on the phone to a reporter yesterday when the door to her office opened and Gen.
COLIN POWELL, the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, stepped in and began singing.
General Powell sang a chorus of "Happy Birthday" to the White House press secretary while her staff laughed and clapped.
Ms.
Myers, who turned 32 yesterday, said she was "flabbergasted" by the appearance of the general.


Children Mimic the Violence on TV; The Roman Example
To the Editor:
Patrick Cooke argues (Op-Ed, Aug. 14) that past societies survived the effects of new technologies, and that we will also survive television.
He brings in Socrates, movies and comic books to defend his point.


Irvan to Drive Allison's No. 28 Ford in Race
ERNIE IRVAN has been selected to drive the No. 28 Ford of the late Davey Allison on the Nascar Winston Cup circuit, three television stations reported yesterday.
Irvan was released from his contract with MORGAN McCLURE and will drive at Darlington, S.C., WSOC-TV in Charlotte, N.C., reported.
WBTV in Charlotte reported that Irvan still had to finalize the deal to buy out his contract from McClure for the No. 4 Kodak car.
JEFF PURVIS of Clarksville, Tenn., an ARCA driver, is slated to replace Irvan, the stations said. (AP)


Krone, Out 6 Months, Faces Further Surgery
Julie Krone underwent surgery yesterday to repair her fractured right ankle, but her surgeon said that a second operation would be needed next week to complete the job and predicted that the 30-year-old jockey would not ride again for at least six months.
"This is not a typical athletic injury," said the surgeon, Dr.
Frank Ariosta, director of orthopedic surgery at Staten Island University Hospital.
"It is more like what you see in a car or plane accident. Since she is a world-class athlete, we have to do the best we can to put her ankle back together so that she can use it again."


U.S. Consumer in July Spent More With Less Pay (Again)
American consumers increased their spending for the fourth straight month in July, the Commerce Department reported today, a sign that the economy continued to grind ahead slowly.
The latest rise, four-tenths of 1 percent, came despite an overall decline in income that reflected the costs of the Midwest flooding.


Intuit and Chipsoft to Merge
Intuit Inc. and Chipsoft Inc. said today that they had agreed to merge in a stock swap valued at about $225 million.
Intuit, the leading producer of personal-finance software, had fended off an assault by the Microsoft Corporation on its core product, Quicken.
Chipsoft markets Turbotax and Macintax individual tax-preparation software and the Turbotax Proseries for professionals.


Schools Reopen in Town That Made Them Close
It is the first day of school here, but to many people in this sprawling piney-woods town it already has the grim feeling of last March, when the school system ran out of money and had to shut down three months early.
In Kalkaska, which got national attention when the schools were closed, students, teachers and parents need no reminder that funds are short again this year.
For one thing, there are hardly any school buses in this far-flung, 440-square-mile district.


Essay; The Separate Peace
When Menachem Begin came down from Camp David, I asked him if he had not gone too far in accepting the phrase "legitimate rights" of Palestinian Arabs.
He countered with a biblical allusion: "Has my right hand lost its cunning?"
Begin knew that the "legitimate" right of Arabs was to self-government, control of local affairs; he doubted that the P.L.O. would settle for autonomy but would demand sovereignty over Israel's Judea and Samaria, to him an illegitimate claim.
Begin was right: The arrogant P.L.O. rejected its chance to work out self-rule in the disputed territories.


COMPANY NEWS: A Verse and a Phone Call; Greeting Cards With a Different Ring
So you think you're hip to the Information Age and you've heard that telephones, television and computers are converging into a multimedia device.
That isn't the half of it.


Wilander Satisfied In Own Satellite Tour
They were waiting, together, for a security escort from the player's lounge to Court 16, a hundred yards or so away at the National Tennis Center.
The players said nothing to each other, not so much as hello, how are you?
Finally, the tournament worker became distracted with something else and just waved the players off.
"Go ahead by yourselves," he said.


Ruling Puts New Jersey in Eye of School-Financing Issue
A court decision handed down here on Tuesday kept the phones ringing nearly nonstop today 1,800 miles away in a Denver office that is a nationwide clearinghouse for information about school financing.
Most calls came from states that have ended up on a path that New Jersey has been traveling for two decades: a cycle of litigation over public school financing, driven by questions rooted in state constitutions on spending disparities per pupil between rich and poor districts.


Garden Q. &amp; A.
What Deer Won't Eat
It seems that every week, letters arrive lamenting the feeding habits of deer (and complaining that some of the plants I mention are only expensive deer food).
In an effort to determine what deer find tasty and what they do not, David H. Chinery, the Cornell Cooperative Extension agent in Westchester County, recently polled a local group of master gardeners and compiled a list based on their observations.
Although many factors determine what a deer will eat, like the time of year and the size of a herd, Mr.
Chinery said he was surprised to discover that there are quite a few flowers they rarely eat.
The survey indicates these include cleome, four-o'clock, verbena, heliotrope, globe thistle, goatsbeard, coreopsis, verbascum, Jacob's ladder, bee balm, ajuga, lily of the valley and wisteria.


The Coliseum's Nocturnal Homeless; After a Sweep at Columbus Circle, a Smaller Group Returns
Two years after New York City swept away a semipermanent encampment of about 40 homeless people at Columbus Circle, homelessness has returned -- with a subtler, quieter rhythm -- to the area in front of the Coliseum.
Every day at 6 A.M., a maintenance worker sweeps by, and six or eight men and women fold their blankets and boxes and wander off for the day.
They return at night, some to work at a nocturnal can redemption center on the Coliseum's sidewalk that pays half price, a nickel for two cans, to a scavenging army of other homeless people.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.31
3.19
3.21
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
2.99
2.99
3.13
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.09
3.10
3.20
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
5.04
5.04
6.03
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
6.08
6.09
7.37
TELEPHONE BONDS
7.00
7.00
8.47
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
5.57
5.60
6.30
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


CHRONICLE
A shaggy bear story:
This one may not be a constituent or even have a vote, but never mind, Senator CONRAD BURNS, a Republican of Montana, has come to the aid of a grizzly bear in Alaska.
The bear, a 3-year-old male weighing an estimated 250 pounds and living in Denali National Park, was to have been destroyed last month after he made a third foray into barrels and trash cans in Kantishna, a private enclave in the middle of the park.
Park officials deemed him an incorrigible scavenger and, therefore, a danger to human visitors.


Climate Change Makes Our Hurricanes Worse; In Andrew's Wake
To the Editor:
A year ago -- in the early morning of Aug. 24 -- Hurricane Andrew devastated large portions of southern Dade County, Florida.
It was the most expensive natural disaster in American history.
In the aftermath, your newspaper published an advertisement alerting readers to the tragedy in our community.
Those readers opened their hearts and pocketbooks to help Andrew's shattered victims begin to rebuild.


A Job-Oriented Defense: Protecting the American Work Place
The Pentagon plans to spend billions over the next five years on weapons that it concedes have as much to do with protecting jobs and technology as with protecting America.
As it confronts the task of shrinking the armed forces in the post-cold war world, the Clinton Administration is taking an approach that combines economics and politics with military necessity.
The long-range plan announced today by Defense Secretary Les Aspin would use the huge Pentagon budget to keep alive production lines and specialized military technologies that it fears would otherwise disappear.


Thomas Torments Yankees Again
If the Yankees were not convinced before, perhaps they are now.
For Frank Thomas, with just about every swing at Yankee Stadium this week, is doing his best to make a lasting impression.
Tuesday night, he used a two-run first-inning home run to get the Yankees' attention and, along the way tie a Chicago White Sox record for home runs, with 37.


Stealth Jets Elude Broncos' Radar Grid
If nothing else, the Jets accomplished one goal in their 0-4 preseason.
Their performances left Denver Coach Wade Phillips baffled heading into Sunday's regular-season opener with the Jets at Giants Stadium.
"I don't know what they were trying to do offensively," Phillips said.
"I don't know whether they were working on things for the preseason or the regular season."


3 Patients Die In Explosion At Hospital
A faulty respirator supplying oxygen to an elderly woman at Maimonides Medical Center in Brooklyn exploded early yesterday morning, killing the woman and two other patients, the Fire Department said.
A fire official said hospital engineers had worked on the respirator several hours before the explosion, after nurses and other workers complained that it was giving electrical shocks.


Bagel Poster Wins Outdoor Ad Contest
An outdoor advertising idea for selling bagels took top honors last night in the Gannett Outdoor Group's fourth annual Creative Challenge contest.
The idea that won the grand prize of $10,000 was submitted by two employees at D'Arcy Masius Benton &amp; Bowles in New York.
Joanna D'Avanzo, an art director, and Danielle Becker, a copywriter, created a poster for Lender's Bagels showing a dry piece of toast with a hole cut out in the middle.


Man Shot on Subway
Fernando Muniz awoke about 11:20 A.M. on an A train in Queens yesterday when a youth sitting nearby was attacked by teen-agers, but instead of looking the other way, he interceded and saved the youth from serious injury, the police said.
One of the teen-agers, Kris Allen, shot Mr.
Muniz in the neck, but he pursued Mr.
Allen and an accomplice through the Howard Beach subway station until they were caught by transit police officers, said Albert O'Leary, a spokesman for the transit police.
Mr.
Muniz, 23, was listed in stable condition at Jamaica Hospital.
Mr.
O'Leary said Mr.
Muniz was on a work-release program from Queensboro Correctional Facility.


Children Mimic the Violence on TV; Flight Into Sex
To the Editor:
We at Inwood House, a 163-year-old youth-serving agency, applaud Bob Herbert's "Violence and the Young" (column, Aug. 15) and would add that the climate of violence has another, less obvious but equally pernicious effect on the lives of young people.


Market Place; In Japan, One Public Offering, Many Consequences
The Tokyo Stock Exchange on Friday will witness a relatively rare event -- the initial public listing of a fast-growing technology start-up.
The start of trading in DDI Corporation, a long-distance and cellular telephone company, is part of a revival in initial public offerings that is beginning in Japan as the stock market seems to have recovered somewhat from its slump of the last two years.


Architects Go To the Ballpark
ANYONE thinking of moving a baseball team (George Steinbrenner, are you reading this?) might want to see the exhibition "Field of Dreams: Architecture and Baseball," which documents recent trends in baseball-park design, particularly ones in the old-fashioned mode.
The show is at the National Art Museum of Sport in Indianapolis through Oct. 14.
It consists of drawings, models and photographs, and will travel through 1995.


Arms Traffickers Use Latin Nations as Dodge
When documents from this Andean country ordering eight Russian T-72 battle tanks crossed the desk of the Foreign Ministry last fall in Moscow, the request seemed somewhat out of line.
This landlocked nation is not in a war, it has only a few outdated tanks, its military needs are mainly in the area of light equipment and helicopters to fight drug traffickers, and it has an annual military budget of about $120 million.
The eight Russian tanks would have cost more than $200 million.


Port Elizabeth Journal; The New South Africa Puts the Old One on Trial
Gen.
Christoffel van der Westhuizen, chief of military intelligence, is the keeper of white South Africa's secrets and to many of his compatriots a symbol of the old order's immunity from public scrutiny.
Nyameka Goniwe, the widow of a black campaigner against apartheid whose scorched and mutilated body was found lying on a bleak prairie, is the keeper of an eight-year-old sorrow and a symbol of the black thirst for justice.


State Sues To Require Breakfasts At a School
The state requested a court order today that would force the Meriden Board of Education to start a breakfast program at an elementary school with a large number of students from poor families.
While stressing that he was acting with great reluctance, the State Attorney General, Richard Blumenthal, said that the 501 students at the John Barry School would suffer "irreparable harm" if a breakfast program were not begun immediately, as required under a state law adopted this summer.


Old Enemies Forget Past
Kenny Anderson and John Starks finally met on a basketball court again -- this time, at least, as friends.
The last time, Anderson's season was ended after he suffered a broken right wrist while being fouled hard by Starks in a Knicks-Nets game at the Meadowlands on Feb. 28.
With the loss of their star point guard, the Nets went into a tailspin and initially there was bad blood between the players.
Both say they worked it out long ago.


People
*
Robert J. McClowry, 41, senior vice president and management director of the Ford Dealer Advertising Associations at J. Walter Thompson Detroit, was named to the additional position of executive managing director at the Regional Advertising Group at J. Walter Thompson Co., which oversees regional and local advertising accounts like the Ford dealer associations and Reebok International.
He succeeds Hugh Trenkemp, 54, an executive vice president, who will join J. Walter Thompson West in San Francisco in an unspecified capacity.


Catch It If You Can
Take the A train, or the No. 2, and if you're very, very lucky, you might get to ride on one of the new subways the New York City Transit Authority is testing.
They are scheduled for several runs a day but are snatched out of service at the slightest glitch and may not reappear for hours or even days.
The two trains -- by Kawasaki of Japan, on the No. 2 line, and by the Bombardier Corporation, based in Canada, on the A line -- have everything from on-board computerized troubleshooting to digitized-voice announcements.
The interior of the Kawasaki, left, has a crisp design by Vignelli Associates, of New York.
The contoured seats are in blue, red or yellow.


Transactions
Baseball  American League
BALTIMORE ORIOLES -- Activated Leo Gomez, infielder, and Jeffrey Hammonds, outfielder, from the 15-day disabled list.
CHICAGO WHITE SOX -- Traded Donn Pall, pitcher, to the Philadelphia Phillies for a player to be named later.
Recalled Brian Drahman, pitcher, from Nashville of the American Association.


Councilman Colon Arraigned On Charges of Stealing Funds
City Councilman Rafael Castaneira Colon of the Bronx was arraigned yesterday on charges that he stole $383,000 from his city expense budget by writing checks in the names of three phantom employees and cashed the checks.
One name that Mr.
Colon used was that of a cousin who had died in Puerto Rico four months before being removed from Mr.
Colon's payroll, the Bronx District Attorney's office said in court.
Another name was that of a sister who was paid $243,000 over six years, but who lived in Venezuela, the indictment said.
The two living people did not know about the use of their names, District Attorney Robert T. Johnson said.


Mining the Past for Inspiration
MARA SUPERIOR fires her porcelains in an outdoor gas-fired kiln at her studio in Hadley, Mass.
But she finds ideas for her teapots, vases and platters in libraries.
"I look for everything from art by Saul Steinberg to the history of Chinese porcelains," she said.
Ms.
Superior is to show some of her porcelains in "Chicago New Art Forms Exposition" at the Navy Pier in Chicago, Oct. 7 to 10.


Holiday on Monday
Monday is Labor Day.
Here are holiday schedules.
NEW YORK  PARADE: Begins at 11:00 A.M. at 44th Street and Fifth Avenue, goes up Fifth Avenue to 72d Street and across to Third Avenue.The West Indian-American Day Parade begins at 11:00 A.M. at Utica Avenue and Eastern Parkway in Brooklyn and goes along Eastern Parkway to Grand Army Plaza.
GOVERNMENT OFFICES: Closed.
POST OFFICE: Express Mail and special delivery only; main post office open at 33d Street and Eighth Avenue.
BANKS: Closed.
PARKING: Sunday rules in effect.
SANITATION: No pickups, street cleaning, or recycling.
SCHOOLS: Closed.
FINANCIAL MARKETS: Closed.
TRANSPORTATION: Buses and subways on Sunday schedule.Long Island Rail Road on a Holiday schedule.
Metro-North on Sunday schedule, with some extra rush hour service.
NEW JERSEY  GOVERNMENT OFFICES: Closed.
POST OFFICES: Express Mail and special delivery only.
BANKS: Closed.
SCHOOLS: Closed.
TRANSPORTATION: N.J.
Transit on Sunday schedule.
CONNECTICUT  GOVERNMENT OFFICES: Closed.
POST OFFICES: Express Mail and special delivery only.
BANKS: Closed.
SCHOOLS: Closed.
TRANSPORTATION: Metro-North on a Sunday Schedule, with some extra rush hour service


Avoid a Bosnian Quagmire
The Geneva peace talks have broken down once again, with Bosnian Muslim leaders refusing to sign a plan based on a three-way partition of the country unless they are allotted more territory.
Serbian and Croatian leaders insist they have made their last offer.
Either way, the new plan to end the Bosnian war so reduces Muslim territory that it's a big step backward from the earlier, flawed Vance-Owen plan.
It was that earlier plan that the Clinton Administration once pledged as many as 30,000 American troops to enforce.
But if agreement is reached, President Clinton would be mistaken to let that earlier pledge be taken as a blank-check guarantee that U.S. forces will be available to enforce the current plan.


Dow Moves Down 6.15 In Dull Trading Session
The summer doldrums descended on Wall Street yesterday, as the major stock indexes closed mixed in listless trading amid new data providing fresh evidence of a sluggish economy.
The Dow Jones industrial average of 30 stocks closed down 6.15 points at 3,645.10 after declines in both the European and Asian stock markets.
But the total market for all New York Stock exchange issues was slightly more positive, with the number of stocks rising in price outnumbering those falling by about 8 to 7.


Johnson Finds New Home as Giants Assess Theirs
As Coach Dan Reeves continued his takeover of the Giants today, Pepper Johnson, the outspoken linebacker he had banished, returned to a coach who gave him his Super Bowl roots.
Reeves, forcefully stamping his imprint on a club he has virtually dismantled, today installed Stacey Dillard as the starting nose tackle over the veteran Erik Howard.


News Corp. Buys On-Line Network
Rupert Murdoch's media conglomerate, the News Corporation, said yesterday that it had agreed to acquire Delphi Internet Services Inc., the fifth-largest on-line computer service in the United States.
Terms of the deal were not disclosed.
Acquiring Delphi will enable the News Corporation to offer many of its newspapers and magazines in electronic form, much as America Online Inc., the fourth-largest service, offers Time magazine, The Chicago Tribune, USA Today and The San Jose (Calif.) Mercury News.
Access to such content, and the financial resources of Mr.
Murdoch's organization, could help Delphi catch up with far larger competitors, such as Prodigy and Compuserve.


A Sensible Teachers' Settlement
After two years of negotiations, Mayor David Dinkins of New York City and the teachers' union have reached agreement on a new contract.
The timing of the contract can't hurt the Mayor, coming as it does before the start of the school year and the concluding phase of the mayoral campaign.
But it will also bring improvements in the teacher evaluation process and is sounder financially than the previous teachers' contract.
It's disappointing that this agreement does not include many long-term gains in teacher efficiency in the classroom.
Other labor pacts have also failed to achieve productivity gains.
Even so, Mr.
Dinkins seems to have learned a lesson from his expensive agreement with the teachers three years ago.
That contract gave them a one-year, 5.5 percent raise at a time when the city faced a severe recession, and established a precedent for other labor agreements the city could ill afford.


Uncertainty on Opening Of Schools Angers Parents
With concerns about asbestos in the classroom delaying the opening of school, many parents are angry and frustrated that they still have not been told exactly when classes will resume.
For hundreds of thousands of families who arrange their schedules and family budgets around the reopening of the public schools, the delays threaten to throw their lives into disarray.
Yesterday, New York City officials said that classes would not begin as scheduled on Sept. 9, but they failed to offer a specific date for the resumption of classes.


New York Should Follow Michigan on Single Women Golfers; Sexism at the Club
To the Editor:
Apropos your Aug. 16 article on discrimination against single women at county clubs, I encountered the same brick wall in Westchester County when searching for a place to play golf.
A male physician representative at one club, in an effort to discourage me from any legal action, informed me that "even a female judge" had been refused admittance.


Jordan to Skip His Celebrity Challenge
MICHAEL JORDAN will not play in this weekend's Michael Jordan Celebrity Challenge tournament at Hilton Head Island, S.C.
"My tournament will go on as planned," Jordan said in a statement Tuesday.
"I know that I can count on the tournament participants and fans to continue demonstrating their enthusiasm for this event as if I were there."


No Headline
"You should always buy at the top end of the market as the only way to stave off technological obsolescence. I speak to users groups all the time, and I always ask for the people who think their PC's run too fast to raise their hands. No one ever does." -- BILL MACHRONE, columnist for PC Magazine.  [ D6:6. ]


Air Mailman: Malone Pushes the Envelope
KARL MALONE may find his customized 18-wheeler a little primitive now that he has experienced a jet fighter.
The 6-foot-9-inch Utah Jazz player, whose nickname is the Mailman, crammed into the rear seat of an F-16B Fighting Falcon training jet Tuesday at Hill Air Force Base in Utah for an hourlong flight with Lieut.
Col.
TERRY CATHCART of the Air Force Reserve's 419th Fighter Wing.


Fire Destroys Store in Harlem
A fire destroyed a Woolworth's store in Harlem yesterday and burned for nearly six hours before firefighters brought it under control, but it caused only minor injuries, a Fire Department spokesman said.
Eight firefighters and three other people suffered smoke inhalation, but none was hospitalized, said the spokesman, Jerry Sanford.


Fade to Black: Pinstripes in Peril on WPIX
Free telecasts of Yankee games, a tradition for 43 years, seem headed toward extinction because WPIX and the MSG Network are at an impasse.
"This is what the consumer feared all along, the loss of all free games to cable," said Michael Eigner, the president of WPIX/Channel 11.
"I've been hopeful of making a deal, but they've made an offer and said, 'Take it or leave it.' "


Averting a Wright Wrong
ADOLPH LUKER, a retired hardware company employee and amateur woodworker, is pleased to help out.
"Beats staying home twiddling my thumbs," he says.
Mr.
Luker sits in the solarium of a restored 1908 Frank Lloyd Wright house collecting $3 admissions and selling postcards to a steady stream of visitors.
He lets it drop that there are 16 clocks in the house.
He knows because he made a wooden case for each.


Dokes Used Drugs Before Auto Accident
Former heavyweight boxing champion MICHAEL DOKES used cocaine and alcohol before running down a newspaper vendor, Broward County sheriff's investigators charged yesterday in Lauderdale Lakes, Fla.
The sheriff's office sent a recommendation to prosecutors saying Dokes, 35, should be charged with drunken driving with injury, driving on the wrong side of the road and failing to carry proof of insurance.


398 Career Saves Join The Yankees' Bullpen
The Yankees, in their increasingly maddening fashion, kept steadfastly on an even keel yesterday.
"I don't know if it improved our club," Manager Buck Showalter said, mulling the acquisition of Lee Smith, the major leagues' career leader in saves.
"We lost Steve Farr and added Lee Smith."


Arthur J. Katzman, a Councilman In New York 29 Years, Dies at 88
Arthur J. Katzman, who was sometimes called "the conscience of city government" during 29 years as a member of New York's City Council, died on Sunday at his home in Mountain View, Calif.
He was 88 years old.
He died in his sleep after a brief illness, his family said.


Bullpen by Committee Gets Chairman in Smith
Lee Smith did not arrive in the Bronx for last night's game because of family commitments, but there was ample speculation about the significant impact he could have in the final month of the season.
Obtaining Smith from the St.
Louis Cardinals for a minor league pitcher made so much sense that the Yankees could not be faulted for drooling about the near future.
With the Yankee bullpen struggling with the worst earned run average in the American League, General Manager Gene Michael finally made a major addition minutes before Tuesday's midnight deadline for solidifying post-season rosters.
It could or could not be the difference for the Yankees in the race in the East, but it will surely make the last four and a half weeks more intriguing.


90's Hot Rod: A Home Computer, Loaded
Barbara Belford, an author in New York, decided recently to get a new personal computer to replace her six-year-old model.
She consulted a computer expert, a friend who advised her that since she would use it mainly for writing and editing, she didn't need anything too fancy.
So much for reasoned advice.
Ms.
Belford bought a "screamer," a machine equipped with a turbocharged microprocessor, a hulking hard disk for storing a library of programs and a compact disk player that can reproduce everything from dictionaries to movies.


A Poolside Debate Over Breast-Feeding Etiquette
BREAST-FEEDING babies alfresco has, over the years, become as routine at the Maplewood town pool as swimming and sunbathing.
And, with apologies, town leaders issued a policy statement yesterday saying it was welcome, even encouraged.
Period.
Just, kindly, be discreet, they asked.


Climate Change Makes Our Hurricanes Worse
To the Editor:
Your Aug. 18 report on preparedness for the hurricane season on the East and Gulf Coasts in the aftermath of 1992's Hurricane Andrew and your Aug. 19 article on building a house to withstand a hurricane both neglect climate.
Scientists and insurance companies alike are concerned that the increased intensity, frequency and cost of storms may be related to the climate changes caused by global warming.


Bonds Sluggish Ahead of Jobs Report
The lull has begun.
It is the week before Labor Day, and the Labor Department will release the July employment report tomorrow.
So traders and investors are either away or sitting on their hands, and little is happening in the bond market.
In moderate trading yesterday, prices and yields barely budged.
By late in trading, the price of the 30-year bond managed to gain 3/32 , which was enough to push the yield down to 6.08 percent, setting another in a growing string of 20-year lows.
Price and yield move in opposite directions.


In Ex-Soviet Lands, U.S. Must Use Caution
To the Editor:
"U.S. Cavalry for Soviet Borders?" (editorial, Aug. 23) is right to call for a serious assessment of the situation on the periphery of the former Soviet Union before there is any United States involvement -- whether it be negotiation or peacekeeping.


Kelley Oil's Stock Plunges On Report of Well's Output
Shares in the Kelley Oil Corporation plunged yesterday after the company announced that production from an important oil and gas well had fallen after the company used a treatment intended to increase the well's output.
The announcement was the latest in a string of bad news about the well that ended what had been a rapid run-up in the stock price.
Since April, when Kelley announced its discovery in Louisiana's Ouiski Bayou field, the stock price quadrupled on expectations that the field would prove an enormous find.


INSIDE
Dying Hurricane Left Wake Of Destruction and Criticism After a brief but destructive assault on North Carolina's Outer Banks, Hurricane Emily curled back into the Atlantic to die.
But as the hard-hit village of Buxton began cleaning up, environmentalists' criticism of coastal development intensified.
Page D20.
Yeltsin Suspends Rival
Boris N. Yeltsin suspended his Vice President and rival, Aleksandr V. Rutskoi, saying his accusations of corruption were damaging.
Page A3.
Revival Plans for 2 Airlines
Delta and American are considering layoffs and other cutbacks to revive their finances.
Delta also may start a no-frills airline.
Page D1.
Face of Illegal Immigration
Contrary to common images that most illegal immigrants are Chinese boat people and Latino laborers, the major groups in New York are from Ecuador, Italy and Poland.
Page B1.
Revival Plans for 2 Airlines
Delta and American are considering layoffs and other corporate changes to revive their finances.
Delta may start a no-frills airline, and there is speculation that American may spin off some operations.
Page D1.
Hollywood in Venice
The presence of U.S. films and film makers at the Venice Film Festival has fostered new energy for the event's 50th season.
Page C13.


Magic Ambassador or Ambassador Magic?
MAGIC JOHNSON made his first appearance as an international spokesman for the National Basketball Association at a sporting goods fair yesterday in Munich, Germany.


Of Parquet and Sinatra: A Waldorf Tour
NEVER mind how the other half lives.
How about the decimal points, the one person in 10,000 or 25,000?
How do these pinpricks in the population manage when they're away from home?
What's it like to be the President of the United States or the Queen of England or, for that matter, Frank Sinatra and check into a hotel?
Let's say the Waldorf-Astoria.
Next Thursday, 50 men and women will get a chance to glimpse exactly how these people -- and numerous others of similar ilk or bank account -- live when they're in New York.
The $500-a-person contributors to the New York Landmarks Conservancy will participate in what is modestly being called "The Tour of the Century."


Children Mimic the Violence on TV
To the Editor:
If Patrick Cooke, author of "TV Causes Violence? Says Who?" (Op-Ed, Aug. 14), had raised a few children or been more observant, he might have noticed that all children are parrots and most teen-agers are sheep.
He might have noted, too, that young boys don't pick flowers and girls don't reach for the nearest gun.


Oilers Trade Simpson to the Sabres
The Edmonton Oilers traded CRAIG SIMPSON, a free-agent forward, to the Buffalo Sabres yesterday for a wing, JOZEF CIERNY, a minor league prospect and a draft pick.
Simpson, whose signing with the San Jose Sharks earlier in the summer was nullified by the National Hockey League's commissioner, GARY BETTMAN, heads to the Sabres with career totals of 235 goals and 235 assists in 588 games.


Books of The Times; The Real Dirt About a Rock Hit of Ill Repute
Louie Louie  The History and Mythology of the World's Most Famous Rock 'n' Roll Song  By Dave Marsh Illustrated. 245 pages.
Hyperion. $19.95.
Pop culture must provide for the dumbest as well as the smartest of its fans, which makes loving it easy but explaining it hard.
Nothing illustrates this better than American music and, as Dave Marsh's "Louie Louie: The History and Mythology of the World's Most Famous Rock 'n' Roll Song" shows, no music illustrates this better than rock.
It is the biggest, the rudest and the youngest (just reaching 40), and everything in it is made from scraps of something else.
Scraps of music, naturally: blues riffs, hillbilly twangs, Broadway ballads, Latin beats and jazz band jitterbugging.
But scraps of style and attitude too: hipster nonchalance, beatnik arrogance, nerd angst, slut defiance and that ineffable blend of glory, misery, titillation and sweaty desperation that is and ever shall be Teen Spirit.


At Venice's Purist Film Festival, Hollywood Provides the Pizazz
The Venice Film Festival was founded in 1932 and, with interludes related to non-filmic intrusions (World War II, the 1968 student disruptions), it is celebrating its 50th season this summer.
A good deal of star power, most of it American, has been mustered for the occasion, along with a good deal of quasi-Quixotian idealism, most of it anti-American.
But with budget cuts and all-purpose national corruption and the imminent retirement of the festival's 73-year-old director, Gillo Pontecorvo -- who just took over last summer -- all is not bright here on the Lido.
Except for the sun, which helps make almost any visit to Venice in September well worthwhile.


Paying a Big Price To Watch the Open
It's already common knowledge that the prices for food and beverages are outrageous at the United States Open.
But people without tickets may be surprised at the "deals" available for a day or night pass.
Scalping is illegal in New York, but scalpers roam the No. 7 subway train all day selling tickets for the day and passes for the holiday weekend.
The average price seems to be about $40 per ticket, though the scalper will start out asking for $60.
This weekend's tickets will cost more.


Economic Scene; After the floods, seeking a more comprehensive rebuilding policy.
WITH the Mississippi in retreat, all that's left to do is honor the indomitable spirit of the river valley dwellers and help them rebuild.
Or is it?
Surely this charitable impulse sums up the view of the great majority of Americans.
And it translates into a political imperative for Washington, which is dutifully scrambling to restore the river's protective levee system and parcel out some $5.7 billion in aid.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article yesterday about the impact of asbestos testing on the scheduled reopening of New York City schools, and a front-page summary of it, named the new Schools Chancellor incorrectly.
He is Ramon C. Cortines.


Cabdriver Shot in Bronx After Motorist Is Cut Off
One of the random confrontations between motorists that occur every day on the streets of New York City erupted into violence yesterday when a medallion cabdriver was shot in the head after he apparently cut off another motorist in the Bronx.
The cabdriver, Harry Pierre-Louis, 34, was in critical condition at Bronx Municipal Hospital Center after a bullet came crashing through his rear window, the police said.


COMPANY BRIEFS
BANCO CENTRAL HISPANOAMERICANO S.A., Madrid, said it had bought a 20 percent stake in the Mexican commercial bank Banco Internacional de Mexico for $183 million.


Next Challenge for Rabin: Selling the Accord to Israelis
On the streets and in the political back rooms, the Israeli Government has begun its campaign to sell the tentative peace agreement with the Palestinians to an uncertain public and to Parliament.
Senior officials predict success in both arenas.
But they acknowledge that sizable blocks of skeptics still need to be persuaded that handing over partial authority to Palestinians in the Gaza Strip and West Bank, and giving a seal of approval to the long-hated Palestine Liberation Organization, will not put them in peril.


Stella Kramrisch, Indian-Art Expert And Professor, 97
Stella Kramrisch, an authority on Indian art, a teacher and a curator, died on Tuesday at her home in Philadelphia.
She was 97 and lived near Philadelphia.
Born in Mikulov, Austria, on May 29, 1896, Professor Kramrisch earned a doctorate of philosophy in Vienna in 1919.
When she became the first professor of Indian art at the University of Calcutta in 1923 and published "Principles of Indian Art" in 1924, Professor Kramrisch laid the foundations for the systematic study of Indian art.


A Paper Boom in Real Estate Investments
A California home builder recently raised a pile of money by selling notes that promised a startlingly high 10.375 percent interest rate with a rating below investment grade.
Using the draw of high yield, the home builder collected $155 million, attracting investors to the troubled world of real estate even though the company was already behind or in default on about $143 million in loans -- a fact that was presumably reflected in the low credit rating.
A yield of around 20 percent was reportedly the draw in another real estate deal, this one from Daiwa Securities America, the American arm of the big Japanese brokerage firm.
It turned a package of nursing-home mortgages into five classes of securities: three with investment-grade ratings and two with considerably more credit risk.
One -- sold privately, and therefore not publicly described -- reportedly yielded around 20 percent.


East Europe Is a Land of Opportunity to the Mafia
Since Europe's ideological division ended, Italian investigators believe that the mobsters of the Mafia have gone east to seek new pickings.
Indeed, investigators say, their prospects seem pretty good.
For one thing, there is Western money flowing, along with an unleashed, Western ardor for getting rich quick, whether from free enterprise or narcotics or prostitution.


Vincent F. Ostrom; Executive, 80
Vincent F. Ostrom, president of the Putnam Trust Company in Greenwich, Conn., from 1959 to 1978, died on Monday in Greenwich Hospital.
He was 80.
The cause was kidney failure, said his son, Mitchell.


Calendar: Walks, Art And a Tour
Historic New York  Lower East Side Tenement Museum, 90 Orchard Street (Delancey Street); (212) 431-0233.
On Sunday, the museum will offer walking tours focusing on vaudeville in New York (at noon) and the Jewish Lower East Side (at 1 P.M.).
Other tours this month include one on Chinese heritage (Sept. 12 at 1 P.M.), religious buildings (Sept. 19 at noon), the Bowery (Sept. 26 at noon) and freed slaves in New York (Sept. 26 at 1 P.M.).
Fee for each walking tour, including museum admission, is $12; students and those 62 and older, $10.


BUDGET IS RECAST AS A BETTER PLAN
With its Republican critics on Congressional recess and not much else competing for headlines, the White House issued an economic report today that depicts its deficit-cutting labors as more muscular, and even more successful, than advertised to Congress just weeks ago.
Private economists and budget experts said the rosier description seemed reasonably credible, but cautioned that it relied on assumptions of continued low inflation and almost subterranean interest rates that have not been seen in recent decades.


Bridge
At the midpoint of qualifying play in the NEC World Team Championships here today, three American teams were well placed, with the fourth fighting to make up lost ground.
In the Bermuda Bowl contest for open teams, the United States No. 2 team took the lead in Group E by beating the overnight leaders, Poland, 18-12.
The standings were: 1st, United States No. 2, 138 victory points; 2d, Poland, 136; 3d, Netherlands, 132; 4th, Brazil, 122.


A Pitcher Can Hold a Past as Well as Flowers
THERE is a serving dish that I discovered in my grandmother's china closet not long after she died.
It is white china edged in gold, rectangular in shape, with three small ceramic fish on its lid.
It is, I have been told, the dish in which my grandmother served sardines, and it is a reasonably attractive relic from an era when people took pride in knowing what was proper.
My grandmother was a student of such rectitudinous ways, though precisely where she learned them I do not know.
Her people were horse thieves in Romania who arrived in the new land in the 1890's and tidied up their ways.
By the time I was born, my grandmother was setting her table with Irish linen and Spode china and pewter salt cellars and crystal fingerbowls presented on lace doilies.
It was all very lovely, I recall.


Review/Theater; Blown Fuse and Odd Britons Equal a Very Crowded Room
Very occasionally, a single gimmick is enough to make a play's reputation, and Peter Shaffer certainly hit on one when, nearly 30 years ago, he conceived the idea for "Black Comedy." The one-act play -- which is paired with another short Shaffer piece, "White Liars," in a revival by the Roundabout Theater Company -- ingeniously sets a social farce in the darkness of a London apartment after a fuse has blown.
The darkness, of course, exists only for the people onstage, since everything that happens after the electricity has gone, in the world of the play, is performed in a blaze of stage lights amid John Lee Beatty's vibrant Pop/Op setting.
Since its New York debut in 1967, with a cast that included Michael Crawford, Lynn Redgrave and Geraldine Page, "Black Comedy" has had a healthy life in American community and university theaters, and one can see why.
It is, for its first half-hour, almost foolproof comically.
It not only offers a novel occasion for the eternal gymnastics of elemental farce: people falling down stairs, bumping into doors and furniture and mistakenly groping each other.
It also, in showing twittish characters trying to maintain their customary social rituals in a world deprived of visual cues, coaxes the latent absurdity out of those rituals, and even the process of mixing a cocktail courts burlesque disaster.
As the evening progresses, though, it requires considerable finesse to disguise the fact that there is something sour at its center.


The Pop Life
The Next Step
Mariah Carey says she's a lot more "comfortable and confident in just being myself." So comfortable, in fact, that she's planning her first tour ever.
It will probably start in late October or November and, although no cities have been announced, she says "you can count on New York City; I wouldn't miss my hometown."


Hospital Explosion Claims Three Lives
Three people were killed when a respirator supplying oxygen to an elderly woman exploded at Maimonides Medical Center in Borough Park, Brooklyn, the Fire Department said.
Hospital engineers had worked on the machine several hours before the explosion, after nurses and other workers complained that it was giving electrical shocks, a fire official said.


Chiefs and Okoye Reach Injury Settlement
The Kansas City Chiefs have reached an injury settlement with their former 1,000-yard rusher, CHRISTIAN OKOYE, and he has left the team to continue rehabilitating his injured knee.
Okoye went home to California and expects to be ready in about three or four weeks to try out for other teams, said his agent, JACK MILLS.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A2-13  JORDANIAN LOOKS TO PEACE  A Jordanian Cabinet minister said his Government was ready to accept the outline of a future peace treaty with Israel once the Palestinians and the Israelis signed an accord on limited Palestinian self-rule.
A1  QUESTIONS OF RECOGNITION  Israeli and Palestinian negotiators ran into difficulties trying to reach a formula for mutual recognition, with the Israelis saying the P.L.O. was balking at Israel's demands for unambiguous recognition.
A1


Sonics Send Two to the Hornets for Gill
The Seattle SuperSonics yesterday traded DANA BARROS and EDDIE JOHNSON to the Charlotte Hornets for KENDALL GILL, finally completing a long-rumored deal.
The Hornets also received the option to trade their 1994 first-round draft choice for the Sonics' pick next year.
Gill, a guard who was the Hornets' first-round draft choice in 1991, averaged 16.9 points and 4.9 rebounds last season.
Gill made the deal possible when he signed a contract last week for a reported $26.6 million over seven years.


Children's Rooms That Can Change and Grow
What do children want?
In a room, they want a bed to sleep in, a chair to sit on, a desk for drawing and writing.
They want floor space to play on, a light to see and read by.
They want a place to stash their toys, an extra bed so a friend can sleep over.
And if they are old enough to know what privacy is, they want that, too.


New York Should Follow Michigan on Single Women Golfers
To the Editor:
Until May 1992, Michigan women, married and single, had the same second-class status as the single women golfers in New York who are trying to breach the barriers at country clubs (news article, Aug. 16).
They were either excluded from membership or relegated to "spouse tee times" and family dining hours.


LABOR CHIEF URGES A RETRAINING PLAN
When the Portage, Pa., factory she had worked at for 20 years shut its doors last February, Mary Ann Bertolino, a sewing machine operator, found no government assistance to enable her to train for a new occupation.
The reason was that she used to sew men's topcoats, not men's shirts or women's nightgowns.
Under the current patchwork of government programs to help workers permanently put out of jobs, the reason a worker has lost a job -- imports, military cuts, the spotted owl -- has to be the right one.
The wrong one can mean that older workers whose job skills are no longer in demand are not eligible for much more than 26 weeks of unemployment checks and a bit of counseling.


Topics of The Times; Hurricane Season -- Again
On a balmy September morning in 1938, The New York Times ran a weather forecast on the bottom of page 27 predicting "Rain and Cooler." Nothing more, nothing less.
Just a typical September day.
Twenty-four hours later most of the Eastern Seaboard -- from Cape Hatteras to Kennebunkport -- lay in shambles.
As William Manchester later described it in his book "The Glory and the Dream," 153 houses on Westhampton beach had vanished; Atlantic City, Quogue, Providence and Springfield were under water; the Shore Line of the New York, New Haven and Hartford Railroad was trying to figure out what to do with a 300-foot steamship that lay across its tracks in New London.
The great hurricane of 1938 had struck, leaving some 600 dead and 65,000 homeless in its wake.


Rosamond Cross; Headmistress, 86
Rosamond Cross, a retired head of the Baldwin School in Bryn Mawr, Pa., died on Tuesday at the Waverly Heights retirement community in Gladwyne, Pa.
She was 86.
The cause appeared to be heart failure, said Barbara Minsker, the school's director of alumnae relations.


Events: Fall Classes In Design and Folk Art
Focus on Design  Cooper-Hewitt Museum, 2 East 91st Street; (212) 860-6321.
Starting Oct. 5, the museum will offer the first of four lectures related to the exhibition "Mechanical Brides: Women and Machines from Home to Office," which continues through Jan. 2.
The fee for the series is $50; members, $40; students, $20.
Individual lectures are $15; members, $10; students, $5.
A second lecture series, about the relationship between design and mass culture, will be held Oct. 13, 20 and 27.
Fee is $30; members, $24; students, $15.
Individual talks are $10; members, $8; students, $5.


Ingersoll Appoints Top Officer
James E. Perrella, who got his start at the Ingersoll-Rand Company as a novice trouble-shooter at a drill factory in 1962, was named the company's chairman and chief executive yesterday, effective Nov. 1.
Mr.
Perrella, 58, who has served as president and been a member of the company's board for the last year, will retain his previous duties in addition to succeeding Theodore H. Black.
Mr.
Black has been chairman and chief executive of Ingersoll-Rand since 1988 and plans to retire Oct. 31 when he becomes 65.


New Chancellor's First 24 Hours in New York
Ramon C. Cortines came to New York City carrying his own bags, and he schlepped them all the way through Kennedy International Airport, smiling patiently as reporters grilled him about his plans for sex education and for confronting the asbestos crisis.
The car carrying the new schools chancellor into the city bogged down in traffic in shirt-drenching heat Tuesday evening, and when he reached his midtown hotel, a television crew blocked his way into the lobby with questions about his sexual identity.


PARENT &amp; CHILD
TO a newborn or a toddler, the thumb is an ideal source of comfort.
It's readily available, reasonably clean, and impossible to swallow.
Sucking a thumb offers young children a way to soothe themselves when they're under stress, and an aid in falling asleep.
Most children drop the habit by the time they enter kindergarten, or at least cut back on where and how much time they spend with their thumbs in their mouths.
For a few, however, thumb-sucking lingers on or even intensifies and can lead to both dental and social problems.


A Garden's Invitation Is Open to All


W.L. McGowan, 69; Led New York Union For Public Workers
William L. McGowan, a retired president of the Civil Service Employees Association, the largest statewide public-employee union in New York, died on Friday near Buffalo.
He was 69.
He suffered a heart attack at his home in Orchard Park, the union said.


Gooden's Line: One Talk, One Physical, No Worries
The clubhouse was empty yesterday.
The door to the manager's office remained closed.
The silence was deafening for a while.
The door then opened, the latest organizational summit over.
There was no screaming and no fight, and so there was a future for Dwight Gooden and Dallas Green.
Green, eager to clear the air after Gooden had publicly expressed confusion and a hint of anger over the handling of his latest shoulder trouble, had ordered the meeting with the right-hander.
Gooden, hurt physically and further wounded because he had been left to ask out of Tuesday night's start at Shea against the Astros, got his feelings off his chest.


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt  *
Federal Home Loan Bank is offering $100 million of step-up notes due in 2000 through First Tennessee.
The notes are priced to yield 4.75 percent, or about 38 basis points more than Treasury securities with a similar maturity.
If the notes are not called on or before Sept. 21, 1996, the interest rate increases to 5.50 percent for two years and to maturity at 6.60 percent for the last two years.
A basis point is one-hundredth of a percent.
*
Maricopa County, Ariz., is offering $100 million of 3.10 percent tax anticipation notes due on July 29, 1994, at a price to yield 2.80 percent through underwriters led by the First Boston Corp.
The notes are rated MIG 2 by Moody's Investors Service and SP-1+ by the Standard &amp; Poor's Corp.


On a Steamy Day, No Comfort for Bruguera and Lendl
On a day so oppressive that even the Cyclops machine went haywire from a case of heat prostration, it was unrealistic to search out Grand Slam-caliber competition on any of the courts comprising the 16-ring circus that doubles as Week 1 of the United States Open.
The reigning French Open champion, Sergi Bruguera, took a premature bow because of illness, and this Open's perennial champion, Ivan Lendl, bowed to a knee injury.
Thomas Enqvist, who conquered Andre Agassi Tuesday evening, was temporarily felled by dehydration yesterday as he queued up in the lunchroom, and Christian Bergstrom and Kenny Thorne were defaulted from their respective singles matches because of cramping.


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY  SCHOOL OPENING WILL BE DELAYED
New York City officials said that classes for the city's one million schoolchildren would not begin on time on Sept. 9 because of the asbestos crisis.
They said that they had not decided when to open schools, but that it would probably not be until Sept. 20 and possibly as late as Sept. 27.
A1.
Ramon C. Cortines, the new Schools Chancellor, was not exactly extended a warm welcome to New York City, but he seemed to shrug it off.
B3.


Honda to Hold Base Price on Accord Model
Honda is maintaining the base price of its new 1994 Accord family sedan at $14,330 -- the same as the current model -- which could provoke protectionist pressure by the Big Three auto makers, which say they expect Japanese car makers to raise prices to reflect the stronger yen.
Preparing to defend against possible attacks by Detroit's auto makers, Honda executives and engineers here explained today how they cut costs to avoid a price increase on the stripped-down Accord, modestly raised prices on other models and still expect to remain profitable.


Study Sees Illegal Aliens In New Light
Contrary to the images of Chinese boat people and Central American day laborers that dominate the public perception of New York State's illegal immigrants, the three major groups are from Ecuador, Italy and Poland.
The first complete analysis of undocumented immigrants, released yesterday by the City Planning Department, estimates that the illegal population in New York State is the second largest in the country, after California's.


Sports of The Times; Johnson Sent Packing for Speaking Out
PEPPER JOHNSON was sent packing from the Giants because his words, in the estimation of his new coach, spoke louder than his actions.
Vince Coleman, meanwhile, was shooed out of Shea Stadium because his actions spoke louder than his silence.
Two different people, Johnson and Coleman; two different situations; same ending..
One deserved.
One not.


NATO Says Alliance Is Unlikely to Grow Soon
NATO diplomats say the Atlantic alliance is highly unlikely to set a target date anytime soon for admitting Poland, Hungary or the Czech Republic as members, even though President Boris N. Yeltsin has said that Russia would not object to their joining.
With NATO still struggling to distill a new role out of the confusion of the post-cold-war era, President Yeltsin's recent comments have added an unexpected shot of yeast to the brew.
But expanding NATO's membership is not expected to be the most important item on the agenda of the NATO summit meeting that President Clinton has called for Jan. 10 in Brussels.


CHRONICLE
For $1.7 million, the PRINCESS OF WALES has bought a 20-acre farmstead in France situated near the bucolic village of Saint-Remy-de-Provence, Agence France Press reported yesterday.
She bought it from Jose van Dam, the Belgian bass-baritone, after renting it last Easter.
The six-room farmhouse, in traditional Provencal architecture, is behind a small forest and has a swimming pool (out of sight of paparazzi, it is hoped).


Corrections
Because of an editing error, a brief report in the Company News column in some editions of Business Day yesterday about the acquisition of Guardian Bancshares by Sterling Bancshares located the headquarters of Guardian incorrectly.
It is in Houston, not Los Angeles.


Dinkins Receives Endorsement of Ferrer
The Bronx Borough President, Fernando Ferrer, formally endorsed Mayor David N. Dinkins yesterday, offering the Mayor some much-needed support from an elected Hispanic official.
A day earlier, Fire Commissioner Carlos M. Rivera resigned and defected to the camp of the Mayor's opponent, Rudolph W. Giuliani, the Republican-Liberal candidate, accusing unnamed mayoral aides of being anti-Hispanic.


S.&amp; P. Financial
Financial services stocks, which move quickly on the market's ups and downs, may be an easy way to bet on the market's direction.
The stocks in the Standard &amp; Poor's financial index, which includes Merrill Lynch and American Express, have been rising almost nonstop since June, from a consolidated price of $49.83 to $57.86 yesterday.


Thompson's Ups (Catch) And Downs (Strikeout)
The images came one after the other, forming the snapshot of a brief career.
Ryan Thompson went over the center-field fence to steal a home run from the Astros in the top of the ninth.
He then struck out, overmatched by a changeup artist's fastball, with the tying run on second in the bottom of the ninth.


COMPANY NEWS: Will Mattresses Take Their Lumps?; And Now the Innkeepers Are Critiquing the Rooms
Move over Mobil and the American Automobile Association, a new entrant will start rating hotels: Days Inn of America, the economy chain that says it is the nation's largest hotel franchiser.
But instead of awarding lodging properties one to five stars (as do Mobil's guides) or one to five diamonds (A.A.A.'s Tour Books), Days Inn -- in keeping with its corporate sunburst logo -- will award as many as five sunbursts.
And rather than have independent evaluators rate a range of hotels, Days Inn's own quality-assurance department will rate only the company's 1,400 properties.


Art in Review
Gertrud and Otto Natzler 'Collaboration/Solitude'  American Craft Museum 40 West 53d Street Manhattan Through Oct. 10
Gertrud and Otto Natzler were two artists who functioned as one, but with a strict division of labor.
From the time they started working together in Vienna in the mid-1930's until Gertrud's death in California in 1971 (they immigrated in 1938), she made delicate vessels and bowls on a potter's wheel, and he devised their glazes and oversaw their firing.


On Bosnia Talks: Hoping to Bridge a Slender Gap
Despite the breakdown of the latest peace talks on Bosnia and Herzegovina, the three warring parties were apparently so close to agreement Wednesday night that diplomats here are still hopeful that Bosnia's Muslims, Serbs and Croats will try again soon to end their war.
After Bosnian Serbs rejected an earlier peace plan this spring, the immediate result was an upsurge in fighting between Serbs and Muslims and between Croats and Muslims, with the Muslims scoring their first significant military successes against the Croats in central Bosnia.


This Country Needs A Progressive Party
To the Editor:
William Safire is correct in "The Fourth Man" (column, Aug. 23) when he advocates a new political party for this country.
But not for his smug and cynical reason of neutralizing Ross Perot (who is not a real political movement anyway) and thus restrict the field of debates to the Democrats and Republicans.


Pfizer Settles Suit Over Heart Valve
Pfizer Inc. said yesterday that it had agreed to settle a class-action lawsuit involving 256 patients seeking compensation for fears that artificial heart valves would fail.
The agreement was announced as the case was about to go to the jury after a monthlong trial in Orange County Superior Court in Irvine, Calif.
With the agreement, Pfizer said there were only 26 remaining California anxiety cases and three more in other states involving functioning heart valves made by Pfizer's Shiley Inc. unit.
It said 415 similar cases had been settled earlier, including 324 in November.


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt  *
Avco Financial Services Inc., Irvine, Calif., a unit of Textron Inc., is offering $200 million of 5.5 percent notes due in 2000 at 99.724 to yield 5.55 percent through Morgan Stanley.
The noncallable issue is rated A-2 by Moody's Investors Service and A by Standard &amp; Poor's Corp. and Duff &amp; Phelps.
*
Federal Home Loan Bank is offering $213.2 million of notes due in 1996 at 100 to yield 4.17 percent through Merrill Lynch.
The issue is noncallable.


August Doledrums
Last month Senator Robert Dole's 1988 Presidential campaign agreed to pay $100,000 in civil penalties for election law violations -- the largest fine ever imposed on a Presidential campaign by the historically limp Federal Election Commission.
The Republican minority leader shrugged off the offense and criticized the commission for its slow response time.
But that trivializes a serious subject.
Mr.
Dole's campaign had accepted illegal corporate contributions, exceeded the spending limits in the important Iowa and New Hampshire primary elections and improperly used the Senator's political action committee to benefit his Presidential effort.
The campaign agreed to refund $104,000 in excessive or prohibited contributions, on top of $245,000 it had already returned.


Chips Off an Old Bloc
As the most credible minority contender for Mayor in New York City's history, David N. Dinkins overcame years of black-Hispanic political feuding to win two-thirds of the Hispanic vote in 1989 -- a vital wedge in his narrow victory over Rudolph W. Giuliani.
Yet that very success created high expectations that, both supporters and critics agree, Mr.
Dinkins has been hard-pressed to fulfill.
The defection of Fire Commissioner Carlos M. Rivera to the Giuliani camp on Tuesday was the latest in a series of bitter blows to a Mayor who had hoped to win credit for making history by naming Mr.
Rivera the first Hispanic head of a uniformed service.
Instead, he has struggled for most of his tenure to hold onto Hispanic supporters who have steadily drifted toward Mr.
Giuliani.


Once Again, Boxing World Is Hiding Behind Sunglasses
As usual, boxing has demonstrated its ability to give itself a black eye.
This time, the damage can't be stopped with a cold compress, though.
Tommy Morrison's "defense" of his World Boxing Organization heavyweight crown last Monday night against an 11th-hour replacement who calls himself the Doughboy has angered the Nevada State Athletic Commission.


Revenge Of the McEnroes
Patrick McEnroe evened a score for his brother John yesterday with a grueling 6-4, 6-3, 6-7 (5-7), 6-3 second-round victory over Paul Haarhuis of the Netherlands in a match that took 3 hours 39 minutes.
Three years ago, Haarhuis pulled off a major upset, eliminating John McEnroe -- the four-time Open champion -- in the second round here.
Yesterday, it was Patrick who finished off Haarhuis on Court 16.


Fall Is Near, School Is Not, and Chaos Looms
New York City's government, to say nothing of the parents of its one million public school students, began the monumental task yesterday of finding ways to occupy those children all day now that the asbestos crisis has delayed the opening of city schools until Sept. 20 at the earliest.
Parents began calling friends, grandparents and baby sitters and juggling their own work schedules.
Libraries and museums made plans for puppet shows and handicraft workshops.
The Dinkins administration said it would extend the city's summer programs at recreation centers and parks, and the Mayor himself offered to teach a course on public television.


Critics' Choices; Artful Activities for Summer's Wane
Art
You can count on two fingers the world-famous masterpieces of the Italian Renaissance that European governments have allowed to travel to New York City.
In 1963, in a gesture of good will, the French lent Leonardo Da Vinci's "Mona Lisa" to the Metropolitan Museum of Art; the next year the Italians sent Michelangelo's "Pieta" to town on the occasion of the World's Fair.
Now there's a third visitor that, while not nearly so legendary, deserves to be on this very short list: Andrea del Verrocchio's bronze "Christ and St. Thomas," now at the Metropolitan Museum.
The statue was unveiled in Florence in 1483, 15 years after it was commissioned by Lorenzo de' Medici for an exterior niche of Orsanmichele.
Verrocchio's brilliance is splendidly evident in this astounding work, which Vasari saw as having "all the grace and divinity that art can convey." Do not miss it.


On Abortion-Clinic Rounds: Forceps and Bulletproof Vest
It was 7:45 A.M., and still cool, but as Dr.
Bernard Smith drove his Jeep to his abortion clinic, he was sweating.
It was his bulletproof vest that was making him hot.
Dr.
Smith has been performing abortions for more than 10 years, much of the time driving a weekly 600-mile circuit of abortion clinics in three states.
As fewer and fewer abortion doctors are willing to put up with the harassment and tension in their own communities, such circuit riders have become far more common.


Critics' Choices; Artful Activities for Summer's Wane
Classical Music
Music history can be peculiar.
In their own time, the theater songs of the 1920's through the 50's were thought of as not quite respectable.
Clever, certainly, and urbane, attractive and even catchy; but not in the same class as Schubert or Brahms Lieder.
That was then.
Now theater songs by George Gershwin, Cole Porter, Jerome Kern and Leonard Bernstein are being redefined as the heart of the American art-song repertory.
And the theater works, for that matter, are being performed as operas.
One could argue the merits of this trend and ponder its ramifications for the relationship between popular and concert music.
But in a way, argument and pondering are beside the point, because history has made its move.


Review/Film; Life and Death at the Edge: The Story of a Drag Queen
International Chrysis, the Bronx-born drag queen who is the subject of the documentary film "Split," had long red hair, a ferociously engaging smile and oversized breasts that she liked to show off in New York City nightspots like La Vie en Rose and Club 82.
Although friends compared her to Rita Hayworth, as shown in "Split" she more closely resembled a plump Raquel Welch.
Chrysis's breasts, which she jokingly christened Johnson and Johnson, helped bring about her death three years ago at the age of 39.
They were injected with wax that hardened into painful lumps and that eventually seeped into her bloodstream.
Along with her unregulated use of female hormones, that seepage contributed to a fatal case of liver cancer.


Jury Pool to Be Expanded by 5,000 for Trade Center Trial
A Federal judge has ordered that 5,000 extra people be called as prospective jurors in the World Trade Center bombing case, one that promises to be one of the most closely followed criminal trials in New York City history.
The 5,000 extra summonses -- one of the largest single issues ever made in Federal Court in Manhattan -- more than doubles the pool of prospective jurors called each month to the courthouse in lower Manhattan.
It is 10 times the number of people called for the trial of John Gotti in Federal Court in Brooklyn last year.


Review/Film; Scenes From the Middle of a Marriage
Shambling, modest and really very likable in its sly, slow-moving fashion, Les Blair's "Bad Behavior" neither looks nor sounds like what it actually is.
This conversational domestic comedy began as a kind of actors' exercise, with its improvised characterizations woven together to form a loose-knit story.
Like Mike Leigh's "Life Is Sweet," a film it gently resembles, Mr.
Blair's comedy of manners has a keen sense of the absurd and takes a compassionate view of its fretful characters.
Though "Life Is Sweet" was much more sharply focused, Mr.
Leigh's work often comes to mind as "Bad Behavior" unfolds.
This story is centered on the marriage of Gerry McAllister (Stephen Rea), a wry and perpetually disheveled urban planner, and Ellie (Sinead Cusack), his exasperated wife of many years.
The McAllisters, who are Irish, live in North London, which is only one of the many reasons they feel ill at ease.
Another is that early in the film, Ellie is told by the annoying Howard Spink (Philip Jackson) that her house is badly in need of repairs.
Never all that peaceful to begin with, the place is soon taken over by contractors.


Boy, 8, Injured in Hit-and-Run
An 8-year-old boy was seriously injured near his house in Brooklyn on Wednesday night when he was struck by a car that carried him on its hood for more than 100 feet before the child fell off, the police said yesterday.
The car then sped off.
The boy, Jamel Ashe, was in critical condition in Kings County Hospital with head injuries and a broken leg, the authorities said.


Clinton to Name Republican To Aid in Selling Trade Pact
The Clinton Administration plans to announce on Friday that William Frenzel, a former 10-term Republican Representative from Minnesota, will join the White House campaign for Congressional approval of the North American Free Trade Agreement, White House officials said today.
Mickey Kantor, the United States Trade Representative, said at a news conference today that the long-expected announcement of a Republican advocate for the agreement would be made on Friday.
Other White House officials said the Administration had selected Mr.
Frenzel, who served in the House from 1971 to 1991, including 15 years on the Ways and Means Committee.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Market Place; Investors are attracted by the News Corporation's big picture.
SOMETIMES a company's performance moves a stock and sometimes perception about its potential is the driving force.
Potential is pushing up stock in the News Corporation.
Alan Kassan, a media analyst at Morgan Stanley, believes that the News Corporation is out front in creating a global television network.
It has B Sky B, a satellite television service in Britain, and Fox Broadcasting in this country, and recently added Star TV, the pioneering Asian satellite television service.
That puts it ahead of both Viacom International, with MTV, and Turner Broadcasting System, with Cable News Network.


Volunteers Push the Search for a Missing Girl, 12
Two weeks ago Sara Anne Wood set out on a short bike ride, a milelong trip between her home and the church here where her father is pastor.
She never got there.


Restaurants
"Lunch for two?" There is a vague snicker.
"Not a chance. We're booked for weeks." At the next restaurant, I am put on hold six times before I finally hang up.
The supercilious voice that answers the subsequent call at a third establishment asks me to wait a minute, then actually allows me to listen in as he takes reservations from a few important people.
He declines mine.
Then I call Colors and almost drop the phone at what I hear.
"Lunch for two? Of course. That would be our pleasure. My name is Raphael, and I will be waiting for you."


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  American League
BOSTON RED SOX -- Called up Scott Taylor, pitcher, from Pawtucket of the International League.


At the Bar; After her 'public torture,' Lani Guinier finds acclaim and 'solidarity' in many places.
As discarded Presidential nominees go, Lani Guinier has no real competition for popularity.
In the three months since President Clinton withdrew her nomination to head the Justice Department's civil rights division, the public has been acclaiming Professor Guinier for something, probably not for her law review articles, but perhaps for handling repudiation nicely, or, as she hopes, for embodying some elusive American sense of equity.


INSIDE
Surprise Plea in Bank Trial
A trial that was to have tested assertions that the Bush Administration secretly armed Iraq, then covered its tracks, ended with a surprise guilty plea by an Italian bank's former Atlanta branch manager.
Page A10.
Barnes &amp; Noble to Sell Stock
Barnes &amp; Noble plans to issue stock to help pay for its expansion into huge book-selling superstores.
Page D1.
Edberg Loses to Elements
It was a dark and muggy day at the United States Open, and suddenly the tennis tournament was without its two-time defending champion as Stefan Edberg fell to Karel Novacek in the second round.
Page B9.


Review/Theater; A Scandal More Discussed Than Performed
Toward the end of the first act of "The First Lulu," a negligeed Lulu watches her third husband threaten his son with a pistol because father has just found son making love to stepmother.
Offstage, behind the arras, a circus acrobat who is Lulu's current lover impatiently waits for the domestic row to end so they can carry on with their tryst.
A delighted Lulu claps her hands and exudes, "This is the high point in my life!"
It has been nearly 100 years since the German playwright Frank Wedekind's Lulu play was banned as "obscene and immoral." In the interim, G. W. Pabst made a movie based on the character and Alban Berg wrote an opera about her.
Wedekind has for the most part been a playwright mentioned in college survey courses (a founder of Expressionism, a major influence on Brecht, etc.), but seldom actually published or produced.


Yanks Counsel Calm For the Stretch Run
It's not like the Yankees were ordering those playoff tickets touting a New York-Chicago American League Championship Series.
But they might have been stretching the truth if they said that the Chicago White Sox visit to the Bronx this week didn't have more than thoughts of sugar plum fairies dancing in Yankee heads.
After all, the White Sox are starting to look as if they're about to make the division race in the A.L.
West a non-issue.
And the Yankees, though certainly not a shoe-in in the East, are the closest challenger to the first-place Toronto Blue Jays.
So who could blame either the White Sox or the Yankees at the start of a three-game series if they wondered about the what-ifs?


College Requires Applicants To Come Clean About Crime
With crime an increasing concern on college and university campuses, new security measures like added lights and extra guards are greeting students this fall as they begin the 1993-94 school year.
But in Raleigh, N.C., St.
Augustine's College has taken a particularly far-reaching step to improve campus safety.
Last year the 1,900 students at St.
Augustine's, a 127-year-old, historically black private college affiliated with the Episcopal Church, were shaken by a rash of violence that included muggings, shootings, assaults and a killing.
This year the college requires all prospective students to produce a statement from their hometown police department certifying whether they have a criminal record.


Aleksandr Nekrich, A Russian Emigre And Historian, 73
Dr.
Aleksandr M. Nekrich, a Russian historian at Harvard University, died on Tuesday at Mount Auburn Hospital in Cambridge.
A resident of Cambridge, he was 73.
The cause was amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, known as Lou Gehrig's disease, said Prof.
Adam Ulam, a colleague and former director of Harvard's Russian Research Center, where Dr.
Nekrich was a senior research fellow.


Corrections
An article yesterday about arms traffickers' use of false documents from Latin nations to purchase weapons referred incorrectly to a former official of the Bolivian Foreign Ministry who has been arrested for helping the traffickers.
He is Norberto Quiroga, not Jorge.


Sounds Around Town
Earth Music
Elba Ramalho, Brazilian Day Street Festival, Avenue of the Americas at 46th Street, (212) 382-1630.
Elba Ramalho hails from northeastern Brazil, the wellspring of that country's earthiest music.
Her repertory spans the suavest urban pop and the jauntiest rural styles, and she's full of grit and energy.
Sunday at about 4 P.M.; admission is free.
Hard-Bop Trio
Billy Childs Trio, the Village Vanguard, 178 Seventh Avenue South, at 11th Street, Greenwich Village, (212) 255-4037.
A rare New York appearance by a West Coast pianist who knows his way around hard-bop harmony and plays with flashy high spirits.
Sets are tonight and tomorrow at 9:30 and 11:30 P.M. and 1 A.M.; Sunday at 9:30 and 11:30 P.M.
Tonight and tomorrow there is a $15 cover and an $8 minimum; on Sunday there is a $12 cover and an $8 minimum.


Last Chance
Here is a sampling of shows in New York City that are to close soon: Closing This Weekend  "FOOL MOON," Richard Rodgers Theater, 226 West 46th Street, Manhattan.
A comedy created by and co-starring Bill Irwin and David Shiner, with music by the Red Clay Ramblers.
Through Sunday.
Performances: tonight at 8; tomorrow at 2 and 8 P.M.; Sunday at 3 P.M.
Tickets: $25 to $42.50.
Information: (212) 307-4100.
"JELLY'S LAST JAM," Virginia Theater, 245 West 52d Street, Manhattan.
A musical inspired by the life of the jazz musician Jelly Roll Morton; directed by George C. Wolfe.
Through Sunday.
Performances: tonight at 8; tomorrow at 2 and 8 P.M.; Sunday at 3 P.M.
Tickets: $45 to $65.
Information: (212) 239-6200.
"THE WILL ROGERS FOLLIES," Palace Theater, 1564 Broadway, at 47th Street.
Musical about the humorist.
Through Sunday.
Performances: tonight at 8; tomorrow at 2 and 8 P.M.; Sunday at 3 P.M.
Tickets: $55 to $65.
Information: (212) 307-4100.
Closing Next Weekend  ANSEL ADAMS, Robert Mann Gallery, 42 East 76th Street, Manhattan.
A show of Adams's photographs.
Through Sept. 11.
Hours: Tuesday through Saturday, 11 A.M. to 6 P.M.
Free.
Information: (212) 570-1223.
"THE DINOSAURS OF 'JURASSIC PARK,' " American Museum of Natural History, Central Park West at 79th Street.
Models of dinosaurs and sets from the film, plus actual fossils.
Through Sept. 12.
Hours: Sunday through Thursday, 10 A.M. to 5:45 P.M.; Friday and Saturday, 10 A.M. to 8:45 P.M.
Admission: $5; $2.50 for children.
Information: (212) 769-5100.


Arrest Ends Gang Chief's Rich Life on Run
For eight months, the leader of the most powerful Asian gang in New York lived a furtive life on the run in a coastal capital of China and in the bustling British colony of Hong Kong, all the while directing his multimillion-dollar crime business by cellular telephone and beeper, law-enforcement officials said yesterday.
As profits from smuggling immigrants as well as from a protection racket and an illegal gambling casino in Chinatown piled up, the gang leader, Guo Liang Chi, regularly received money by wire from his father and a brother whom he had left in charge in New York, the officials said.


Sounds Around Town
Sounds From the Edge
Bailter Space, CBGB, 315 Bowery, at Bleecker Street, East Village, (212) 982-4052.
A sextuple bill that moves from the neo-girl-group sound of the Shams to No Safety's accommodation of noise and pop to New Zealand's own noise-rock group Bailter Space.
It's all music on the edge, and what a broad and irregular edge it is.
The show starts tomorrow at 8:30 P.M., and the cover is $8.
Brown at Bradley's
Donald Brown, Bradley's, 70 University Place, Greenwich Village, (212) 228-6440.
Donald Brown is one of these young pianists and composers better known among musicians than among the jazz audience.
His shows at Bradley's are always spectacular, and he's using two fine young musicians, the alto saxophonist Jesse Davis and the bassist Peter Washington.
The shows are tonight through Sunday, at 10 P.M., midnight and 2 A.M.; there is a $12 cover and an $8 minimum.
Tyner at the Note
McCoy Tyner, Blue Note, 131 West Third Street, Greenwich Village, (212) 475-8592.
Thirty years ago, as a member of John Coltrane's group, McCoy Tyner produced a piano vocabulary that completely changed the way young pianists played.
He has left behind his original innovations -- still borrowed regularly by others -- and his improvisations are a wonder of harmony and rhythm, complicated and distinct.
Sets are tonight and tomorrow at 9 and 11:30 P.M. and 1:30 A.M. and on Sunday at 9 and 11:30 P.M.
There's a $25 cover plus a $5 minimum.


'Star Wars' Deception Just Prolonged Cold War; Still Squandering
To the Editor:
Your reports on the rigged 1984 "Star Wars" test raise serious questions about our ballistic missile defense program and its management.


Review/Film: Boxing Helena; A Kinky, Macabre Tale Of Erotic Fascination
SURELY you've heard about Jennifer Chambers Lynch's "Boxing Helena" by now.
It's the film that made legal history when its prospective star, Kim Basinger, was held liable for having got cold feet.
Speaking of feet, "Boxing Helena" is the one that sounds as if its story, about a surgeon who amputates the arms and legs of the woman he loves, could make Ms.
Lynch's father, David ("Blue Velvet") Lynch, look like Norman Rockwell.
It's also the film that threatens to give the concept of metaphor a bad name.
In the hailstorm of publicity that surrounds the film's opening, Ms.
Lynch has been trying hard to leap past the lurid to the metaphorical as she explains what her film is about.
Ignore the severed limbs, and this is a story about love and obsession.
Or about darkest fantasy.
Or about the impossibility of truly possessing anyone.
Whatever.


Labor Day Weekend: Town and Country
Here is a sampling of Labor Day weekend activities in the New York metropolitan region: NEW YORK CITY Today  "LAUGH-A-THON," Chicago City Limits Theater, 351 East 74th Street, Manhattan.
A benefit for the Muscular Dystrophy Association. 8 P.M.
Tickets: $15.
Information: (212) 772-8707.
Tomorrow  WASHINGTON SQUARE OUTDOOR ART EXHIBIT, sidewalks surrounding Washington Square Park, Greenwich Village.
Noon to 7 P.M.
Through Monday and Sept. 11 and 12.
Information: (212) 982-6255.
BRIGHTON BEACH BOARDWALK FESTIVAL, Brighton Beach boardwalk from Coney Island Avenue to Ocean Parkway, Brooklyn.
Sponsored by the National Kidney Foundation of New York/New Jersey. 11 A.M. to 6 P.M.
Free.
Information: (212) 809-4900.
EIGHTH AVENUE FESTIVAL, Eighth Avenue from 52d to 60th Street, Borough Park, Brooklyn.
Sponsored by the Brooklyn Council of Chinese Churches.
Noon to 4 P.M.
Free.
CRAFTS FESTIVAL, Lincoln Center's Fordham University Plaza, West 62d Street and Columbus Avenue.
Sponsored by Fordham University.
Through Monday and Sept. 11 and 12. 11 A.M. to 7 P.M.
Free.
Information: (212) 677-4627.
WEST SIDE ARTS, CRAFTS AND ANTIQUES FESTIVAL, West End Avenue from 86th to 96th Street, Manhattan.
Sponsored by the N.A.A.C.P.
Mid-Manhattan Branch. 11 A.M. to 6 P.M.
Free.
Information: (212) 764-6330.
"DRESS THE NAKED MOLE-RAT CONTEST," the Bronx Zoo, World of Darkness, 185th Street and Southern Boulevard.
An artistic competition for children. 11 A.M. to 4 P.M.
Admission: $5.75; $2 for the elderly and children 2 to 12; free for children under 2.
Information: (718) 367-1010.
Sunday  FIREWORKS BY GRUCCI, South Street Seaport, at the East River. 8:45 P.M.
Information: (212) 732-7678.
GREAT CHELSEA LABOR DAY FEST, Eighth Avenue from 15th to 23d Street, Chelsea.
Sponsored by the Chelsea Reform Democratic Club. 10 A.M. to 7 P.M.
Free.
Information: (212) 995-9412. 30TH AVENUE ASTORIA FESTIVAL, Astoria, Queens.
Sponsored by the 30th Avenue Area Merchants Association. 11 A.M. to 7 P.M.
Free.
Information: (718) 274-1314.
BRAZILIAN INDEPENDENCE DAY FESTIVAL, West 46th Street from Avenue of the Americas to Madison Avenue.
Sponsored by the Brazilian American Cultural Center. 10 A.M. to 7 P.M.
Free.
Information: (212) 382-1630.
SEUFFERT BAND, Forest Park's Music Grove, Main Drive off Woodhaven Boulevard, Glendale, Queens. 3 P.M.
Free.
KEN BUTLER, Snug Harbor Cultural Center Gazebo, 1000 Richmond Terrace, Livingston, S.I.
A concert of instruments made of toothbrushes, hockey sticks and other objects. 3 P.M.
Free.
Information: (718) 448-2500.
Monday  ARTIE SHAW BAND, Ambrose Stage, Pier 16, at the East River, South Street Seaport. 6 P.M.
Free.
Information: (212) 732-7678.
"IMMIGRANT LABORS, IMMIGRANT TRIUMPHS," Lower East Side.
A walking tour exploring immigrants and their contributions to the labor movement.
Sponsored by Big Onion Walking Tours. 1 P.M.
Fee: $9; $7 for students and the elderly.
Information: (212) 439-1090.
STEINWAY STREET LABOR DAY FESTIVAL, Steinway Street from 28th to 35th Avenue, Astoria, Queens. 11 A.M. to 6 P.M.
Free.
Information: (212) 809-4900.
AUSTIN STREET LABOR DAY FESTIVAL, Austin Street from Ascan Avenue to 70th Avenue, Forest Hills, Queens.
Sponsored by We Care About New York Inc. and the Forest Hills Chamber of Commerce. 11 A.M. to 6 P.M.
Free.
Information: (212) 686-1001.
LABOR DAY PARADE, Fifth Avenue from 44th to 72d Street.
Sponsored by the New York City Central Labor Council. 11 A.M.
"NOHO: A NEW FRONTIER," lower Manhattan.
A walking tour sponsored by Bernie's New York. 2 P.M.
Fee: $5.
Information: (718) 655-1883.
"THE DAY THE EARTH STOOD STILL," Bryant Park, Avenue of the Americas at 40th Street.
The film will be projected on a giant screen as part of the Bryant Park Summer Film Festival. 8 P.M.
Free.
Information: (212) 938-4142.
LONG ISLAND Today  "EDIBLE LANDSCAPES," Quail Hill Farms, Amagansett.
A demonstration as part of the Green Earth Festival. 1:30 P.M.
Information: (516) 725-0325.
Tomorrow  SHINNECOCK POWWOW, Shinnecock Indian Reservation, Southampton.
Through Monday.
Hours: tomorrow and Sunday, 2 to 5 P.M. and 7 to 10 P.M.; Monday, 1 to 5 P.M.
Admission: $6; $4 for children and the elderly.
Information: (516) 283-6143.
LABOR DAY WEEKEND FESTIVAL, Palmer Vineyards, Sound Avenue, Aquebogue.
Live music and winery tours and tasting.
Through Monday. 11 A.M. to 6 P.M.
Free.
Information: (516) 722-9463.
ANTIQUES FAIR, Miss Amelia's Cottage, Main Street, Amagansett.
Hours: 10 A.M. to 6 P.M.
Information: (516) 267-3020.
"OLD-FASHIONED BUTTER MAKING," County Farm, Yaphank Avenue, Yaphank.
A workshop. 10 A.M.
Information: (516) 852-4608.
ARTS AND CRAFTS SHOW, Boardwalk at Riverside Boulevard, Long Beach.
Through Sunday. 9 A.M. to 7 P.M.
Information: (516) 432-1192.
Sunday  DR.
JOHN AND THE NEW ISLAND SOCIAL PLEASURE CLUB BAND, Planting Fields Arboretum, Oyster Bay.
Loup Garou will open the show. 8 P.M.
Tickets: $15 to $25.
Information: (516) 922-0061.
JEWISH BOOKFEST AND ARTS FESTIVAL, Suffolk Y, 74 Hauppauge Road, Commack.
Through Monday. 11 A.M. to 6 P.M.
Admission: $14 per day; $12 for students and the elderly; free for children under 12; $20 for two days.
Information: (516) 938-4600.
UPSTATE NEW YORK Tomorrow  WOODSTOCK-NEW PALTZ ART AND CRAFTS FAIR, Ulster County Fairgrounds, Albany Post Road, New Paltz.
Through Monday.
Hours: tomorrow and Sunday, 10 A.M. to 6 P.M.; Monday, 10 A.M. to 5 P.M.
Admission: $5.50; $4.50 for the elderly; $3.50 for children 4 to 12.
Information: (914) 246-3414.
NEW YORK RENAISSANCE FESTIVAL, Sterling Forest, off Route 17A, Tuxedo.
A recreated 16th-century English fair with jesters, jugglers and jousters.
Through Monday. 11 A.M. to 6 P.M.
Admission: $13.50; $11.50 for the elderly; $5.50 for children 3 to 12.
Information: (914) 351-5171.
"HERB GARDEN WALK," John Jay Homestead State Historic Site, Route 22, Katonah. 2 P.M.
Fee: $5.
Information: (914) 232-5651.
KATONAH STREET FESTIVAL, Katonah Avenue, Katonah.
Rides and circus, $2 to $3. 10 A.M. to 4 P.M.
Information: (914) 232-2668.
Monday  CHESS TOURNAMENT, John Jay Homestead State Historic Site, Route 22, Katonah. 9 A.M. to 4 P.M.
Free.
Information: (914) 232-5651.
CONNECTICUT Today  "ODYSSEY '93," St.
Barbara Greek Church, 480 Racebrook Road, Orange.
A Greek Festival.
Through Monday.
Noon to 10 P.M.
Free.
Information: (212) 795-1347.
Tomorrow  "LABOR DAY WEEKEND MEET THE ARTISTS AND ARTISANS SHOW," Olde Mistick Village, Route 27, Mystic.
Through Monday. 10 A.M. to 6 P.M.
Free.
Information: (203) 874-5672.
NORTH AMERICAN WILDLIFE ASSOCIATION ARTS AND CRAFTS FESTIVAL, Town Green, Madison. 9 A.M. to 4 P.M.
Information: (203) 245-9407.
ELI WHITNEY FOLK FESTIVAL, Edgerton Park, New Haven.
Emmylou Harris and Northern Lights. 6:30 P.M.
Tickets: $15; $13 in advance.
Information: (203) 248-6582.
"STORIES OF SOLDIERS, SALTBOXES, STREAMS AND SAWMILLS," Tiffany Farm, Old Lyme.
Four-mile walk and talk with the historian Elizabeth Plimpton. 10 A.M.
Fee: $3; box lunches are available for $10.50.
Information: (203) 434-5542.
COUNTRY FAIR, Route 63, south of Goshen Center, Goshen.
Through Monday. 8 A.M. to dusk.
Admission: $4; children free.
Information: (203) 491-3604.
COUNTRY FAIR, Quarry Hill Road, Haddam Neck.
Through Monday.
Hours: tomorrow, 9 A.M. to 10 P.M.; Sunday, 7:30 A.M. to 10 P.M.; Monday, 7:30 A.M. to 6 P.M.
Admission: $3.50, children free.
Information: (203) 267-7677 or 267-4671.
COUNTRY FAIR, Junction Routes 171 and 169, South Woodstock.
Through Monday.
Hours: 9 A.M. to 9 P.M.
Admission: $5; free for children; parking $3.
Information: (203) 928-5711.
NEW JERSEY Today  ANNUAL LABOR DAY WEEKEND SIDEWALK SALE, Liberty Village Factory Outlets, Church Street, Flemington.
Through Monday. 10 A.M. to 6 P.M.
Information: (908) 782-8550.
ANNUAL CLAMSHELL PITCHING TOURNAMENT, Congress Street Beach, Beach Drive and Congress Street, Cape May.
Through Monday.
Information: (609) 259-0600.
SOCIETA MADONNA DEI MARTINI FESTIVAL, Fourth and Adams Streets, Hoboken.
Through Monday. 7:30 P.M. to midnight.
Free.
Information: (201) 659-9431.
Tomorrow  SOMERSET HILLS FUN FESTIVAL OF ARTS AND CRAFTS, Oak Street, Basking Ridge.
Hours: tomorrow, 3 to 9 P.M.; Sunday, 1 to 9 P.M.
Free.
NEW JERSEY STATE SHEEP DOG TRIALS, Fosterfields Living Historical Farm, Kahdena Road, Morris Township.
Dog handlers and their border collies compete in demonstrations of their skills in moving sheep.
Sponsored by the Morris County Park Commission.
Through Monday.
Opening hours: tomorrow, 10 A.M.; Sunday, 1 P.M.; Monday, 10 A.M.
Admission: $3; $2 for children 6 to 16 and the elderly; children under 6 free.
Information: (201) 326-7645.
Also, on all three days, the Willows, a historic mansion, open for visiting from 1 to 4 P.M. with admission at an additional $1, and cow-milking demonstrations at 3:30 P.M.
CENTENNIAL CARNIVAL, behind the Post Office, Oradell.
Through Monday.
Noon to 10 P.M.
Free.
Information: (201) 261-8200.
Sunday  SCANDINAVIAN FEST, Vasa Park, Wolfe Road and Route 46, Budd Lake. 10 A.M. to 9 P.M.
Information: (908) 852-4357.
Monday  LABOR DAY PARADE AND PICNIC, American Labor Museum/Botto House National Landmark, 83 Norwood Street, Haledon. 11 A.M.
Information: (201) 595-7953.
LABOR DAY POLISH FESTIVAL, Action Park, Route 94, Vernon. 1 to 6 P.M.
Admission: $10 for the festival only; $26 for the festival and all park attractions; $18 for children.
Information: (201) 827-2000.


Holiday on Monday
Monday is Labor Day.
Here are holiday schedules.
NEW YORK  PARADE: Begins at 11:00 A.M. at 44th Street and Fifth Avenue, goes up Fifth Avenue to 72d Street and across to Third Avenue.The West Indian-American Day Parade begins at 11:00 A.M. at Utica Avenue and Eastern Parkway in Brooklyn and goes along Eastern Parkway to Grand Army Plaza.
GOVERNMENT OFFICES: Closed.
POST OFFICE: Express Mail and special delivery only; main post office open at 33d Street and Eighth Avenue.
BANKS: Closed.
PARKING: Sunday rules in effect.
SANITATION: No pickups, street cleaning, or recycling.
SCHOOLS: Closed.
FINANCIAL MARKETS: Closed.
TRANSPORTATION: Buses and subways on Sunday schedule.Long Island Rail Road on a Holiday schedule.
Metro-North on Sunday schedule, with some extra rush hour service.
NEW JERSEY  GOVERNMENT OFFICES: Closed.
POST OFFICES: Express Mail and special delivery only.
BANKS: Closed.
SCHOOLS: Closed.
TRANSPORTATION: N.J.
Transit on Sunday schedule.
CONNECTICUT  GOVERNMENT OFFICES: Closed.
POST OFFICES: Express Mail and special delivery only.
BANKS: Closed.
SCHOOLS: Closed.
TRANSPORTATION: Metro-North on a Sunday Schedule, with some extra rush hour service.


Kodak Is a Picture of Corporate Cynicism; 'It Ain't Worth It!'
To the Editor:
Those believing the country's problems would be solved if we'd let corporate America run things might ponder doings at Eastman Kodak.
The board of directors dumped the chairman, partly because he was too paternalistic (too slow and unenthusiastic about slashing jobs and livelihoods) and too concerned about the well-being of Kodak's community.


Israel and P.L.O. Step Up Effort for Recognition Text
Israeli and Palestine Liberation Organization diplomats engaged in a flurry of faxes and phone calls today between offices in Tunis, Europe, Washington and Jerusalem in a frenzied effort to agree on a text for mutual recognition.
President Clinton, whose Administration has moved to the sidelines as Israel and the P.L.O. try to hammer out the terms through their private channels, made his most explicit public statement so far on the negotiations.
The President was strikingly cautious about the Israel-P.L.O. accord, treating it as another turn in the peace effort that might soon fall apart.


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY  A MILLION CHILDREN AND NO SCHOOL
New York City's government, to say nothing of the parents of its one million public school students, began the monumental task of finding ways to occupy those children all day while the city's schools remain closed until at least Sept. 20 because of the asbestos crisis.
A1.
The Board of Education voted to delay the opening of school for at least 11 days. B3.
The asbestos inspection of the schools missed its Sept. 9 deadline because officials underestimated the obstacles.
News Analysis.
B3.
EXTRAVAGANT LIFE ON THE RUN
For eight months, the leader of the most powerful Asian gang in New York lived a furtive life on the run in a coastal capital of China and in the bustling British colony of Hong Kong, all the while directing his multimillion-dollar crime business by cellular telephone and beeper, law-enforcement officials said.
B2.
THE BATTLE FOR HISPANIC VOTERS
As the most credible minority contender for Mayor in New York City's history, David N. Dinkins overcame years of black-Hispanic political feuding to win two-thirds of the Hispanic vote in 1989, but he is being challenged much more strongly this year.
News Analysis.
B4.
Mayor Dinkins offered comments that laid the groundwork for a less-than-overwhelming victory in the Sept. 14 Democratic primary.
B4.
SLAIN GIRL IS IDENTIFIED
After nearly two weeks as a nameless, unclaimed victim on a morgue slab, a young girl whose battered body was found burning beneath a highway overpass in the Bronx on Aug. 22 was identified by the authorities.
B4.
CAR SERIOUSLY INJURES BROOKLYN BOY
An 8-year-old boy was seriously injured near his house in Bushwick, Brooklyn when he was struck by a car.
B4.
REGION  MAN FREED FROM HOSPITAL
Larry Hogue, the mentally ill man who for years frightened residents of the Upper West Side, was discharged from a New York State hospital to live with his son and three grandchildren in Bridgeport, Conn.
B4.
SEARCH PRESSED FOR GIRL
Two weeks ago Sara Anne Wood, 12, set out on a short bike ride, a milelong trip between her home and the church in Litchfield, N.Y., where her father is pastor.
She never got there.
Now a $100,000 reward has been offered for her safe return, along with a $40,000 reward for information that leads to finding her, as a huge search continues.
B5.
BODY PARTS LINKED TO SERIAL KILLING
Body parts found last summer in waterways off Manhattan have been identified as those of a 20-year-old woman, Violet O'Neill, who the police believe was among 18 women killed by a Long Island man, Joel Rifkin.
B5.
BOY INDICTED IN FATAL BEATING
A 13-year-old Bath, N.Y., boy was indicted on a charge of second-degree murder in the fatal beating of a 4-year-old boy.
B5.
Holiday schedule B4
Our Towns by Peter Marks B5
Chronicle B6


Los Angeles Times Weighs Sale of Headquarters
Pressed for cash in a depressed California regional economy, the Times Mirror Company, publisher of The Los Angeles Times and Newsday, is considering selling its downtown Los Angeles headquarters and moving to a high-rise office tower, people familiar with the plan said today.
Officials of Times Mirror said today that they had hired a consultant to conduct a feasibility study of the cost advantages in moving but that no decision to relocate had been made.


TV Weekend; Old-Style Thriller With Up-to-Date Nudity
"The Wrong Man" begins like a trim, old-fashioned thriller dear to the hearts of B-movie fans.
A merchant seaman (Kevin Anderson) gets entangled in a murder in Tampico, Mexico, goes on the run from an entertaining pair of federales (Jorge Cervera Jr. and Ernesto LaGuardia) and finds himself in the company of a big blowhard American (John Lithgow) and his available wife (Rosanna Arquette).
Up-to-date touches include four-letter words, bared breasts and behinds (including the hero's) and soft-porn writhings.
There is also plenty of seedy scenery and a top-of-the-voice performance by Mr.
Lithgow, alternating between explosions of rage and fits of bonhomie.
You can't tell whether the fellow he is playing is determined to keep his flaunt-it wife and the flaunted-at seaman apart or push them very close together, but although the character may flail, Mr.
Lithgow's energy never flags.


Pentagon Sees A Greater Role For Reservists
With the number of active-duty troops shrinking but the Pentagon still determined to stand ready to fight two wars at once, the military is preparing to rely more heavily on combat reservists, whose performance raised some doubts during the Persian Gulf war.
Under the plan for a post-cold war military structure that Defense Secretary Les Aspin made public on Wednesday, the Pentagon intends to increase the training, equipment and combat readiness of about 15 Army National Guard brigades to enable them to reinforce American troops quickly in the second of two regional conflicts.


Critics' Choices; Artful Activities for Summer's Wane
Film
Sample the bone-dry wit of Aki Kaurismaki in "La Vie de Boheme" (at the Quad Cinema in Greenwich Village), Mr.
Kaurismaki's perfectly deadpan black-and-white film about struggling artists living in Paris.
For reasons that are not easily described, Mr.
Kaurismaki's favorite sad-sack actors can be irresistibly droll as they make their courtly way through a story based on Henri Murger's "Scenes de la Vie de Boheme." Mr.
Kaurismaki's strange, idiosyncratic humor is very much in evidence, despite the characters' perfect solemnity about their many travails.
Ousmane Sembene's "Guelwaar" (at Lincoln Plaza Cinemas in Manhattan) offers a deceptively plain, wonderfully well-observed portrait of Senegalese society, as it is mirrored by an elaborately described tribal dispute.
Starting small, with a mixup that mushrooms into a communal battle, Mr.
Sembene's film shares some remarkable (and clearly coincidental) similarities with Spike Lee's "Do the Right Thing." But this septuagenarian African film maker supplies much quieter insights, and a subtler view of human nature.


Review/Film; Jazz Fantasy On Sun Ra's Trip to Earth
Sun Ra, the late composer, band leader and keyboardist, created music that combined the singsong simplicity of nursery rhymes with open-ended squeals and twitters and rumbles.
He claimed Saturn as his birthplace and filled his lyrics with interstellar imagery.
Unlike most jazz films, "Space Is the Place," which opens today at the Walter Reade Theater, doesn't bother with the composer's biography, although it does offer glimpses of Ra's Intergalactic Myth-Science Solar Arkestra.
Most of the time, however, it proffers fantasies to match the hallucinatory music.
Made in 1974, it's already an artifact of a time when the hangover of the late 1960's met the disillusioned 1970's; black power and free jazz collided with the fashion sense of Superfly.
"Space Is the Place" is the "Putney Swope" of jazz films.
In the movie's episodic plot, Sun Ra -- dressed in full glitter-Egyptian regalia -- lives on a bluish planet populated entirely by black people.
He comes to Earth, in a spaceship that looks like a pair of bloodshot eyeballs painted on a rubber raft, to recruit more black colonists and to philosophize.
"Are you ready to alter your destiny?" he asks.
On Earth, Ra has run-ins with two black opponents, an obeisant newscaster and the diabolical Mr.
Overseer, and two white Federal Bureau of Investigation agents.
There's a vignette in a mid-1940's jazz club in Chicago (where Ra's piano-playing is too avant-garde for the management), a cosmic card game and some proselytizing at an inner-city youth center, where one teen-ager dismisses Ra as "some old hippie." "How do we know you're for real?" another asks.


Bailey's Teammates Are Leaving Him Out in the Cold, Brooks Says
Linebacker Michael Brooks has been in the National Football League for seven years.
He spent his first six with the Denver Broncos before joining the Giants this year as a free agent.
He led the Broncos in tackles for three straight years.
He has played in the Pro Bowl.
He is considered one of the best linebackers in pro football.
He thought he'd seen it all.
But it turns out he hasn't seen it all.
Brooks says that when he became a Giant, he was amazed at the cold shoulder he received at first from teammates.
Now he's concerned that Carlton Bailey, another linebacker signed as a free agent, is still getting frozen out and that the defense's chemistry is being disrupted.


Review/Film; A Tour of Homicidal America
"Kalifornia" gets rolling as Brian Kessler (David Duchovny) and Carrie Laughlin (Michelle Forbes), a couple of artily bored yuppies with a lot of black in their wardrobes, decide to collaborate on a book.
Carrie, a photographer who favors erotic self-portraits, and Brian, a magazine writer with a self-important streak, think it might be stimulating to join forces on a coffee-table volume about famous American murder sites.
Great idea, right?
Jaded, thrill-seeking potential buyers of such a book constitute the likeliest audience for Dominic Sena's desperately stylish film about Carrie and Brian's fact-finding trip.
Early, understandably anxious to hit the road after having killed his landlord and torched his trailer, turns out to be a big bonanza for Brian and Carrie.
They were interested in homicidal Americana to begin with, and now they have a real live specimen in their back seat.
Early exerts a strong grip on everyone, whether he is nonchalantly killing strangers at gas stations or showing off his hole-ridden, disgusting socks at mealtimes.
He exerts an especially strong grip on Adele, who confides that Early only beats her when she deserves it and who giggles crazily at all the wrong moments. (Ms. Lewis, who has many similar mannerisms, may be fast becoming the Sandy Dennis of her generation.)


NEWS SUMMARY
International A2-9  P.L.O.
SAYS ISRAELI PACT IS NEAR  P.L.O. officials said they were near an accord with Israel on mutual recognition.
In response, King Hussein of Jordan called for a meeting of Arab nations, saying the Arab future is threatened.
A1  Momentum from the tentative pact is prompting much diplomacy.
A8


Critics' Choices; Artful Activities for Summer's Wane
Video
If you crossbred "Glengarry Glen Ross" with "Goodfellas" and sloshed on several buckets of blood, you would have a movie that resembles "Reservoir Dogs," last year's gripping, widely praised gangster film written and directed by Quentin Tarantino.
The story about a Los Angeles jewelry story robbery that goes spectacularly wrong, could be taken as a cautionary tale about the perils of male bonding.
Most of the low-budget film is set in a warehouse where the gangsters, who know one another only by code names, were scheduled to meet after the heist.
The tough-guy dialogue has an edge, concision and dark humor that echo the Martin Scorsese of "Mean Streets." Among the performances by a superb ensemble, those of Harvey Keitel, Tim Roth and Lawrence Tierney are especially acute.
Particularly memorable is a witty opening scene in which the hoods speculate on the many meanings of Madonna in dialogue that neatly parodies David Mamet.


Chrysler Is Union Target In Canada
The Canadian Automobile Workers today selected the Chrysler Corporation as the lead company in negotiating a new labor contract, which will then serve as a pattern in bargaining with the Ford Motor Company and the General Motors Corporation.
The decision was expected by automobile executives and union leaders here, since the popularity of the L/H cars and mini-vans that Chrysler makes in Canada gives the union greater leverage in bargaining than it would have with the other companies.
Anxious to keep the production lines humming, Chrysler may prove more willing than Ford or G.M. to accede to the demands of the union, which include more paid holidays, better pensions and higher wages.


A Quick Dose of Reality for Mr. Cortines
The announced delay in the opening of New York City schools is more than a nuisance for parents and students, who now find carefully balanced schedules turned upside down.
It further underscores the crisis of confidence in the school system.
Restoring that confidence is the first -- and toughest -- assignment for the new Schools Chancellor, Ramon Cortines, and a continuing challenge for the Board of Education.
It was bad enough last month when Mayor David Dinkins announced that each of the city's 1,069 school buildings had to be rechecked for asbestos.
That announcement came after it was discovered that federally mandated inspections conducted in the 1980's were seriously mismanaged and possibly fraudulent.


Police Identify 13th Body As Victim of L.I. Killer
Body parts found last summer in the waterways around New York City have been identified as those of a 20-year-old Manhattan woman who the police believe was among 18 women killed by Joel Rifkin.
The body of the woman, Violet O'Neill, is the 13th that the police have identified and linked to Mr.
Rifkin, a 34-year-old unemployed landscaper who the authorities say has confessed to the murders of 17 women, many of whom were prostitutes.
Another body is still unidentified, and four women believed to be among his victims are still missing, the police said.


'Star Wars' Deception Just Prolonged Cold War
To the Editor:
Robert McFarlane's claim in "Consider What Star Wars Accomplished" (Op-Ed, Aug. 24), that the Strategic Defense Initiative was designed to bring the Soviet Union to its knees and that it helped do so, is as much a fantasy as "Star Wars" itself.


Bridge
Two American teams seem certain to qualify for playoffs at the NEC World Team Championships here, but two others are decidedly in jeopardy with four rounds of play remaining.
In the Bermuda Bowl contest for open teams, the United States No. 1 team, which includes Michael Becker of Tenafly, N.J., has fought back after a bad start and is challenging for the crucial fourth position in Group W. The standings are: 1.
China 183 victory points; 2.
Norway 169; 3.
Denmark 162.5; 4.
India 155.5; 5.
U.S.A.
No. 1, 150.


Art in Review
Francois Kollar  Zabriskie Gallery 724 Fifth Avenue (at 56th Street) Through Sept. 18
Born in Hungary, Francois Kollar (1904-1979) moved to Paris in 1924 and over the next decade established himself as a leading commercial photographer, specializing in fashion shots for Harper's Bazaar, Cartier and other clients.
It is easy to see from the varied selection of work here why he was successful: Kollar brought to his mundane assignments a sense of the expressive possibilities of light and dark, and in many pictures he used rich shadows and graceful, curving lines to simplify his compositions and create a sense of mystery.


Sarajevo Works for Recovery But Is Fearful on the Future
Taking advantage of the longest reprieve from shelling in the entire 17-month-long Bosnian war, Sarajevans are cautiously taking back streets and parks.
On Wednesday, city workers entered a downtown building that until a few days ago had been a cover for Serbian snipers and began sweeping up broken glass.
Water and electricity service have been restored to neighborhoods that have been without either for months, and buyers and sellers pushing carts have begun pouring into city markets to barter housewares, garden vegetables and clothing while vendors move among the crowd selling cups of coffee from thermoses.


Home Is Where the Profits Are; Suburbanites Reap the Benefits of a Weak Economy as Entrepreneurs Come Calling
On Sunday mornings, sporting a black wet suit and neon fins, Harry Triola of Fort Salonga, L.I., flip-flops over to his neighbor's swimming pool, where he meets Nicholas Martielli, his personal scuba-diving instructor.
At least three nights a week, Eric Swenson, an estates and trusts lawyer, sets himself apart from the competition by writing clients a complete will, in the privacy of their living rooms, for $99.


Shares of Avon Drop by 7% On Third-Quarter Forecast
Avon Products Inc. stock lost more than 7 percent of its value yesterday after the company announced that third-quarter earnings would not match 1992 levels.
The shares lost $4.625 to close at $54.875.
Nearly two million shares were traded on the New York Stock Exchange.


People
*
David Henry, president of Henry Gill Silverman Advertising, Denver, was named to the new position of chief executive.
Chuck Silverman, the agency's vice president and creative director, succeeded Mr.
Henry as president.


'Star Wars' Deception Just Prolonged Cold War; Faceless Sources
To the Editor:
It is astonishing that you would publish on your Aug. 18 front page an article impugning the honesty of reputable people, based on the presumed remarks of anonymous sources, and follow it up Aug. 19 with a scathing editorial based on the same suspect evidence.
Article and editorial accuse the Strategic Defense Initiative program's managers of base dishonesty, faking tests to deceive Congress.


Carter's Big Catch
CRIS CARTER has agreed to a two-year contract extension with Minnesota for $3.42 million, making him the highest-paid receiver in Viking history. (AP)


Review/Art; The Greening of Russia: Recycling Lenin Statues
What to do with all those statues of Lenin and Stalin in Russia now that the Revolution has gone out of style?
That's the question that the artist-team Komar and Melamid, internal dissidents turned American residents, began asking themselves when the Soviet Union dissolved in 1991.
"Monumental Propaganda" is their answer.
Or more accurately, answers, since this unusual group show, sponsored by Independent Curators Inc. and installed in the Courtyard Gallery of the World Financial Center, is very much a collaboration.
Komar and Melamid invited 150 artists from the United States, Russia, Canada and Europe to submit proposals for disposing of the thousands of public sculptures in the former Soviet Union that await destruction because their political message is obsolete.
Some responses -- texts, drawings, collages and photographs -- say good riddance, others find ways to give old icons new meanings.
Together they constitute the exhibition.


Coslet's Blocking Plans Try to Tune Out Critics
As he will quickly tell you, Bruce Coslet can work at a variety of jobs.
For two years, after retiring as a tight end with the Bengals in 1976, he operated a construction business in Stockton, Calif.
He is a licensed realtor.
He invested in a chain of delicatessens on the West Coast.
But he doesn't hammer nails, make ham sandwiches or list bungalows for a living now.
He coaches pro football players.
It is a very demanding occupation and Coslet works in one of the most demanding sports cities in America.
Winning breeds adoration.
Losing begets derision.
And every move is played out and secondguessed in the newspapers everyday.


For Manny Ramirez, To Play Is the Thing
Before the game in the canvas-covered Metrodome this evening, the first that Manny Ramirez of the Cleveland Indians and Washington Heights would play as a major leaguer, he said he did not know, nor care, who was pitching for the opposition, the Minnesota Twins.
"Just see the ball," he said.
"Try to hit it as hard as I can, like when I was in Triple-A."


Diner's Journal
Fresh Country Air
The culinary facelift at La Cremaillere, a venerable French country restaurant in Banksville, N.Y., not far from Greenwich, Conn., is well under way.
The restaurant reopened with a new owner about two weeks ago, and at this early date, it appears that what was a menu of French food caught in a time warp has been refreshed and reinvigorated without losing its classic roots.
The new chef, Matthew Tivy, 32, whose recent experience has been mostly in brash contemporary restaurants in lower Manhattan, appears to be filling his larder with fine raw materials for French cooking with some inventive grace notes.
Among the appetizers ($5.50 to $18.50), a salad of tender warm skate, set on a bed of frisee and perfumed with basil ($8.50), had slivers of jicama for texture.
Escargots suitably bolstered with ample garlic were tossed with cream and toasted pine nuts over angel hair pasta ($10.50), and the smooth spinach soup ($6) matched the delicacy of the oysters afloat in it.


Max Henry Fisher, British Editor And Merchant Banker, 71, Dies
Max Henry Fisher, a British merchant banker and who as the editor of The Financial Times in the1970's turned it into a European journal of information and opinion, died Sunday, the paper reported yesterday.
He was 71.
The cause was not given.


Second Barros Move?
Charlotte is prepared to deal newly acquired guard DANA BARROS to Philadelphia in exchange for the 76ers' HERSEY HAWKINS, it was reported yesterday.
The Philadelphia Inquirer said the Hornets are ready to swap Barros, a veteran forward, SIDNEY GREEN, and a 1994 first-round draft choice for Hawkins, a top shooting guard.


PGA Chooses Winged Foot
Winged Foot Golf Club added another jewel to its tournament tiara yesterday when the Professional Golfers Association of America awarded the club the 1997 PGA Championship.
Winged Foot, situated in Mamaroneck, N.Y., has staged the United States Open four times, the United States Women's Open twice and was the site of the first United States Senior Open.
It will be the host of the PGA Championship for the first time.


Richard B. Wearn Chemist and Executive, 77
Dr.
Richard B. Wearn, a retired chemical researcher and former executive of the Colgate-Palmolive Company in Manhattan, died on Tuesday at the South Carolina Episcopal Home in West Columbia, S.C.
He was 77.
The cause was amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, which is known as Lou Gehrig's disease, said Anne Crawford, a spokeswoman for Colgate-Palmolive.


K. V. MacKenzie, An Undersea Expert For Navy, Dies at 82
Dr.
Kenneth V. MacKenzie, a Navy scientist for more than 30 years who took part in dives into the deepest areas of the oceans and was a pioneer of anti-submarine warfare technology, died on Tuesday in La Jolla, Calif.
He was 82.
A daughter, Kay Mighell of Seattle, said that the cause was Parkinson's disease and that he had died at a nursing home.


TV Listings
On Fridays, television and radio news and listings now appear at the end of section D, with Home Video.
Today, pages D15-16.


Refugee From Racial Hostility Is Killed in Robbery
Bill Simpson, one of two black men who moved into the previously all-white East Texas town of Vidor last winter, moved out on Wednesday because he was afraid of the racism there.
Hours later he was shot to death a few miles down the road in Beaumont, the city he had returned to.
The Beaumont police and a friend of Mr.
Simpson who was wounded in the attack said that the gunman was black, that the motive was robbery and that there did not appear to be any connection between the shooting and Mr.
Simpson's role in breaking the racial barrier in Vidor.


No Headline
"This is the opportunity for the Middle East to make it into the 21st century. It  now has a chance not to be a backwater. Israel has a chance to realize its potential to be the Singapore of the  Middle East." -- STEVEN SPIEGEL, a Middle East historian at U.C.L.A.  [ A1:2. ]


So Long, Summer, and Thanks
KISS it goodbye.
All of it.
The Technicolor drinks.
The fabulously trashy beach novels.
The creative loafing at work.
The truncated Fridays.
Wave bye-bye.
Summer is over.
Labor Day is one of the few holidays that still fit the rhythms of modern life.
With the first whiff of September, the national sense of guilt kicks in with a vengeance.
Everyone deserves June and July.
But August?
August is an inexcusable indulgence.
It's a second dessert, a third martini, a fourth video.


Long Bond Yield Slips Nearer 6%
The yield on the 30-year bond continued its relentless march downward yesterday, creeping closer to the 6 percent mark and apparently catching some traders off guard.
On a day that many expected to be quiet because of the cautious trading that usually occurs ahead of the Friday release of the monthly employment data, bond dealers were suddenly faced with heavy retail buying as portfolio managers of all kinds swooped in and bought the 30-year bond and other Treasury securities.





Corrections
A report last Monday about the wedding of Ilissa Rothschild and Mark Ressler misstated the bridegroom's occupation.
He is an Assistant United States Attorney, not an Assistant District Attorney, in Brooklyn.


Agency to End Use of Drug That Halts Breast Milk Flow
The Food and Drug Administration responded to a petition it received from a consumer health group today by saying that it would begin steps to end use of a prescription drug to treat breast engorgement after childbirth.
The group, the Public Citizen Health Research Group, which is affiliated with Ralph Nader's Public Citizen consumer organization, sent a letter today to the Drug Commissioner, Dr.
David A. Kessler, asking that the agency stop any maker from recommending the drug, bromocriptine mesylate.
The drug is designed to stop milk production for women who do not plan to nurse after childbirth, thus preventing postpartum breast engorgement.


Officials Admit Asbestos Deadline Was Unrealistic
The emergency asbestos inspection of New York City's public schools will miss its deadline of Sept. 9 because officials underestimated the deterioration in the schools and overestimated their ability to take control of a crisis whose full impact is still emerging.
When investigators revealed in August that the Board of Education's asbestos tests were so grossly mismanaged as to be meaningless, Mayor David N. Dinkins sent a legion of officials and inspectors to the rescue, vowing to open no school until it was safe.


Israeli Debate Focusing on Security in Territories
Few words are more important in the average Israeli's vocabulary than "security," and so for many people here the ultimate test of the self-rule agreement tentatively reached with the Palestinians will be whether the occupied territories stay quiet or turn into Dodge City.
Alarm bells sounded in some quarters this week when top army commanders, saying they had not been consulted in advance on the draft accord, cautioned that it would become more difficult to combat Palestinian violence.


Critics' Choices; Artful Activities for Summer's Wane
Pop Music
The Caribbean is a subway ride away this weekend, when Labor Day brings two annual peaks of the season for island music.
One is the annual all-star New York Salsa Festival at Madison Square Garden, a night of percussive dance music and ardent love songs.
It is billed as a 40th-anniversary tribute to Sonora Poncena, the Puerto Rican powerhouse led by Papo Lucca on keyboards.
The bill also includes performers from all over Latin America, notably Oscar D'Leon, a fervent tenor from Venezuela, and Joe Arroyo, a Colombian singer with a pan-Caribbean taste and a voice like a salsa Sam Cooke, along with Tito Nieves, Marc Anthony, Rey Ruiz and others.
Tomorrow at 8 P.M.
Information: (212) 465-6741.
Tickets, $25 to $34.
In Brooklyn, this weekend brings the annual West Indian parade down Eastern Parkway on Labor Day, with steel-drum bands, reggae sound systems, carnival costumes and general celebration; the parade starts about 11 A.M.
To warm up, there are three nights of concerts in the Brooklyn Museum's grounds, at the corner of Washington Avenue and President Street.
Tonight there is a reggae show, including Terror Fabulous, Pac-Man, Butch Cassidy, Terry Ganzie and others; tickets are $25.
Tomorrow brings the Steel Band Panorama, a concert and competition featuring some of the best groups from Brooklyn and Trinidad; tickets are $20.
Sunday is calypso night, with the latest rhymed satires and party anthems by the Mighty Sparrow, Superblue, Crazy and Swallow, along with dancers and carnival costumes; tickets are $25.
Shows begin at 9 P.M.; information: (718) 774-8807 or (718) 625-1515.


Books of The Times; Plotter's Stupidity Saved By Stupidity of Others
A Simple Plan
By Scott Smith
335 pages. Alfred A. Knopf. $21.
A better title for "A Simple Plan," Scott Smith's much ballyhooed first novel, might be "A Stupid Plan."


For the IBM PC account, Lintas divides to conquer.
LINTAS WORLDWIDE has dramatically demonstrated how eager -- nay, anxious -- it is to hold onto its important IBM PC Company business, unexpectedly spinning off from its New York office an agency devoted solely to besting the seven other finalists in the PC company's review.
L2 , as the spinoff is coyly called, opened yesterday morning, only six or so weeks before the review is likely to end.
It took a floor at 79 Fifth Avenue in Manhattan after more than 20 Lintas New York employees, plus a top executive hired from outside, moved there Wednesday night from the flagship office at 1 Dag Hammarskjold Plaza.


This Time Braves, 3 1/2 Back, Surprise
If John Patterson could do it for the San Francisco Giants, Tony Tarasco could do it for the Atlanta Braves.
Playing anything you can do, I can do at least as well, Tarasco tonight ignited a three-run rally with a pinch-hit in the seventh inning that propelled the Braves to a 5-3 victory.
Run-scoring singles by Otis Nixon, Ron Gant and Fred McGriff tipped the game Atlanta's way.


Finding a Whole World in 64 Squares
ON a recent Saturday afternoon in the thick of August, Manhattan was anything but deserted.
The humidity was down, the sky was blue and an insistent breeze appeared to have convinced streams of people in Greenwich Village that a good mood was in order, that a distant beach wasn't a better place to be.
In the southwest corner of Washington Square Park stood the 19 chess tables that recently regained notoriety by way of the film "Searching for Bobby Fischer." The movie describes the early playing days of Josh Waitzkin, who is now a 16-year-old international master and ranked No. 1 in that age group in the United States.
I was not looking for the next Josh Waitzkin.
In the interest of exploring the chess world of New York City shown in "Bobby Fischer," I was simply trying to summon the nerve to play a game with one of the hustlers who threaded through the onlookers, competition clocks in hand, saying, "Speed chess, anyone?"


U.S.C. Picks Miller
CHERYL MILLER, Southern Cal's leading career scorer and rebounder, returned to the women's basketball program yesterday as head coach, replacing MARIANNE STANLEY, who did not have her contract renewed after four years with the Trojans. (AP)


Rison Arrested
Atlanta wide receiver ANDRE RISON was arrested in Atlanta early yesterday after he fired a pistol after two men tried to break up a fight between Rison and his girlfriend, the police said.
Rison was charged with aggravated assault and freed on $16,500 bond.
His girlfriend, LISA LOPES of the rap group TLC, was freed on $1,200 bond on a charge of obstruction. (AP)


Brown a Brown Again As a Consultant
JIM BROWN is back with the Cleveland Browns.
The team hired the Hall of Fame running back as a part-time consultant yesterday, making him a Browns employee for the first time since he retired abruptly at age 29 after the 1965 season, during the prime of his career. (AP)


Reviews/ Film; Boys Act Out a Crush on Marilyn Monroe
"Calendar Girl," a film involving one of yesterday's pin-ups (Marilyn Monroe) and a vehicle for one of today's (Jason Priestley, of the television show "Beverly Hills 90210"), certainly demonstrates that calendar art isn't what it used to be.
Mr.
Priestley stars as one of three teen-age boys who fall in love with Monroe's famous nude calendar shot.
In what is surely one of the least interesting fantasies ever engendered by that photograph, the three head for California in hopes of meeting their dream girl.
Other films, like Robert Zemeckis's "I Wanna Hold Your Hand," have had infinitely more fun with similar ideas.
Roy (Mr. Priestley), Ned (Gabriel Olds) and Scott (Jerry O'Connell) actually do catch glimpses of something resembling Monroe.
She is made to seem pert, giggly and accessible, despite the fact that the film is set in 1962, shortly before her death and certainly not when she was in the best of spirits.
Eventually she even invites one of the boys for an innocent late-night assignation (during which the Monroe look-alike goes to unwittingly hilarious lengths to turn away from the camera or block her face with her arm).
"I'd rather be your friend than your hero," she says wisp ily to her young companion.
"Friends last longer."


Dinkins Plays Down His Prospects in Primary
Mayor David N. Dinkins laid the groundwork yesterday for a less-than-overwhelming victory in the Sept. 14 Democratic primary, predicting that his challenger, Roy E. Innis, would "do well" and perhaps garner more than one-third of the vote.
"This is the pre-Giuliani vote," Mr.
Dinkins said, estimating that Mr.
Innis would get 30 to 35 percent of the primary vote, mostly from registered Democrats who anticipate voting for the Republican-Liberal candidate, Rudolph W. Giuliani, in the Nov. 2 general election.


The 'New' Oval Office: Slight Changes, but Tidier
White House officials unveiled the new Oval Office today, and, to the untrained eye, it looked pretty much like the old Oval Office.
It was too much to hope, after all, that the redesigned Oval Office might provide a touch of drama in these Washington dog days.
If Kaki Hockersmith, the Clintons' Little Rock decorator, had created an homage to the Graceland "jungle room" of the President's childhood idol, Elvis, it would have done much to help the capital shake off its summer torpor.


Bomb Trial Jury Pool
A Federal district judge has ordered that 5,000 extra people be called as prospective jurors in the World Trade Center bombing case, which is expected to be one of the most closely followed criminal trials in New York City history.
Article, page B1


Carillo's Passing Shots Tweak a 'Young Lad'
You are CBS's Mary Carillo.
You are a confident, talented tennis analyst and reporter.
You hear from a guy you grew up with, this ex-champion named John McEnroe, that because you are a woman you are not fit to call men's tennis on TV.
What to do?
You return serve with humor, refuse to transform the comments into a major feminist issue and try, not always successfully, to shift the focus from the gender scandal to the tennis at the United States Open.
"I've been dealing with this for a week," said Carillo, shaking her head, in CBS's studio Wednesday at the United States Tennis Association National Tennis Center.
"Coverage of the coverage has always boggled my mind."


Sports of The Times; Becker Gets No Favors From Open
THEY really stuck it to Boris here at the Open.
It was grubby to dole out the first-round matches over three days and nights, to justify the separate-admission night matches.
And it was flat-out dumb to make him wait around yesterday, too.
It took all of Becker's skill and tenacity to survive the schedule-makers, the rain and unseeded Andrei Cherkasov, 3-6, 6-7 (8-10), 7-5, 6-4, 6-4.


Toyota Unit Sues Its Former Agency
Toyota Motor Corporate Services of North America said yesterday that it had filed a lawsuit in New York State Supreme Court against its former agency, Martin Davis Omon &amp; Partners, seeking the return of funds forwarded to the agency for payment of media bills and other charges related to the company's corporate advertising account.
The $5 million to $10 million account had been at Martin Davis in New York from February 1990, when the agency was known as Omon New York Ltd., until June 13, when the account followed four former Martin Davis executives to their new shop, Oasis International Group Ltd. in New York.


Subway Explosion in Bronx Injures Four
An explosion underneath a subway train in the Bronx yesterday injured four people and delayed trains for two hours, a spokesman for the Transit Authority said.
The explosion, caused by a malfunction of the electrical transfer that powers subway trains, occurred at 2:40 P.M. underneath a No. 6 train as it traveled north between the 149th Street and Longwood Avenue stations, said the spokesman, Bob Slovak.


Bank Fraud Plea Forestalls Questions About Iraq Arms
A bank fraud case that was to have been the main stage for an accusation that the Bush Administration secretly engaged in the arming of Iraq and then sought to cover it up came to a surprising close today when the defendant, a week away from trial, struck a deal with the Government and pleaded guilty in Federal District Court in Atlanta.
The defendant, Christopher P. Drogoul, former manager of the Atlanta branch of a Rome bank, Banca Nazionale del Lavoro, had earlier insisted that he wanted to go to trial to demonstrate that he had been a pawn in an international conspiracy, involving the Bush Administration, to strengthen the Iraqi regime of Saddam Hussein in the months before its invasion of Kuwait.


SERBS AND CROATS FACE U.S. PRESSURE
The Administration strongly urged Croatia and Serbia today to make fresh territorial concessions to the Muslim-led Government of Bosnia and Herzegovina to help revive peace negotiations in Geneva.
It also warned them not to increase fighting.
As these messages were dispatched to Zagreb and Belgrade, President Clinton warned anew that the "NATO military option" of air strikes against Bosnian Serb forces, which was adopted last month, could be carried out if attacks on Bosnian Muslims resumed.


Chairman Appointed By Ross Roy Group
Peter R. Mills, the president and chief executive at Ross Roy Inc. in Bloomfield Hills, Mich., was, as expected, named to the additional positions of chairman and chief executive of its parent company, the Ross Roy Group.
The appointment was made yesterday by the Ross Roy board of directors.
Mr.
Mills, 54, succeeds Glen W. Fortinberry, who died of leukemia on Aug. 17.


Barnes &amp; Noble Goes Public: Vol. 2
Joining the fall rush to cash in on the voracious appetite for new public stock offerings, Barnes &amp; Noble Inc., the country's largest operator of book superstores and owner of the B. Dalton, Doubleday and Scribner's bookstore chains, is planning to sell a stake in its future.
That future, the company says, holds almost 300 book superstores, which are fast becoming the libraries of choice for many readers.


Surf's Up, Too Much


Corrections
A picture caption in Business Day yesterday, with the continuation of a front-page article about powerful personal computers, referred incorrectly to the son in a family that has three computers.
He is Andrew Machrone, not Eric.


Medical Issues Shine On Mixed Trading Day
Stocks were mixed in heavy trading yesterday, bolstered by drug issues and low interest rates but held back by weakness in airline and cyclical stocks.
Reports that President Clinton had backed away from cost controls as part of the Government's proposed health care program led investors on a shopping spree for drug stocks.
Pfizer's settlement of liability cases in California related to a heart valve added a lift to the group.


For Jews in America, a Time For New Hope and New Fear
For Steven Spiegel, a Middle East historian at the University of California at Los Angeles, the prospect of a peace agreement between Israelis and Palestinians is the kind of thing an analyst lives for: what he calls "a great historic moment."
"My God," he recalled saying to himself when he heard reports that negotiators were close to an agreement.
"That does it. This is the opportunity for the Middle East to make it into the 21st century. It now has a chance not to be a backwater. Israel has a chance to realize its potential to be the Singapore of the Middle East." Wide Range of Reactions
Across the country, as American Jews followed the progress of talks between Israel and the Palestine Liberation Organization, there was plenty of hope that at long last the Middle East could be at the beginning of a new era.


CHRONICLE
LYNN REDGRAVE stopped the show Tuesday evening -- for the sake of two lights in the mezzanine that had gone out.
Normally that would have been of little moment in her one-woman show, "Shakespeare for My Father," at the Helen Hayes Theater.
But the lights had been illuminating CANDACE BROCKER-PENN, the sign-language interpreter who was conveying Miss Redgrave's words to some 150 hearing-impaired people in the audience.
They were attending the show under the auspices of the Theater Development Fund's Theater Access Program.


A New Information Mass Market
Rupert Murdoch's acquisition of Delphi Internet Services, a gateway to the global Internet computer network, may be the clearest indication yet that businesses are eager to tap into a market of computer users that is growing by as many as a million new customers a month.
When the News Corporation, of which Mr.
Murdoch is chairman and chief executive, said on Wednesday that it would buy Delphi, an on-line computer service, the company said it planned to offer many of its newspapers and magazines in electronic form over the Internet.
It was one of many recent moves helping to lift the company's stock.  [ Market Place, page D4. ]


Eager to Try World Series, Smith Tries on Pinstripes
Lee Smith talked about his late grandfather having been a Yankee fan, even though he lived in Freeport, La.
He said he did not mind being called the Yankee savior, even though he does not think one player can decide a pennant.
He laughed about having to give his facial hair another shave; Smith clipped it from a beard to a goatee before leaving St.
Louis yesterday, but the clean-cut Yankees made him trim it to a mustache.
In his first day on the job, the pitcher who could save the Yankees tried to defuse the pressure by displaying a ready wit.
His biggest concern, he said, was whether his uniform would fit.
It did.


Palestinian Officials Say Pact With Israel Is Near
Senior officials of the Palestine Liberation Organization said today that they were within reach of an agreement with Israel on mutual recognition.
And along with hopes and fears on both sides, success or failure of the agreement could determine the future of Yasir Arafat as the P.L.O. chairman.
"Things are moving ahead quickly toward a recognition accord with Israel, which we expect within days," Bassam Abu Sharif, a close aide to Mr.
Arafat, said in a telephone interview.
He also made clear that he expected United States recognition of the P.L.O. to follow soon after.


Critics' Choices; Artful Activities for Summer's Wane
Dance
Mark Dendy once specialized in hurtling through space, blond curls flying, in his own and other choreographers' works.
But even dancers grow older and begin to fix their gazes on new horizons.
Mr.
Dendy has not given up the dance, but his eyes are currently fixed on a cornerstone of performance art, the creation and portrayal of characters in episodic monologues.
Tonight and tomorrow night at Performance Space 122, Mr.
Dendy will present "Bus Ride to Heaven," in which a group of wildly different people find themselves together en route to that greater, final glory.
The piece, presented earlier in the year at Dance Theater Workshop, has been described as a "one wo/man show," for several of the characters are women.


Kodak Is a Picture of Corporate Cynicism
To the Editor:
Re "10,000 Jobs to Be Cut by Kodak" (Business Day, Aug. 19): The struggle between the Eastman Kodak Company management and the investment community illustrates the fallacy of Wall Street's short-term focus.
Despite Kodak's profitability, investors are forcing the company to fire thousands to improve short-term stock performance.


Critics' Choices; Artful Activities for Summer's Wane
Theater
Even people who don't like mime -- and their numbers, one hears, are legion -- should give "Fool Moon" a chance before it closes on Sunday.
This revue, created by and starring Bill Irwin and David Shiner, is a far more effective safety valve for urban pressures than drinking two martinis or yelling at a runaway taxi driver.
Even before the curtain goes up, Mr.
Irwin and Mr.
Shiner give us a taste of exactly what can go wrong in a typical night at the theater: Mr.
Shiner, by impersonating an obstreperous late arrival who can't find his seat, and Mr.
Irwin, by portraying a would-be emcee vanquished by a recalcitrant microphone wire before he can speak a word.
Frustration, it becomes clear, is what this production is really about.
For the rest of the performance, with the gleefully eclectic musical accompaniment of the Red Clay Ramblers, Mr.
Irwin and Mr.
Shiner -- who play off each other in a good-clown, bad-clown tandem -- sustain a highly cathartic interpretation of life as an eternal wrestling match.
Car doors, plates of spaghetti, cigarettes and even the performers' own intractable limbs are autonomous forces with daunting powers of their own.
Sound familiar?


Mentally Ill Man Is Discharged From Hospital to Live With Son
Larry Hogue, the mentally ill man who for years frightened residents of the Upper West Side, was discharged from a state hospital yesterday to live with his son and three grandchildren in Bridgeport, Conn.
A psychiatrist and a social worker at Creedmoor Psychiatric Center in Queens evaluated Mr.
Hogue yesterday and decided that his mental condition had improved enough for him to leave the hospital where he has been institutionalized against his will since Dec. 14, 1992.


Home Video
New Fonda Tapes
These days, even perusing a best-seller list of fitness tapes is a bit of a workout.
Tamilee Webb is turning abs, arms, buns and legs to steel. (Five of Ms. Webb's "Buns of Steel" cassettes and three "Abs of Steel" are best sellers.) Cindy Crawford is shaping the body, Cher is building body confidence, Richard Simmons is sweatin' to the oldies, Denise Austin is kickin' with country and Judi Sheppard Missett is toning with jazzercise funk.
Into this churning niche come three new tapes from the exercise pioneer Jane Fonda.
On Sept. 15, A*Vision will release "Jane Fonda's Favorite Fat Burners," a compilation of routines from four of her earlier videos; "Jane Fonda's Pregnancy Workout" and "Jane Fonda's Start Up," a 25-minute introductory warm-up for beginners.


On My Mind; The Road to Palestine
Phase One: creation of a Palestinian state controlled by the Palestine Liberation Organization.
Phase Two: use of that state to carry on the struggle until "all Palestinian territory," which means Israel, is under Palestinian domination.
For a quarter-century that has been the two-phase policy of the P.L.O.
Sometimes it is stated formally -- as at the P.L.O.
Cairo meeting in 1974.
And day after day it has been proclaimed one way or another in P.L.O. speeches to the Palestinian people.


Man Gets 71 Months In Prison for Fraud
A packed courtroom erupted into applause today as a Federal judge sentenced Allan David Harris, a disbarred lawyer accused of defrauding investment clients, to 71 months in prison, double what the Federal sentencing guidelines require.
Mr.
Harris appeared dazed as Judge Leonard D. Wexler of Federal District Court, granted the requests of Mr.
Harris's victims and imposed the stiffest sentence possible under law.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.06
3.25
3.33
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
2.97
2.99
3.11
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.07
3.09
3.17
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
5.01
5.04
6.02
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
6.04
6.08
7.35
TELEPHONE BONDS
6.96
7.00
8.45
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
5.55
5.57
6.30
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Where's the Bottom?
With its only superpower enemy having retired from the global battlefield, does a fiscally strapped United States still need to spend more than $1.2 trillion over the next five years for defense?
It's hard to see why.
But that's the number on the bottom line of the Pentagon's new "bottom up review," unveiled Wednesday by Secretary of Defense Aspin.
By cutting perhaps $120 billion more than the Bush Administration had planned over the five-year period and scrapping some of the forces and weapons aimed solely at the now-vanished Soviet threat, the review makes a modest start at adjusting defense budgets to new international realities.
But the start is too modest to do justice to competing fiscal needs.


Out! Edberg Is Beaten by Novacek
Down went the champions, two sets to none, dire straits even for a pair of tennis treasures who share 11 Grand Slam titles.
As La Guardia's jets roared a path through the leaden cloud ceiling overhead, there was the two-time defending United States Open champion, Stefan Edberg, doing a fast fade on the grandstand court, and there was the 1989 champion, Boris Becker, fussing and fuming on the stadium.
Once again, upset artists and underdogs commandeered the men's draw at the National Tennis Center.
Edberg surrendered his Open tenure with uncharacteristic meekness in four sets, but Becker bullied his way through a much-interrupted first-round epic that required two days to stage and wound up taking 4 hours 43 minutes to decide.


New Jersey Education Act Is Judged Unconstitutional
After a judge ruled this week that the state had not done enough to close the gap between rich and poor school districts, Gov.
Jim Florio indicated he was taking comfort, and political refuge, in one thought: the school spending plan had not been declared outright unconstitutional.
Today he lost that comfort.


Israel Again Puts Off Demjanjuk Deportation
John Demjanjuk's deportation from Israel was put off once again today when a Supreme Court justice said he wanted more time to consider an appeal from Israelis pressing for new war-crimes charges stemming from the "Ivan the Terrible" case.
The justice, Theodore Orr, did not say how long he would take to decide, but it seemed likely that the 73-year-old Mr.
Demjanjuk would remain at the Ayalon Prison near Tel Aviv into next week and perhaps beyond.


China Says Saudis Found No Arms Cargo on Ship
China said today that a Saudi-American inspection team had completed a thorough search of suspected containers on a Chinese freighter in the Persian Gulf and found they contained none of the illicit chemical weapons cargo that United States intelligence agencies and the Clinton Administration earlier asserted.
Foreign Ministry spokesman Wu Jianmin, in a news briefing here today, said, "personnel dispatched by the United States Government" to the Saudi Arabian port at Damman "took part in the whole process of inspection as technical advisers to the Saudi side."


COMPANY BRIEFS
BAXTER DIAGNOSTICS INC., Deerfield, Ill., has signed an alliance for research and marketing with Spectral Diagnostics Inc. based in Toronto.
SPORT SUPPLY GROUP INC., Farmers Branch, Tex., said it was in talks to buy several companies, which it did not identify, that would add about $100 million to its annual revenue.


A Shepherd Coyotes Are Sure to Hate: the Llama
On a hillside here in Highland County, Count Dondi surveys his flock, his elegant neck poised, his doleful eyes ever watchful, his ears twitching expressively at the slightest sign of potential danger.
On the steep, partly wooded slopes of southwestern Virginia, where sheep graze in the shadow of the Allegheny Mountains, danger means coyotes.
Farmers in these parts have used donkeys, dogs, traps, snares, even night vision glasses to combat the wily predators, to little avail.
Now the coyotes may have met their match in an unlikely combatant: the docile llama.


In a Surprise Move, Iacocca Leaves Chrysler Board Early
Declaring, "It's time to let the younger people do the driving," Lee A. Iacocca, former chairman of the Chrysler Corporation, resigned today as a director and chairman of the executive committee.
Mr.
Iacocca's unexpected departure comes less than nine months into what was to have been a two-year board term, though he will remain on call as a consultant through the end of 1994 at an annual salary of $500,000 and with perquisites like access to a company jet.


Houston Effler Gets Footwear Account
Fayva, the retail footwear chain recently acquired by J. Baker Inc. in Canton, Mass., said yesterday that it had selected Houston Effler &amp; Partners in Boston to handle its account, most recently handled on a project basis by Rossin Greenberg Seronick in Boston.
Billings were estimated at $5 million.


Slain Girl Is Identified As Runaway From Harlem
After nearly two weeks as a nameless, unclaimed victim on a morgue slab, a young girl whose slashed and battered body was found burning beneath a highway overpass in the Bronx on Aug. 22 was identified by the authorities last night as a 13-year-old Harlem runaway with a troubled past.
The police identified the girl as Ebony Williams, of 103 West 120th Street, and said she was reported missing by her mother only last Tuesday, 10 days after her disappearance and death.
A detective noted a similarity between the girl in the report and the girl in the morgue, and the victim -- burned beyond recognition -- was positively identified from dental records.


Review/Music; Zorn's 40 Years of Restless Music
John Zorn, wearing an orange T-shirt and camouflage pants, sat on a milk crate and made his alto saxophone sputter and squawk.
It may not have looked like the beginning of a monthlong series devoted to the work of a major composer, but that's exactly what it was.
On Wednesday night, the Knitting Factory started what might be called its Zorniad, marking Mr.
Zorn's 40th year.
The Knitting Factory is the appropriate place for the project, since Mr.
Zorn has performed there regularly and collaborated with a good percentage of the club's other headliners.
The retrospective began with juvenilia.
"Caevorrys," written when the composer was 12 years old, received what Mr.
Zorn called its "first and probably last public performance." "Caevorrys" (for clarinet, flute, piano and "frequency generator," now a synthesizer) presaged later work.
Mr.
Zorn likes texture, noise, sudden changes and raucousness; he doesn't have much use for melody or smooth transitions.
He has cited the contemporary classical composer Mauricio Kagel and the free-jazz saxophonist Albert Ayler as influences; both modern musics encouraged his own love of cacophony and crunch.


Elizabeth B.Coker, 84, A Novelist of Old South
Elizabeth Boatwright Coker, a writer of historical novels, died on Wednesday in Byerly Hospital here.
She was 84.
Her family said she suffered a stroke last weekend, her family said.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
President Clinton will jettison some of his plans for comprehensive health benefits for all Americans.
Because of cost concerns, the package will initially include only limited mental health care and will not cover dental services for adults.  [ Page A1. ]
The back-to-school selling season has gotten off to a slow start.
Such sales can be a bellwether of Christmas sales.  [ D2. ]


Argentines Say a Sex Cult Enslaved 268 Children
An Argentine judge said today that a police raid had found 268 children living in cramped quarters, many of them underfed and poorly clothed, and literature promoting sex between adults and children.
The raid was carried out early Wednesday on a group known as the Family.
As many as 60 United States citizens were among the children and adults taken into custody, the judge said.


Study Finds Most Students Lack Reasoning Skills in Mathematics
When it comes to mathematical problem-solving, most American students just don't get it, the Department of Education said in a report issued Wednesday.
The department's National Center for Education Statistics said only 16 percent of the fourth graders, 8 percent of the eighth graders and 9 percent of the high school seniors correctly answered mathematics questions requiring problem-solving skills in a nationwide test.


U.S. AND RUSSIANS JOIN IN NEW PLAN FOR SPACE STATION
Formally ending decades of cold war rivalry in space, the United States and Russia agreed today to merge the hearts of their manned space programs, embarking on a joint effort to design and construct an international space station.
In a separate agreement signed today by Vice President Al Gore and Prime Minister Victor S. Chernomyrdin, Russia also agreed to place export controls on missile technology, a step the Administration had set as a condition to cooperation in space.


A Strike At Kennedy Center
The musicians of the Kennedy Center Opera House Orchestra struck on Wednesday in a contract dispute over the orchestra's status as a tenured ensemble.
The musicians were performing in a production of "The Phantom of the Opera." Performances have been canceled through today, but Alan Wasser, the general manager of the production, said that he was exploring ways to resume performances tomorrow or early next week.
The orchestra, which is represented by Local 161-710 of the American Federation of Musicians, performs for ballet and musical theater productions at the Kennedy Center.
It is also the orchestra of the Washington Opera, and is in a separate negotiation with the company on a contract to replace one that expired on Tuesday.


Free Yank TV Sought
The possibility that free Yankees games on WPIX-TV/Channel 11 may disappear next year because of an impasse with the MSG Network has Sports Fans United, a New York-based fans group, irate.
"This is an attack on fans and a raid on the public interest," said ADAM KOLTON, the group's executive director.
"The ultimate blame is on GEORGE STEINBRENNER, who signed an exclusive deal with MSG giving them the rights to all Yankees games. He violated a public trust."


Art in Review
Minayoshi Takada  Houk Friedman Gallery 851 Madison Avenue (at 71st Street) Through Sept. 18
Like arty girlie pictures, the photographs of nudes taken between 1947 and 1950 by Minayoshi Takada appeal to both esthetic and prurient interests.
As a photographer and magazine editor, Takada (1899-1982) was an influential figure in Japanese photography for many years.


COLLEGE FOOTBALL REPORT
Penn State
Penn State teams have been competing, and holding their own, in the Big Ten Conference since 1991.
But that has been in sports other than football.
At State College, Pa., football is No. 1 and an attitude prevails there not unlike that at Texas, another pigskin preserve.
A onetime Longhorn sports information director, Jones Ramsey, once made it clear where his school's priorities stood by saying, "the one sport I hate worse than track is field."


Jones and Young Land on Their Feet
Mets pitchers are proving recyclable.
Not only did Bobby Jones rediscover the action on his curveball tonight, but Anthony Young landed here and was issued Dwight Gooden's spot in the starting rotation.
With this team, what goes around tends to come around.
Jones was the phenom who temporarily fell on hard times.
He seemed legitimate in his debut victory over the Phillies in Philadelphia last month, but two forgettable outings had the 23-year-old's earned run average up to an astronomical 7.02.
Then, just when the words "not ready yet" were about to spew from Manager Dallas Green's mouth, Jones earned an 8-3 victory over the Chicago Cubs tonight at Wrigley Field.


For Children
Long Island Rail Road 'Watch Hill Special'
Fire Island National Seashore  Patchogue, L.I.
Recommended for all ages  (718) 217-5477  (516) 822-5477  Daily through Sept. 15  Recommended for all ages
Most subway riders have seen the Long Island Rail Road posters advertising day trips to beaches, including Watch Hill.
Since I had never heard of Watch Hill (isn't that in Rhode Island?) and yearned for a last hurrah in salt water, it was time to explore, with a 5-year-old.


2 Ex-Champs Socked
Two former champions yesterday paid the price for acting in less than championship fashion.
In Conway, N.H., MARVIN HAGLER was fined $350 and had his license suspended for 90 days after being found guilty of drunken driving.
A Columbus, Ohio, jury ruled BUSTER DOUGLAS will have to pay more than $293,000 in city taxes from his losing 1990 championship fight with EVANDER HOLYFIELD.  (AP)


Big Inning, Big Pitcher, Big Victory for Yankees
The Yankees needed a fun inning, an inning where they could have a blast and six players could scoot around the bases recklessly.
They needed a superb game from Jimmy Key, a game where he returned to nicking the corners and returned to being the old Jimmy Key.
Even the Yankees conceded they needed it.
They had lost two straight games to the White Sox, four of their last five and the first-place Blue Jays were losing them in their rearview mirror.
Key had been bashed by the Indians in his worst start of the season five days ago and was in a six-week drought.
Which Key would appear last night?
When would they have a rollicking inning?


The Spoken Word
POETRY READING, Nuyorican Poets Cafe, 236 East Third Street, East Village.
David Allen, Tito Nunez, Dale Goodson, Lisa Buscani, William Fogarty, Moravia White and Susan Yi read from their work.
Tonight at 7:30.
Admission: $6.
Information: (212) 505-8183.
TALKS AT THE WHITNEY, Whitney Museum of American Art, 945 Madison Avenue, at 75th Street.
"Handpainted Pop: American Art in Transition, 1955-62," tomorrow and Sunday at 2 P.M.; "In the Spirit of Fluxus," tomorrow and Sunday at 3:30 P.M.
All lectures are given by Margaret Sundell and are free with museum admission: $6; $5 for students and the elderly.
Information: (212) 570-3676.


Earliest Date for Opening Of School Year Is Sept. 20
Amid apologies and regrets, the New York York City Board of Education voted yesterday to delay the opening of school for the first time since a five-day teachers strike two decades ago.
In a 6-to-1 vote, the board agreed to postpone the opening from Sept. 9 until at least Sept. 20 to complete an inspection for asbestos and cleanup of the city's 1,069 schools.
The new inspections were ordered after investigators determined that four years of previous asbestos inspections were faulty and possibly fraudulent.


A Meddlesome Mother Leaves a Farewell Gift
A FEW weeks before she died in the winter of 1991, Vitta Perlman greeted her old friend Helaine Strauss with a joyous announcement: her son Clifford was going to marry a woman named Nancy Denton.
Ordinarily, Mrs.
Strauss would have been thrilled at the news.
But it was hard for her to get excited that day because there was a kink in Mrs.
Perlman's wedding scenario.


Sumburgh Journal; As Oil Calamities Go, Shetland Spill Was a Wimp
The Braer's giant steel hull has been smashed and scattered by the long Atlantic swells.
Only its blunt prow remains intact, tilted at a broken angle from the boiling surf where the tanker was driven aground in January, spilling its cargo of 630,000 barrels of oil.
But shoreward of the wreck, along a narrow cleft in the steep coastline that only last winter was oiled black and stinking with petroleum, there is nothing to suggest that this ragged headland had been the site of one of the biggest tanker accidents in a decade.


CHRONICLE
Is she or isn't she . . . buying a house in France, that is?
Two countries were abuzz this week with talk that the PRINCESS OF WALES had bought a farmstead near the village of St.-Remy-de-Provence.
Paris-Match and Agence France Press magazine had reported that the Princess had bought the country retreat for $1.7 million from Jose van Dam, the Belgian bass-baritone.
Mais non.
A spokesman at Buckingham Palace said that the story was "absolutely untrue," the Press Association, Great Britain's national news agency, reported yesterday.


Garage Damaged in Bombing Reopens at the World Trade Center


VLSI
Shares of VLSI Technology Inc. rose in active trading yesterday after receiving a "buy" rating from Bear, Stearns &amp; Company.
Factors behind the recommendation include strong demand for the company's computer chip sets for desktop computers and wireless communications systems, and the technology exchange agreement with the Intel Corporation for the development of new chip sets.


Shakespeare for Mere Mortals
Is Shakespeare truly the ruling genius of English literature, or just another writer?
Is the insistence on teaching Shakespeare to schoolchildren merely a sinister plot to bolster the agenda of the Right?
Was Shakespeare a misogynist?
A bourgeois hegemonist?
An apologist for imperialism?
If you, gentle reader, don't have an opinion on any of these questions, never fear: A whole raft of academics have plenty.
Together they have created a publishing mini-industry that has lately been labeled the Bardbiz.


Law Helps Communities Evict Bad Neighbors
To the Editor:
As a Civil Court judge assigned to the "drug eviction part," I write regarding an Aug. 22 article on efforts by a Bronx church to close alleged drug premises.
Contrary to the statement that such premises can be closed only after five separate offenses or obtaining a criminal conviction, the Real Property and Proceedings Law of New York provides an expedited procedure for evicting tenants whose premises, residential or commercial, can be shown to have been used for conducting an illegal drug business.


Review/Art; More to It Than Meets the Eye: A Show of Minimalist Paintings
As summer turns to fall and the art world revs up for the new season, one of the slower, more meditative esthetic experiences available in New York City is "Singular Dimensions in Painting" at the Guggenheim Museum SoHo.
This show places before the viewer nearly 40 Minimalist or proto-Minimalist paintings from the 1950's, 60's and 70's, most of them from the museum's collection.
Dominated by canvases in muted shades of gray, olive, blue and white or intractable black, it is nothing if not quiet and serene.
Although somewhat flawed in conception and limited in breadth, "Singular Dimensions" offers one of the most extensive surveys of this style in several years.
By concentrating on painting instead of sculpture, it emphasizes Minimalism's gentler side, countering the tendency among feminist art historians to see it rather simplistically as a uniformly authoritarian, macho way of art making.


Retailers' August Sales Hurt by Warm Weather
The back-to-school selling season, often regarded as a bellwether of Christmas sales, has gotten off to a slow start with retailers around the country reporting only small sales increases in August.
Shoppers turned out to buy notebooks and writing instruments but held off on buying blue jeans and jackets.
As a result, specialty store chains selling apparel, like the Gap Inc. and Ann Taylor Inc., had a particularly difficult time ringing up sales during the month.


Cable and Telephones Should Remain Rivals
To the Editor:
"Cable and Phone Companies: Foes or Allies?" (Business Day, Aug. 26), analyzing potential cooperation between telephone companies and cable companies, highlights the benefits of such partnerships, but minimizes the attendant risks for consumers.


Accounts
*
Descente America, Englewood, Colo., to Kelley &amp; Co., Boston, to handle its ski apparel division account, previously in-house.
Billings were not disclosed. *
A.T.&amp; T. Universal Card Services, Basking Ridge, N.J., to Campus Dimensions Inc., Philadelphia, as the first agency to market the A.T.&amp; T. Universal Card on college campuses nationwide.
Billings were not disclosed.


Seeking Thaw, Vatican Sends Aide to China
Hoping for a thaw in its chilly ties with China, the Vatican today sent a senior diplomat, Roger Cardinal Etchegaray, to a sporting event that begins Saturday in Beijing.
He is the highest ranking Roman Catholic Church official to visit China since the Communists took over in 1949.
[ Cardinal Etchegaray arrived in Beijing early Friday, The Associated Press reported. ]


RESULTS PLUS
GOLF  Hatalsky in Lead  Morris Hatalsky, whose last PGA Tour victory came in 1990, had eight birdies in a round of 64 and took a one-stroke lead after the first round of the Greater Milwaukee Open at Franklin, Wis., a tournament he won 10 years ago.
Steve Pate birdied the last three holes for a seven-under-par 65 at Tuckaway Country Club.
Jay Haas, Russell Beiersdorf and Tom Sieckmann were at 66.
At four-under 68 was the leading money-winner, Nick Price, who needs to win $3,009 this week to break Tom Kite's single-season earnings record of $1,395,278. (AP) ROWING  7 U.S.
Crews Advance  Seven American crews advanced to the finals of the world rowing championships yesterday, joining six other American boats that qualified for the medal round earlier in the week at Roudnice in the Czech Republic.
The United States men's fours without coxswain, silver medalists at the Barcelona Olympics last summer, won the second semifinal yesterday, edging Poland and Britain, and the women's eight fought off crews from Belarus, Russia, and Ukraine to finish second to Germany and qualify.
David Gleeson and Robert Kaehler, double scullers, finished third and are also in medal contention. (AP)  HOCKEY  Senators Fined $100,000  The National Hockey League yesterday absolved the Ottawa Senators of deliberately losing any games last season, but fined the team $100,000 for comments made by a former club official that insinuated such a possibility.
The team was also cited for failing to notify the league of the allegations.
The league's inquiry was prompted by reports that Bruce Firestone, former chairman and co-owner of the Senators, had offered inducements to players to lose their final game against the Boston Bruins so Ottawa would be assured the first pick in last June's entry draft.
Although there was some dispute as to what exactly was said, Firestone acknowledged that certain intemperate and inappropriate comments were made regarding the club's performance last season, the league said.
But Commissioner Gary Bettman said, "There was no basis in fact to those comments." (AP) COLLEGE FOOTBALL Two Winning Debuts It was a winning start for two coaches in new assignments last night.
For one, it was the first time ever; for the other, the second time around.
In Hattiesburg, Miss., Johnny Majors made his second successful debut at Pitt as Curtis Martin scored twice and Tom Tumulty made two key defensive plays to preserve a 14-10 victory over Southern Mississippi.
It came twodecades after Pitt held heavily favored Georgia to a 707 tie in Major's first game as coach. (AP)


Don James Finds That Roses Outnumber the Thorns
The former coach will arrive by yacht.
As the players, coaches and fans at the University of Washington continue to cope with emotions usually reserved for a death in the family, Don James will begin his season outside football the way he has always wanted -- relaxing on Lake Washington as he approaches Husky Stadium this Saturday.


TALKS CONTINUING, NORWEGIAN STATES
The Norwegian official who aided the secret talks between Israel and the Palestine Liberation Organization said today that negotiations on mutual recognition were continuing by telephone after the last face-to-face session here Tuesday night.
"There is a document, but it is not final yet," said the official, Foreign Minister Johan Jorgen Holst, who oversaw the secret talks that produced it last month.
"The questions are obviously very sensitive, because they go to the core of the legacy of the conflict -- the raison d'etre of the P.L.O. as an organization, and the legitimacy of the Israeli state."


Dinkins Invokes the Future
Today, Mayor David N. Dinkins begins broadcasting two new 30-second television commercials, in addition to the three ads already on the air.
One of the new ads features city-built ballfields in vacant lots, the other expanded library service.
The campaign says its ad buy for the week is $305,000, enough for a typical viewer to see a Dinkins ad 8 or 10 times in that period.
ON THE SCREEN Images of David Meadvin, 9-year-old campaign voluteer walking to East Elmhurst public library branch in Queens, using computer card catalogue, pulling book off shelf, sitting at table perusing book with Mr.
Dinkins and walking down aisle.
Ends with facsimile of Mayor's signature on screen with silent slogan: "One City. One Future."
PRODUCER Doak, Shrum, Harris, Carrier, Devine of Washington.
THE SCRIPT Narrator's voice: When David Meadvin goes to the library, he opens more than a book.
He opens doors to the future.
There was another young man who long ago learned lessons like that in his own life.
And today, as Mayor of New York, in the face of Federal cutbacks and budget crisis, he's fought to open city libraries six days a week, for the first time in almost half a century.
Because of David Dinkins, libraries are about more than buildings and books.
They're about New York's children and what they someday can become.
Mayor Dinkins.
It takes more than tough talk to run a tough city.
ACCURACY Mr.
Dinkins has moved to extend branch library service in all five boroughs to six days a week for the first time since 1947, but only after first making deep and bitterly protested cuts in library hours and services in his first 18 months in office to help balance the budget.
SCORECARD This ad, with its soothing soundtrack and soft, sentimental images of an avuncular Mayor, is part of a pointillist campaign that aims to blend dozens of dots into a persuasive pictures, and it does several chores at once.
It highlights a small but important accomplishment that the Mayor has managed to make in tough times, one that hits many New Yorkers in their own neighborhoods.
It plays to the Mayor's natural warmth and affection for children, which virtually leaps off the screen.
It invokes the Mayor's place in history, both by recalling Mr.
Dinkins's own diligent rise (he often notes that he was a B student in Latin at his segregated junior high school in Trenton, then led the class at his integrated high school) and his place as a potentially powerful role model for a new generation of children.


CLINTON CUTS AIMS ON MENTAL HEALTH AND DENTAL COSTS
President Clinton has decided to jettison some of the ambitious plans for comprehensive health benefits that he and his advisers had decided should be guaranteed to all Americans, Administration officials said today.
Because of concerns about cost, the health care overhaul package will initially include only limited amounts of mental health care and will not cover dental services for adults.


CHRONICLE
If sports stars can abandon their teams for stronger ones or for the highest bidder, why not newspaper columnists?
MIKE McALARY, the chronicler of street life and police exploits, both fair and foul, for The New York Post -- or is it The Daily News? -- seems to have mastered a certain fickleness more typical of power hitters than keyboard jockeys.


The Plot of the Mayoral Race Thickens


Texaco Gets Aid to Invest In Russia
The United States and Russia have put together a fund to encourage American companies to invest in Russia, and in a White House signing ceremony yesterday Texaco became the first beneficiary.
The oil company, which has an $80 million project to restore the production of 150 dormant wells in the giant Sutormin field in western Siberia, concluded an agreement with the Overseas Private Investment Corporation, a Federal agency, which will provide $28 million of loan guarantees and insurance against political risk for the effort.


United Air Said to Delay Kitchen Sale
The parent of United Airlines has suspended the sale of its flight kitchens, one of many moves intended to speed up an effort by its unions to put together a buyout proposal, according to people familiar with details of the talks.
The sale of the UAL Corporation's 17 flight kitchens, which employ 5,800 members of the machinists' union, has been something of a lightning rod in the relations of the company with its largest unions.
A coalition of unions representing United pilots, flight attendants and machinists has decided to try to gain control of the airline rather than face a loss of jobs resulting from the airline's continuing restructuring program.


School Calendar Altered to Accommodate Asbestos Delay
Having delayed the opening of school for the first time in nearly two decades, New York City's Board of Education shuffled the school calendar yesterday to make up the lost days by canceling a staff planning day and three holidays, including Columbus Day and Veterans Day.
The changes came as city and school officials continued to scramble for alternative ways to occupy the city's one million schoolchildren during the five days of school postponed because of the asbestos crisis.


Out and About: A periodic look at summer in the New York area; All Summer Long, in One Weekend
As the sun drops in the sky and the children grow tired and the gulls become cockier, the people who linger on the beach go down to the water and stand in it, sit in it, lie in it, surrender to it.
On the wide beach that runs for miles here, an old man stood ankle-deep in the surf, staring out to sea and massaging his belly, as round as his wife's when she bore their children.
A woman lay on her back in the wet sand, knees drawn up, arms at her sides, eyes closed, as if waiting to be swept away.
A girl knelt in the shallow surf, each retreating wave digging her deeper into the sand.
But she would not close the book she was reading or rise from the water.


Supposed to Be Rude?
To the Editor:
My wife and I took our 15-year-old grandson, Kurt, to New York City over the weekend to show him the usual sites.
As Kentuckians, I suppose we weren't too hard to dazzle, especially with the view from atop the World Trade Center and the dancing in "Crazy for You."
But what impressed us as much as anything else were New Yorkers themselves.
A fireman in heavy gear kindly pointed us to a subway station we were looking for.
A man in the Wall Street area walked a block with us to show us where to get tickets for the New York Stock Exchange tour.
Others were equally kind and helpful.


Peruvians Support Their Government
To the Editor:
Re "Champion Freedom in Peru" (editorial, Aug. 20):
Peru has recently undergone radical political changes that can hardly be described as "modest." Last Nov. 22 a Constituent Congress was freely elected in a process monitored by the Organization of American States.
That Congress is now legislating and overseeing the executive, and is about to approve a new Constitution.
Since 1990, Peru has dismantled the greatest terrorist menace in South America; made economic and financial reforms that President Clinton has called the most wide ranging in Latin America; redefined a cumbersome and often corrupt state apparatus, and introduced guarantees in the projected Constitution for an independent judicial branch.
This program is being pursued amid news media debate and absolute freedom of the press.
Not surprisingly, Peruvian Government policies have had a more than 60 percent approval rating over the last three years.


COMPANY BRIEFS
KIMCO REALTY CORP., Roslyn, L.I., acquired two shopping centers, Independence Square in Charlotte, N.C., and Peppertree Plaza in Margate, Fla., for about $24 million.
PIONEER GROUP INC., Boston, agreed to acquire Mutual of Omaha Fund Management Co. from Mutual of Omaha Insurance Co. for $23.5 million plus contingent payments of up to $3 million in three years.
POCO PETROLEUMS LTD., Calgary, Alberta, said it wanted to acquire the remaining Voyager oil and natural gas joint ventures and limited partnerships it does not already own for $18.5 million, or up to 2.95 million shares of its stock.


GTE ANNOUNCES PLANS TO ELIMINATE 2,600 JOBS
The GTE Corporation said yesterday that its local-telephone operations, the largest in the country, would eliminate 2,600 jobs.
About 1,600 of these positions, however, are already vacant because of an early retirement program earlier this year.
The positions were still carried on the company's books.
The remaining 1,000 staff reductions may come from early retirements and layoffs.


Rebels Kill 14 Colombian Soldiers in an Ambush


Peronist Backsliding
Argentina's President, Carlos Menem, proudly claims the mantle of Juan Peron, the charismatic strongman who transfixed his nation from the 1940's through the 70's.
And with his brilliantly successful economic policies, Mr.
Menem has revived the political fortunes of the Peronist movement.
Unfortunately, as Nathaniel Nash of The Times reported this week, Mr.
Menem seems to have revived some of the negative sides of Peronism as well, including thuggish attacks on reporters who dare to criticize his Government.
Mr.
Menem points out, rightly, that he is a Peronist with a difference.
Where Juan Peron nationalized, Carlos Menem privatizes.
And where Juan Peron won ovations and elections by demonizing the United States, Mr.
Menem loves to boast of the "carnal relationship" he has established between Buenos Aires and Washington.


Brooklyn Man Tells a Florida Jury About Being Kidnapped and Set Ablaze
With the case against the accused in disarray, a black New Yorker took the witness stand today and told of being kidnapped, showered with racial insults and doused with gasoline by his laughing white abductors before being set ablaze last winter.
Near the end of almost four hours of testimony at the Palm Beach County Courthouse, the 32-year-old witness, Christopher Wilson, a stock-brokerage clerk who lives the Flatbush section of Brooklyn, pointed to Charles Rourk, 33, and Mark Kohut, 27, both day laborers, and calmly identified them as the men who attacked him in a Tampa suburb on New Year's Day while he was on vacation in Florida.


Brooklyn Race Grabs Citywide Attention; Bitter Campaign as 45th District Prepares to Elect First Black Council Member
Amid the prim, tree-lined homes and bustling strips of small businesses in Flatbush, Brooklyn, one of the city's most contentious political battles is taking shape: to determine who will become the district's first black representative to the City Council.
The race reflects the passing of the torch from white to minority leaders in councilmanic districts around the city.
Carved out two years ago to encourage minority candidates, the largely working-class 45th District -- which includes parts of Flatlands and East Flatbush -- is 75 percent black.
Susan D. Alter, a white Democratic Councilwoman, managed to keep the seat in 1991 when she captured the Jewish vote in the primary and seven black candidates divided the rest.


Beliefs
For Stephen L. Carter, it was the kind of moment that authors of books about politics entertain only in fantasy.
On Monday, the President of the United States spoke at a prayer breakfast with religious leaders.
"I bought a book on vacation called 'The Culture of Disbelief,' by Stephen Carter," President Clinton said, adding, "And I would urge you all to read it."
Mr.
Clinton had obviously read the book himself.
His remarks reflected more than a cursory familiarity with its provocative contents.


Federal Agency Wants to Cut Your Vitamins
To the Editor:
I am surprised at the limited coverage of a most important health issue facing Congress.
The Food and Drug Administration, through proposed regulations, intends to limit free and unrestricted use of vitamins, minerals, herbs and dietary supplements in their present over-the-counter forms and potencies.
The proposed regulations could become law Dec. 1 unless countering legislation defeats it.
Under the proposal, the F.D.A. would disallow dietary supplement potency from exceeding levels found in food.
Any supplement with higher potencies would be subject to classification as an unsafe food additive.
The F.D.A. further intends to classify herbs as drugs.
Certain other supplements, such as amino acids, would be available only through prescription.


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY  REASSURANCE CITED ABOVE DANGER  The decision to delay the opening of New York City's schools while they are inspected for asbestos was based more on a need to reassure fearful parents than on any health risk in this situation, health experts and school officials say.
The health risks posed by a few days, or even months, of attendance in schools built with asbestos where the exposure could be limited are negligible, they said.
Page 1.


Hibbard Easily Finds The Mets' Weakness
Fifteen minutes after their 88th loss of the season, half of the Mets players were dressed and ready to hit Rush Street or watch an in-house hotel movie this afternoon.
But where was Jeff Kent?
The second baseman was in the dugout, in full uniform, alone with his bat.
Not that he had done anything productive with it today, but at least he was the one losing player preoccupied and perturbed by the team's latest morose act: making a star of Cubs pitcher Greg Hibbard.


Taylor Urges Giants to Move On; Hampton Signs New Pact
Lawrence Taylor had been remarkably restrained, which is unusual for the blunt and outspoken linebacker.
While some of his good friends have been shown the door, good friends like linebacker Pepper Johnson, Taylor had been pretty silent.
Until today.
Taylor said that while he disagreed with some of the personnel changes made by Coach Dan Reeves -- changes like waiving Johnson, who was later picked up by the Cleveland Browns -- he realized that the team has to move on.
Still, it became apparent that Taylor missed Johnson and didn't like the decision to release him.


Corrections
An article in Weekend on Aug. 27 about a tennis camp at Mohonk Mountain House in New Paltz, N.Y., misidentified a participant's employer.
Shirley Onacilla is a computer expert for the private Wall Street bank Brown Brothers Harriman &amp; Company.


Big Ten Is Paterno's Biggest Challenge
Joe Paterno likes Robert Browning because the poet, like Paterno, could not run or pass, but he could inspire.
"Ah, but a man's reach should exceed his grasp, or what's a heaven for?" is Paterno's favorite Browning line.
It inspired the reach Paterno took in 1964 when, as a young assistant coach, he devised the game plan for a 3-4 Penn State team that stunned the Big Ten Conference and unbeaten No. 2 Ohio State, 27-0, in Columbus.


Budapest and I.B.M. Make Music Together
When subscribers to the Hungarian Symphony Orchestra arrive for the season's opening night at the handsome Art Nouveau Academy of Music here next month, their tickets, their programs and the posters in the lobby will be emblazoned with the corporate logo of I.B.M., which is sponsoring the season.
And I.B.M. is backing a special four-concert Mozart series and a Mozart piano concerto contest.
The idea of corporate support for cultural institutions is new in Eastern Europe and is still treated somewhat gingerly in countries where Communism held sway for so many years.
Art is often considered by East Europeans to be sacrosanct and too pure for the incursion of crude commerce.
But as a sign of the changes now taking place, Budapest University is offering well-attended courses on the economics of arts institutions, with a heavy emphasis on how to attract private money for culture.


Browning Ferris to Acquire A Rival to Cut Down Costs
Browning Ferris Industries has agreed to buy Los Angeles County's largest trash-hauler in a deal valued at about $500 million to take advantage of potential savings in markets where the rivals overlap, industry analysts said yesterday.
The price it agreed to pay for Western Waste Industries, based in Torrance, Calif., is more than twice the company's revenue and twice the industry average for recent acquisitions, analysts said.


Bridge
A furious scramble to qualify marked the end of the preliminary stage of the NEC World Team Championships here this afternoon.
After 13 of 14 rounds in Group W of the Bermuda Bowl for open teams, the standings were: 1.
China and Norway tied, 227 victory points; 3.
Denmark 196.75; 4.
U.S.A.
No. 1, 196.25; 5.
India 193.5.; 6.
Venezuela 188.
The Americans, in one of the four qualifying positions for the first time since play began Monday, are to play Norway in the last preliminary round, while India faces China and Denmark meets Venezuela.
Although China and Norway are sure to qualify, each will be fighting hard because heading the group gives the right to select a quarterfinal opponent from the other group.


When Leaders Fly, Others Fume; Despite Profit, Air-India Is Nagged by Disruptions
The record profits posted today by Air-India, this country's international carrier, came despite a nagging problem that irritates the airline's officials and passengers alike: frequent flight rescheduling caused by the travel of Government leaders.
The Government-owned airline is regularly ordered to part with aircraft to fly Government leaders like Prime Minister P. V. Narasimha Rao and President Shankar Dayal Sharma abroad.


INSIDE
Jury Hears of Racial Burning
A black New Yorker told a Florida jury how he was kidnapped, showered with racial insults and set on fire in a racially motivated attack.
Page 7.
Customer Losses at Empire
Empire Blue Cross and Blue Shield has lost half a million of the 7.6 million customers it was insuring at the beginning of the year.
Page 21.
Meade Esposito Dies at 86
Meade H. Esposito, a Democrat who dominated Brooklyn politics as the last of the clubhouse-era party leaders, has died at age 86.
Page 26.


Enrollment Diminishes At Blue Cross
Buffeted by criticism and management turmoil, New York State's largest health insurer, Empire Blue Cross and Blue Shield, lost half a million of the 7.6 million people it was insuring at the beginning of the year.
Empire executives attributed the loss to a variety of causes, ranging from rate increases to its customers' smaller work forces to a year of internal disruption and an erosion in consumer confidence.
For the company, which has always prided itself on being the nation's largest Blue Cross plan, the loss is humbling, but its financial effects are unclear.


Experts Say Fear of Asbestos Exceeds the Risk in Schools
The decision to delay the opening of New York City's schools while they are inspected for asbestos was based more on a need to reassure fearful parents than on any estimate of health risk in this situation, health experts and school officials say.
There is no question that asbestos inhaled over a long period in significant quantities can cause cancer or lung disease.
But the health risks posed by a few days, or even months, of attendance in schools with asbestos where the exposure could be limited are negligible, they said -- less than the statistical likelihood of developing AIDS or being killed by a mugger, a drunken driver or a bolt of lightning.
Indeed, the dangers to children while playing in the streets while out of school are probably greater than the risks of spending a few days in a school while officials establish whether asbestos is present.


ARAFAT BATTLING FOR ISRAEL ACCORD IN HIS FATAH GROUP
Yasir Arafat, the leader of the Palestine Liberation Organization, struggled today to rally his mainstream Fatah movement behind proposals for peace with Israel, a first step to gaining the support of a sharply divided P.L.O.
Palestinian officials said several members of the Fatah Central Council had expressed vehement criticism of the content of the peace proposals and of the secretive manner in which they had been drafted.
But they added that Mr.
Arafat expected to secure the backing of Al Fatah, the most moderate group in the organization.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article yesterday about the dismissal of the military intelligence chief in Nicaragua misidentified the Nicaraguan President in some editions.
She is Violeta Barrios de Chamorro.


2 on Long Island Plead Guilty in Insurance-Claim Schemes
A former diplomat and the former president of the defunct Newmark and Lewis appliance-store chain have pleaded guilty to filing fraudulent insurance claims.
The two cases are part of an continuing Justice Department crackdown on insurance fraud, Federal prosecutors said.


Gingrich Plan for Satellite Lessons Arouses Critics
A proposed course of study that would allow the House Republican whip, Newt Gingrich, to teach college students in his home district and at some 132 sites in 31 states via satellite is running into questions about its financing and goals.
Critics, including much of the faculty at Kennesaw State College in suburban Cobb County, say the college and public resources are being used to promote the combative Georgia Republican's political agenda.
The criticism mounted this week with the release of documents showing that Mr.
Gingrich's political action committee helped set up the course and that many longtime supporters paid for it through a tax-exempt foundation.


Givenchy Wins a Major Round in Discount Fight
A Federal district judge in Los Angeles has struck another blow against diversion, the migration of luxury goods into discount and off-price stores.
In an opinion made public yesterday, Judge Mariana F. Pfaelzer ruled that C &amp; C Beauty Sales Inc., a Miami-based importer, had violated copyright laws by distributing and selling Amarige, a perfume made by Parfums Givenchy S.A., without the permission of Givenchy U.S.A., the French fragrance company's United States subsidiary and owner of the copyright on the perfume's box.


Perez Throwing Sinkers at the Yankees' Hopes
The monotony of it all is amazing.
Melido Perez starts, Melido Perez loses and another day disappears from the baseball calendar.
There may not be a greater burden during a pennant race than a slumping pitcher, and the Yankees are saddled with exactly that problem as they chase the Blue Jays.
Perez's mystifying descent continued last night and he continued to test Buck Showalter's patience with another skittish performance.
The Yankee manager might have to decide if Perez deserves to remain in the rotation after the Cleveland Indians peppered him for nine hits and five earned runs in six-plus innings, surging to a 7-3 victory at Yankee Stadium.


Ukraine Agrees to Allow Russians To Buy Fleet and Destroy Arsenal
Faced with a deepening economic crisis and a heavy debt to Russia for oil and gas, President Leonid M. Kravchuk of Ukraine agreed today to let Russia buy Ukraine's share of the disputed Black Sea Fleet, and to dismantle the nuclear weapons remaining on Ukrainian territory, in return for the uranium extracted from their warheads.
Mr.
Kravchuk's agreement with President Boris N. Yeltsin marked a sharp rollback in Ukraine's ambitions for equal status with its giant and powerful neighbor.
But the accords need to be approved by both the Russian and Ukrainian Parliaments, and such action is not necessarily preordained.


Review/Dance; From Barcelona, a Bit of Combative Affection
Mal Pelo is a Barcelona modern dance company whose name literally translates as Bad Hair.
More poetically -- the group's work seems to be rooted in its own poetic view of the world -- the name can also mean Street Urchin.
The second translation seemed much closer to the mark on the evidence of a performance by Mal Pelo Saturday afternoon in the Studio Theater at the Jacob's Pillow Dance Festival.
There was a tousled, slightly gamin look to "Sur-Perros del Sur" ("Dogs of the South"), an hourlong piece that Mal Pelo presented in its first formal American engagement after showcases at the Pillow and in New York.
Three wayfarers bounded, darted and wandered through a dark landscape, pausing for bits of activity with lines of fish hanging about the stage and with a large wooden table and chairs, which were put to enjoyable acrobatic use.


Reader's Digest Grants Go to 2 Dance Groups
Dance Theater of Harlem and Ballet Hispanico have been awarded major grants by the Lila Wallace-Reader's Digest Arts Stabilization Initiative.
The Harlem ballet company will receive a four-year grant of $1 million, the maximum award, with $435,302 to go to Ballet Hispanico over five years.
The grants are for reducing liabilities, establishing working capital reserves and implementing long-range financial plans.


Walsh-Washington War of the Words: Now, the Final Word
They were proud members of the Forty Niner Faithful, adolescent division.
Jamal Fountaine rejoiced in the Super Bowl successes of the Bill Walsh era.
Eric Bjornson has a picture of himself, in a tuxedo, receiving a scholar-athlete award from Walsh.


Advanced Micro Shares Fall On News of an Unclean Chip
Shares in Advanced Micro Devices Inc. fell today after the company disclosed that its "cleanroom" version of the Intel Corporation's 486-class computer microprocessor was not so clean after all.
Advanced Micro said its Am486SX chip contained software developed by Intel for an earlier-generation chip, the 386.
Earlier Advanced Micro statements had been widely interpreted to mean its cleanroom 486 chip was free of Intel software.


Indiana Church Destroyed by Fire


Shooting on a Bus
The police were investigating early today a fight that broke out aboard a Transit Authority bus in Manhattan shortly before midnight between two groups of men in which shots were fired inside the bus as it was driven up Broadway through Harlem.
Sgt.
Joseph Gallagher, a police spokesman, said one group of men entered the bus at 126th Street and Broadway about 11:30 P.M., and a dispute broke out with a group already aboard.
The men, as well as most of the passengers, fled when the bus stopped at 158th Street.
Sergeant Gallagher said neither the identities of those involved, nor the reason for the fight could be immediately determined.


Weicker Calls Special Session Over Patriots
Gov.
Lowell P. Weicker Jr. summoned the General Assembly today for a special legislative session later this month on the subject of football, specifically the hows and whys of luring the New England Patriots professional football team south from Massachusetts.
Mr.
Weicker said the move poses an "opportunity of potentially great benefit" to Connecticut and thus qualifies as an emergency that justifies a special session.
It is to begin Sept. 22.


A Primer: The Forces Propelling Interest Rates Back to the 1960's
The earth did not tremble when the interest yield on 30-year Treasury bonds slipped below 6 percent yesterday for the first time in a quarter century.
But as economic symbols go, it was a big one, a sign of near-consensus that the American economy is hunkering down for a long period of stable prices and tepid growth.
"The Wall Street types are all redoing their charts to go back to the 1950's," said John Makin, an economist at the American Enterprise Institute -- back to an era when savings accounts paid 2 percent and inflation was something that happened to profligate foreigners.


Retrieval of Bush Personnel Files By Clinton Aide Is Under Inquiry
The State Department has begun an internal investigation into why a Clinton Administration official ordered the retrieval of sensitive personnel files of Bush Administration appointees and how that material was given to The Washington Post.
For the Clinton Administration, the inquiry is embarrassingly reminiscent of disclosures during the Presidential campaign that Republican political appointees at the State Department searched the passport files of Mr.
Clinton and his mother, Virginia Kelley.


Prayers Won't Pacify South Africa
Prayers, parades and a national moment of silence on Thursday attested movingly to South Africa's yearning for peace.
President F. W. de Klerk spoke the right words on Peace Day; so did his former prisoner, Nelson Mandela, leader of the African National Congress.
There are indeed "sinister forces and faceless murderers," in Mr.
Mandela's words, using "senseless violence to prevent the advent of democracy."
But prayers alone cannot assure a successful transition as white rule yields to multiracial democracy in a breakthrough election now scheduled for next April.
As many as 10,000 people have been killed in the three years since Mr.
Mandela was freed, an average of nine deaths a day.
And South Africa's police, tainted by complicity with past apartheid regimes, seem unable or unwilling to contain violence in black townships.


Peruvians Support Their Government; Plundered Heritage
To the Editor:
"Poor Peru Stands By as Its Rich Past Is Plundered" (news article, Aug. 25) mentions the United States, Japan and Western Europe as the principal markets for looted material from Peru.
However, the United States, as a signatory of the 1970 Unesco Convention on unauthorized international movement of cultural property, can restrict import of such material when a state that is party to that convention requests relief.


Barbara Schoen, 69, Director of Writing At SUNY-Purchase
Barbara Taylor Schoen, an author and the founder and director of the writing program at the State University of New York at Purchase, died on Thursday at her Purchase home.
She was 69.
She had been ill for a long time, her family said.


Sell the Farm: Agricultural Tourists Are Growth Crop in New York
Her name is Peggy Smart, but the children who visit the Woolamby Farm here call her Mother Goose.
"The children were calling me Bo Peep, and I thought I was a little too old to be Bo Peep," said Mrs.
Smart, a co-owner of the farm.
"Mother Goose liked to tell stories and nursery rhymes: I thought it made a better character to use."


E.M.S. Crew Is Blamed Over Patient Left for Dead
The New York State Health Department said today that two New York City emergency medical technicians performed incompetently when they declared a Brooklyn woman dead as she lay unconscious and barely breathing in her apartment building last June.
The 40-year-old woman, Nancy Vitale, was left without treatment for nearly three hours after the two technicians decided she was dead.
It was not until a doctor from the city Medical Examiner's office heard gurgling sounds coming from Ms.
Vitale that she was taken to Coney Island Hospital, where she was treated and eventually released.


Barges Return to a Swifter and Much Wider River
For two months the mighty barges waited, marooned in their places or chased to quieter channels while enough grain to feed a continent sat sodden in silos and farmers and shippers could do little but count their losses.
Now life is returning to normal on the Mississippi as the barges carrying grain from the upper Corn Belt to the Gulf of Mexico make their first tentative trips down a river that barge hands say they barely recognize.


New York Needs Term Limits for City Council and Top Posts
To the Editor:
An Aug. 19 article that foresees the coming New York City Council election as causing few changes, states that "the hope that the newly empowered City Council . . . would attract droves of grass-roots candidacies has run smack up against some hard political realities." That should come as no surprise.
In the 1991 City Council elections, nearly 95 percent of the incumbents were re-elected.
Indeed, incumbency has its advantages.
Among other perquisites of office, an incumbent has a taxpayer-financed staff, which may act as a public relations operation; the ability to mail newsletters to constituents, and perhaps most important, easy access to special interest money.
Thus we have noncompetitive races, members increasingly insulated from constituent pressure and ossification of municipal government.


Photographer of Ships Plies His Craft, Literally
THERE was Robert Kousoulos in his tiny inflatable rubber boat in the middle of the Hudson, peering upriver into approaching fog and stalking big ships as is his custom and passion.
"Sometimes you can spend a whole day and not see anything," said Mr.
Kousoulos, 51, a truck-driving instructor.
It was about to turn into one of his better days.
"Look," he said, pointing to a dark spot in the mist north of Spuyten Duyvil.
"I think that's a tug." He nosed his nameless 11-foot craft northward and turned up the throttle on the 15-horsepower outboard.
The little boat started to skim over whirlpools and tidal ripples.
"There's a buoy up there and I want to have it in the foreground when the ship passes. The tide could make it tricky."


Nicaraguan Leader Reaffirms Pledge to Oust General
Nicaragua sank again into political turmoil today as President Violeta Barrios de Chamorro struck back at Sandinista military leaders by reaffirming her pledge to remove Gen.
Humberto Ortega Saavedra as the Army commander.
Outraged Sandinista leaders challenged Mrs.
Chamorro openly on Thursday after she surprised them by announcing that she would dismiss the head of the Army's intelligence section and take it immediately under civilian control and that she intended to replace General Ortega some time next year.


Executive Changes
BEECH AIRCRAFT CORP., Wichita, Kan., named its chairman and chief executive, Arthur E. Wegner, to the additional post of president.
M.
A.
HANNA CO., Cleveland, an international specialty chemicals company, appointed Douglas R. Schrank vice president and chief financial officer.


NEWS SUMMARY
International 2-5  ARAFAT FIGHTS FOR PEACE PACT
Yasir Arafat struggled to win support from his mainstream Fatah movement for peace proposals with Israel, but Palestinian officials said he was likely to win its backing as a first step in the P.L.O.  1


Rating the Financial Knowledge of the Next Generation
How well do students understand the financial markets and related subjects?
A recent survey of junior high and high school students found some big gaps in knowledge.
Although a majority of respondents selected the correct definition of a stock, only about a third said stocks would likely make more money than bonds or bank deposits over 20 years.
Respondents overwhelmingly said that inflation makes it more expensive to borrow money and that the Federal budget deficit is bad for the economy.
But thay underestimated Federal income tax rates and overestimated employment (the most common answer was 21 percent; the official tally is 7 percent)


Corrections
An article in Business Day yesterday about the possibility that the Times Mirror Company would move its corporate headquarters in Los Angeles mischaracterized the company's financial position.
Although advertising revenue has fallen 15 percent since 1990, the company's financial condition is not "tenuous."


Billups Draws One Year in Prison
Former Cincinnati Bengals player LEWIS BILLUPS was sentenced to 12 months in prison and fined $10,000 yesterday for threatening the Washington Bullets' REX CHAPMAN in calls to Chapman's sister.
Billups pleaded guilty in June to making phone calls from Florida to his former girlfriend, JENNY CHAPMAN, in which he threatened to ruin Rex Chapman's career if she talked to another man.
In one call, Billups threatened to have friends break the player's knees.
The calls were taped by the FBI, which had been contacted by the Chapman family.


John W. Griffin, 73, Florida Archeologist
John Wallace Griffin, who mixed archeology and history in exploring Florida's past, died yesterday at his home in St.
Augustine, Fla.
He was 73.
The cause was cancer, said Page Edwards, Jr., the executive director of the St.
Augustine Historical Society, where Mr.
Griffin worked as director from 1958 to 1971.


The Last of the Lazy, Hazy Days


U.S.-Built Vehicles in Sales Rise
Sales of domestically built cars and light trucks continued their steady rise in late August, gaining 19.7 percent from the corresponding period last year, when sales were sluggish.
Many dealers reported that low inventories of 1993 models, rather than flagging consumer interest, kept them from selling even more vehicles.
"Sales were decent, but inventory was so low we could have done better," said Bob Van Ramshorst, co-owner of Ridgeway Chevrolet-Geo in Lansing, Ill.
He said that that problem was easing as the new 1994 models arrived in his showroom.


New Nader Book Attacks Safety Record of Airlines and the F.A.A.
In a new book, Ralph Nader accuses the airline industry and the Government of doing little to reverse growing dangers in air transportation, an accusation the industry and the Federal Aviation Administration vehemently deny.
The book, "Collision Course: The Truth About Airline Safety" (Tab Books/McGraw-Hill), is scheduled for publication Wednesday.
It is a blistering attack on what Mr.
Nader and his co-author, Wesley J. Smith, contend are outmoded aircraft, pilots who lack proper training, unreliable air traffic control equipment, inadequate inspections and bureaucratic inaction.


Three Council Candidates Vie To Be First Black Elected From a Brooklyn District


Hradistko Journal; Digging for Buried Treasure That the Nazis Looted
In the damp, dark banks of a creek not far from this summer vacation village in the Czech countryside, trenches have been hacked and then abandoned.
About a mile away, two plots in the forest, about 50 yards by 50 yards, have been fenced off with imposing new aluminum wire.
And on a nearby hilltop, the police keep surveillance on a hole in the ground.
The cause of all this attention is the belief that buried under the ground are hundreds of crates -- some say more than 500 -- of gold, jewels, art and perhaps Swiss bank account numbers hidden here by the Nazis in the waning days of World War II.


Financing Data Released
Rudolph W. Giuliani's fund-raising outpaced Mayor David N. Dinkins's by nearly 3 to 1 in the three weeks ended last Monday, with the Republican-Liberal challenger taking in $851,195, compared to $279,078 for the incumbent, campaign finance filings showed yesterday.
In the same period, Mr.
Giuliani spent $795,000 and the Mayor spent $920,693.Mr.
Giuliani has now outstripped the Mayor's efforts for two consecutive reporting periods.
The Mayor now has $1.5 million in cash on hand, while Mr.
Giuliani has $1.3 million.
Not including matching funds, Mr.
Dinkins has raised $6.2 million and spent $5.5 million.
Mr.
Giuliani has raised a $5.4 million and spent $4 million.


Don Hall, Songwriter And Singer, Dies at 44
Don Hall, a singer and songwriter who helped found People Taking Action Against AIDS, died on Thursday at St.
Luke's-Roosevelt Hospital in Manhattan.
He was 44 and had homes in Manhattan and Bellport Village, L.I.
The cause was AIDS, said his companion, Robert Starr.


Corrections
A news analysis yesterday about the emergency reinspection of New York City schools for asbestos rendered the name of the Special Commissioner of Investigation for the New York City School District incorrectly.
He is Edward S. Stancik.


Corrections
A drawing of a man in a boat that appeared with the Our Towns column in some copies yesterday was published in error.
The correct illustration showed a couple seated at a table.


Rison's Day in Court Postponed
The aggravated assault case against Falcons wide receiver ANDRE RISON was postponed yesterday, and Rison said he would play Sunday against the Lions in his hometown of Detroit.
Rison appeared in Atlanta Municipal Court with his friend, the rap performer LISA LOPES, with whom he was fighting when they were arrested early Thursday in a parking lot.
The police said Rison assaulted Lopes, a member of the rap group TLC, after they left a nightclub.
He is also accused of firing a gun after two men tried to help Lopes.


Looking for Safer Yield In All the Right Places
PREDICTING the course of interest rates is notoriously difficult.
It requires getting the economy right, and then timing the market.
Who could have guessed that a Democratic President with ambitious social programs would send yields to their lowest levels in decades?
But for investors who trembled as long Treasuries burst through 6 percent this week, a growing breed of strategists aims to provide some protection should yields bounce back up.
Foreign debt, junk bonds, high-yielding stocks and municipals are among their suggestions.
In general, the strategists favor broad diversification and caution that the credit markets can't continue to deliver terrific returns.


No Headline
"He's taking us all with him. He's putting Washington Heights on the map." -- RALPH GONZALEZ, whose high-school teammate Manny Ramirez played in Yankee Stadium last night.  [ 29:1. ]


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
2.94
3.03
3.02
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
2.93
2.97
2.90
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.02
3.07
2.95
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
4.87
5.01
5.85
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
5.94
6.04
7.28
TELEPHONE BONDS
6.88
6.96
8.40
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
5.53
5.55
6.25
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


A Nobleman's Castle Can Be Your Off-Site Venue
To be born British and an aristocrat used to guarantee wealth, prestige and one or several grand country houses to be handed down through the generations.
Unfortunately for many, wealth is no longer a guaranteed part of the package, and the family seat is often a liability because of the costs of maintenance and taxes.


Handling Elders' Often-Murky Finances
As an emergency medical technician, John Praggastis had plenty of experience helping to revive elderly patients.
But the financial and household chaos surrounding his 98-year-old grandfather defied quick treatment.
During a trip to his childhood home in Portland, Ore., Mr.
Praggastis visited his paternal grandfather and frail grandmother and found their yard littered with debris, their refrigerator filled with moldy food and their finances in disarray.


Neighborhood Hero Touches Every Base
In Washington Heights this summer, the sweetest sentence in the Spanish language is this: "Mami, ya me subieron a las Grandes Ligas." Mommy, they called me to the major leagues.
That is what Manny Ramirez said when he telephoned his mother, Onelcida Ramirez, a factory worker, Wednesday night.


For Martin, Game Is Nothing but Net
It was the hardcourts that brought out the competitive nature in Todd Martin: the basketball ones.
He dreamed of making the last-second shot; he dreaded making the crucial error that would lose the game.
In a sense, basketball drew Martin to tennis courts.


Edouard Stackpole, Whaling Expert, 89
Edouard A. Stackpole, a leading expert on whaling, an author and curator, died on Thursday at Nantucket Cottage Hospital in Nantucket, Mass.
He was 89.
He died of complications following a stroke, his family said.


Finding the Right Mix of Stocks and Bonds
The 96 balanced funds have reaped the benefits of continuing bull markets in stocks and bonds with differing strategies: the only real link is that the winners mostly made big bets.
Balanced funds combine stocks and bonds, often in a 50-50 mix.
Evergreen and CGM Mutual have edged their stock holdings up to about 60 percent, while Fidelity Balanced and National Growth and Income hold only a third of their portfolios in equities.


An Optimistic Back-to-School Haircut


Cease-Fire Eroding With Bosnia Talks Stalled
Sarajevo radio reported today that forces of the Muslim-led Bosnian Government battled nationalist Serbian and Croatian militia members in several key regions in fighting aimed at redrawing the map in a proposed peace settlement.
The plan would break this country into a loose union of three republics: one Serbian, one Croatian and one mostly Muslim.
The Bosnian Serbs and Croats have accepted the proposal, but the Muslims have rejected it because they also are seeking the restoration of districts that had Muslim-majority populations before the Serbs overran them, killing the residents or forcing them to flee.


Review/Pop; A Zimbabwean's Songs of Struggle
Thomas Mapfumo, Zimbabwe's most respected bandleader, doesn't write frivolous songs.
On his new album, "Hondo" (ZimBob), he sings about war, AIDS and the loss of traditional African culture.
A song he performed on Sunday night at S.O.B.'s, "Maiti Kurima Hamubvire" ("You Once Boasted You Were a Great Farmer"), laments broken promises and "untold suffering." Mr.
Mapfumo's style has been named "chimurenga" ("struggle") for its role in the revolution that turned Rhodesia into Zimbabwe; his voice is a deep, somber baritone, full of stoic melancholy.
But even he can't help smiling at the band's music, a gentle updating of age-old traditions.
It is music that plinks and shimmers, set in motion by patterns derived from the traditional music played on mbiras (thumb pianos) by Zimbabwe's Shona people.
In some of Mr.
Mapfumo's songs, two mbiras generate light, interlocking motifs, in six-beat meters that sound like a music box; in others, electric guitars play similar lines, sometimes over rhythms akin to soca and reggae.


RESULTS PLUS
TRACK AND FIELD 5 Win Awards of Gold Michael Johnson, Noureddine Morceli, Sonia O'Sullivan, Maria Mutola and Trine Hattestad each earned four kilograms of gold yesterday by winning at the Van Damme Memorial in Brussels to sweep the Golden Four meets.
A total of 20 kilograms of gold, worth about $265,000, was offered as a reward to be won outright or shared by anyone winning the same event at Oslo, Zurich, Berlin and Brussels.
Morceli, who is from Algeria, was on world-record pace with one lap to go in the mile but weakened in the final straight and finished in 3 minutes 47.30 seconds, only .98 seconds off the world mark Steve Cram of Britain set in 1985.
Johnson had to catch the 1992 Olympic champion, Quincy Watts, for most of the 400-meter race, but his final kick gave him the edge and a share of the gold.
He was timed in 44.45.
O'Sullivan of Ireland beat Yvonne Murray of Scotland in the women's 3,000 meters in 8:30.87.
Mutola of Mozambique won the women's 800 meters in 1:57.90, and Hattestad of Norway threw the javelin 222 feet 10 inches. (AP)


Giuliani Appears to Alter Stand On Exemptions to Budget Cuts
Rudolph W. Giuliani, the Republican-Liberal candidate for mayor, appears to have altered his position on exempting certain city agencies from the substantial budget cuts that he proposed last month.
In releasing a broad plan for the city's economy and the municipal budget on Aug. 10, Mr.
Giuliani said he would reduce the size of the city's work force by about 35,000 jobs, from about 215,000 workers to 180,000 workers, within four years.
Mr.
Giuliani said he would trim the size of local government through attrition and early-retirement packages.


China's Censors Issue a Warning
Even as Government censors allowed the internationally acclaimed Chinese film "Farewell to My Concubine" to resume public showings here this week, the state censorship bureau warned that it would continue to ban any films that put the Communist system in a bad light.
A directive from the Film Bureau of the Ministry of Radio, Film and Television, published on Thursday in the industry newspaper China Film Weekly, said, "Since August this year when censoring feature films, the film bureau continuously found attitude problems in some films."


Dinkins Agrees to 2 Debates With Democratic Rivals
Mayor David N. Dinkins has agreed to two televised debates with his rivals for the Democratic mayoral nomination, his campaign confirmed yesterday.
The debates will give his challengers, Roy Innis and Eric Melendez, a valuable opportunity to pick up visibility and legitimacy two days before the Sept. 14 primary.
So far, their candidacies have been overshadowed by Mr.
Dinkins's impending rematch with Rudolph W. Giuliani, the Republican-Liberal candidate.


Review/Film; A Futuristic Prison That Demands Escape
In the hellish futureworld of Stuart Gordon's film "Fortress," overpopulation has led to the passage of laws decreeing that a woman can be pregnant only once in her lifetime.
The film's creepy opening scenes show what happens to those caught breaking the rules.
Apprehended at the border while trying to flee the country, John Brennick (Christopher Lambert), a former Black Beret captain, and his wife, Karen (Loryn Locklin), pregnant with her second child, are shipped to the Fortress, an impermeable 33-story underground prison in the middle of the desert.
The structure is one of the more ingenious fantasies of high-tech fiendishness to be seen in films recently.
A privately operated facility run by the Men-Tel Corporation, it has a surveillance system that not only monitors the prisoners' activities 24 hours a day but also looks in on their dreams and even enters them.


Dow Gains 7.83 for Day But Slips 6.70 for Week
Stocks were up modestly on moderate volume ahead of Labor Day, as weakness in the European markets carried into early trading yesterday in the United States.
But a strong rally in the bond market on weaker-than-expected employment data for August kept equities afloat.
Long-term interest rates slipped below 6 percent for the first time, making the return on investment in equities more attractive and limiting the downside to the market as some buyers stepped in from the sidelines.


Clinton Pushes 'Practical' Job-Training for Youth
President Clinton came to an airport hangar here today to sell a program intended to develop better ways of offering job training to young people uninspired by traditional academic programs.
Addressing several hundred people at an aviation school here that he considers a model of "practical" learning, the President said: "The truth is there's a lot of very serious academic research which indicates that significant numbers of our people actually learn better in practical circumstances than they do in classroom settings. It's different for different people."


Mexico Passes Electoral Change, but Foils a Presidential Bid
Mexico's governing party, under pressure to reform the system that has kept it in power for more than 60 years, has passed a package of electoral changes but carefully avoided giving a popular opposition party leader any chance to run in next year's presidential election.
After an all-night debate, the Legislature -- in which the governing party holds a large majority -- early this morning approved a modification in Mexico's Constitution that loosens the qualifications for presidential candidates, but stipulated that the new law would not become effective until the year 2000.


When Workfare Is Just Make-Work
As usual, Washington is a few steps behind New York City.
Federal lawmakers have been making a lot of noise about the need for "workfare" programs that would require able-bodied welfare recipients to work as a condition for receiving benefits.
In New York, we have tried such a program and know it doesn't work.
At the Parks Department, about 800 welfare recipients currently help clean parks as part of the citywide Work Experience Program, started in 1987.
Participants work 35 hours every other week, and can only stay at the Parks Department for nine months.


Business Digest
The Economy
The number of United States payroll jobs fell in August for the first time in more than a year, and the Government's chief forecasting index turned down in July.
These and other sobering results more than offset economic improvements elsewhere, including a slight decline in the August unemployment rate, to 6.7 percent from 6.8 percent in July.  [ Page 1. ]  The jobless rate rose slightly in New York and New Jersey, but remained unchanged in New York City.  [ 47. ]


Observer; Besides The Pencil Box
For children about to start school here are words of wisdom to ease the long path toward living happily ever after:
First, because the Michael Jackson matter is dramatizing the American press's descent into swinishness, hear the French poet Baudelaire's thought on journalism:


Dudley a Blazer, at Least for a While
CHRIS DUDLEY will not soon forget the summer of 1993.
"It's been one of the longest summers of my life," he said yesterday, one day after the National Basketball Association's special master, a league and union arbitrator, upheld his unusual contract with the Portland Trail Blazers.


Money Fund Assets Down
The total assets of the nation's 647 retail money market mutual funds decreased $3.02 billion, to $385.76 billion, for the week ended on Wednesday, according to the Investment Company Institute.
The assets of the 407 taxable retail money market funds were down $2.73 billion, to $303.38 billion, while the assets of the 240 retail tax-exempt funds decreased $290.0 million, to $82.38 billion.


CHRONICLE
If the stage is conducive to romance so, too, it seems, is the kitchen.
AMY SCHERBER, owner of Amy's Bread, a Manhattan bakery, and KERRY HEFFERNAN, who is to become the executive chef at the Polo restaurant in the Westbury Hotel, will be married on Sept. 19.
Their courtship began in the kitchen of Bouley, the TriBeCa restaurant.
"We were working side by side there six years ago when it first opened, both doing the garde-manger," Ms.
Scherber said, referring to the preparation of cold dishes and salads.


Federal Agency Wants to Cut Your Vitamins; The AZT Connection
To the Editor:
Perhaps the most alarming aspect of President Clinton's health care reform is the counterattack by the medical establishment and the Food and Drug Administration on the new battleground of alternative health care.
They are trying to deny the basic rights of choice by attempting to make alternative treatments inaccessible, if not controlled by the conventional medical establishment.
Their attempts to categorize green algae and garlic, among other foods, as drugs is ludicrous.
It is no coincidence that these foods are a few of the widely known natural products used to improve the immune system by groups such as people with AIDS.
The recent international conference on AIDS declared azidothymidine, or AZT, the F.D.A.-approved drug to fight AIDS, mostly ineffective, capable of doing more harm than good.


Holiday on Monday
Monday is Labor Day. Here are holiday schedules.  NEW YORK
PARADE Begins at 11:00 A.M. at 44th Street and Fifth Avenue, goes up Fifth Avenue to 72d Street and across to Third Avenue.The West Indian-American Day Parade begins at 11:00 A.M. at Utica Avenue and Eastern Parkway in Brooklyn and goes along Eastern Parkway to Grand Army Plaza.


A Rookie Safety Keeps His Head
Although Damon Pieri started the Jets' final preseason game last week against the Redskins in Washington, taking the place of Ronnie Lott at free safety, he is still listed only third on the depth chart.
But the rookie free agent out of San Diego State is not intimidated by competing for a spot in the Jets' multimillion-dollar defensive backfield.


Brief Lives
In 1989 JoAnne Johnson, 19, and Allison Atlas, 20, found out they didn't have long to live -- not unless they received bone marrow transplants that might defeat their leukemia.
But JoAnne was black and Allison Jewish, which meant they could expect little help from the poorly funded National Marrow Donor Program's registry.
At the time only about 70,000 people were registered, and the chance that a member of a minority group would find a compatible donor was close to infinitesimal. (The odds on finding a match between two unrelated people improve markedly if the two are of the same race or ethnic group.)
The Johnsons asked African-Americans to volunteer, and lined up 3,800 in the Washington area.
Then they brought their campaign to Chicago, and New York.
No match was found, and JoAnne died.


Sports of The Times; The Season Of the Spoiler
AL HOLLAND, who knew something about the art he practiced so well for the San Francisco Giants and Philadelphia Phillies, used to walk around and ominously warn anyone who would listen: "Beware the barrel-chested pitcher."
Well, pennant contenders, beware the barrel-chested spoilers.


Judge Arrested as Italian Scandal Touches Judiciary for First Time
A Milan judge was arrested today in connection with what may prove to be the greatest of Italy's recent scandals: the Government buyout in 1990 of the Enimont chemical corporation.
Italy's previous scandals have implicated top names in business, politicians and the mob.
But the arrest today of Diego Curto extended the accusations of corruption to the judiciary as well.
Until now, the judiciary has been seen as the guardian that uncovered the bribery and kickback scandal that has riddled business and politics in Italy.


Demjanjuk's Lawyers Seek Return of U.S. Citizenship
As John Demjanjuk sat in a prison cell halfway around the world, his lawyers today took their first step to regain his American citizenship.
At a hearing here, a Federal appeals panel sharply questioned whether the Government had improperly withheld information that might have been useful to Mr.
Demjanjuk's defense when he was stripped of his citizenship and extradited to Israel in 1986.


Corrections
A brief article on Friday sum marizing Mayor David N. Dinkins's latest campaign commercial misstated the age of David Meadvin, a campaign volunteer, because of incorrect information provided by the campaign.
He is 12 years old, not 9.


How They Do It; Paying Off Debt and Improving a Credit History
In June 1992, Larry Lawrence, an athletic coach and counselor at a school in Philadelphia, and his wife, Emma, a receptionist, spotted a semidetached house that they desperately wanted to buy.
But they knew their troubled credit history might prevent them from getting a mortgage.
They had fallen behind with the $523 in monthly payments on their two leased cars after Mrs.
Lawrence suffered a heart attack in 1991 and took unpaid leave from her job.
Other bills were also late.
Moreover, when they returned one car, they were informed they still owed $5,000.


Lesson No. 1: Students Should Claim Refunds
WITH colleges opening for the fall term, a cram course in some relatively simple tax strategies can help students and parents ace Taxes 101 next April.
For openers, file a return.
Sounds obvious, but William J. Goldberg, Southwest partner in charge of personal financial planning for KPMG Peat Marwick in Houston, says many students fail to do so.


30-Year Treasury Bond's Yield Falls Below 6%
Long-term interest rates plunged to their lowest level in a quarter century yesterday, riding a rising wave of bad news on the economy and good news on inflation that could carry interest rates even lower.
Although expectations had grown for a drop below 6 percent in the yield on the Treasury's 30-year bond, a yield of 5.94 percent was still an unfamiliar sight to many on Wall Street.


Q &amp; A
401(k)'s and 403(b)'s  Q. What is the difference between a 401(k) and a 403(b) retirement plan?
FRANCISCO IZAGUIRRE, Manhattan Beach, Calif.
A.
Both 401(k) and 403(b) plans are defined contribution plans established by employers to let employees defer part of their salary on a tax-favored basis.


Murder, Memory And the Klan: A special report.; Widow Inherits a Confession To a 36-Year-Old Hate Crime
It was well after midnight one chilly winter more than 36 years ago.
Four white men and one black man stood on the Tyler Goodwin Bridge, in a deserted area near here.
Fifty feet below, the Alabama River flowed briskly.
The white men were Ku Klux Klansmen.
They had driven the black man through the dark countryside, terrorizing him.
He had said something offensive to a white woman, they said, and he was going to pay.
Now, on the bridge, one Klansman pointed his gun at the young man and said, "Hit the water."


LEADING INDICATORS AND PAYROLL JOBS DISPLAY WEAKNESS
In reports raising fresh doubts about the durability of the economic recovery, the Government said today that the number of payroll jobs fell in August for the first time in more than a year and that its chief forecasting index turned down in July.
These and other sobering results more than offset improvements elsewhere among figures released today, including a slight decline in the August unemployment rate, to 6.7 percent from 6.8 percent in July.


Musical Chairs: Hornets Get Hawkins
The Charlotte Hornets, in their second trade of the week, acquired high-scoring guard HERSEY HAWKINS from the Philadelphia 76ers yesterday for guard DANA BARROS and forward SIDNEY GREEN.
The Hornets also sent the rights to their 1993 first-round pick, GREG GRAHAM, to the 76ers as well as an option that will allow Philadelphia to switch first-round draft-pick positions in 1994 with Seattle.


Becker Suddenly Finds a Clear Path to the Semifinals
It took Boris Becker five days to get through two rounds of the United States Open, but it was worth the extended wait.
He may have little time off between matches, but his toughest opponent on the way to the semifinals will likely be himself.
Becker's 6-2, 6-2, 6-4 victory in 1 hour 47 minutes yesterday over Jakob Hlasek of Switzerland moved Germany's angry boomer further along in a part of the Open draw that now includes Becker, who is seeded No. 4, and no one else ranked above No. 24.
So much for several conspiracy theories, though Becker continued with his bizarre third-person diatribe over the scheduling snafu.


Brazil Shows Concern For Indigenous People
To the Editor:
"Brazil's Guilt in the Amazon Massacre" (Op-Ed, Aug. 26) by Terence Turner, professor of anthropology at the University of Chicago, is grossly misleading, to say the least.
The investigations of the alleged massacre of Yanomami Indians are still under way, and not a single corpse has been found so far that could be convincingly tied to the denounced events.
Notwithstanding this, Professor Turner, a member of the human rights commission of the American Anthropological Association, mentions 70 victims "shot, hacked to pieces and burned" somewhere in the Amazon, and he accuses Brazilians of an "increasingly hostile attitude toward the indigenous people."


Mary Grady Moses, 77
Mary Alicia Grady Moses, the widow of the New York planner, builder and administrator Robert Moses, died on Tuesday at Beth Israel North Medical Center.
She was 77 and a lifelong resident of Manhattan.
She died after a brief illness, her family said.


Olympus Drops Plan for New Headquarters in Melville
The Olympus Corporation, the Japanese-owned manufacturer of cameras and medical equipment, has dropped plans to build a new American corporate headquarters on 53.7 acres of state land in Melville, L.I., citing legal opposition from a local civic association.
The decision, conveyed to Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo in a letter today from Kenji Fujii, the president and chief executive officer of Olympus America of Lake Success, marks the collapse of a two-year effort by the State Urban Development Corporation and Suffolk County to assist the company in siting the headquarters on a corner of the 500-acre Long Island Developmental Center, a former state center for the retarded.


CHRONICLE
CHRISTIAN AUBERT knew that this day would be an emotionally charged one for his fiancee, LEILA FLORENTINO.
Tonight she will perform the title role of Kim in "Miss Saigon" for the last time, so he figured they should get married today as well.
"We had been postponing our wedding because she was in the show, so when we knew that she was leaving it, I said, 'Why not have all the emotion at the same time?' " said Mr.
Aubert, who also is an actor.


Texas Senator Is Subpoenaed in Inquiry Over Role as State Treasurer
Kay Bailey Hutchison, who gained national stature earlier this year with her landslide election to the United States Senate, was issued a subpoena today to appear before a Texas grand jury that has been investigating her tenure as State Treasurer.
The grand jury has been looking into accusations, some from former subordinates of Mrs.
Hutchison, that Texas Treasury employees were used to perform political and personal duties for her during the two and a half years she served in the post, which she resigned in June to take her Senate seat.


By Boat, by Plane or by Car: The Great Labor Day Weekend Exodus


CHRONICLE
Meanwhile, consider the rumors of a potential marriage swirling about the Japanese royal family.
EMPEROR AKIHITO and EMPRESS MICHIKO arrived in Rome yesterday for a two-week European trip that is to include an audience with Pope John Paul II.
But that's not what has the Japanese press agog.


Donald Macdonald, Professor, Diplomat And an Author, 74
Donald S. Macdonald, a retired Foreign Service officer and professor emeritus of Korean studies at Georgetown University, died on Sunday at a Washington hospice.
A resident of Washington, he was 74.
He had been ill with cancer for three months, his family said.


Yonkers: The Price of Desegregation
For Federal District Judge Leonard Sand, it's the case that won't go away.
In 1985 he ruled that Yonkers, N.Y., had deliberately promoted racial segregation in housing and education for nearly 40 years.
Now, says Judge Sand, Yonkers public schools are a long way from being truly desegregated, though to their credit educators are trying to do a better job of integrating the schools.
The judge has offered important support for their efforts.


Meade Esposito, 86, Former Power in Politics, Is Dead
Meade H. Esposito, the Democratic leader who reigned over Brooklyn politics for a quarter century and whose power influenced New York State politics and extended onto the national scene, died last night at North Shore University Hospital in Manhasset, L.I.
He was 86.
Mr.
Esposito, who lived in Manhasset since his conviction in a 1988 influence-peddling scandal, entered the hospital last Sunday.


After Pullout, Lithuania Faces Other Challenges
Only hours after the last unit of Russian soldiers left Lithuania on Tuesday night, jubilant Government officials began giving their friends new stickers they had privately printed.
The stickers carry the national coat of arms and the legend: "Lithuania, Free of Foreign Troops."
The nation breathed a collective sigh of relief when the long train laden with Russian soldiers and weapons finally left Lithuanian soil.
People here had been praying for this moment for more than half a century, many without believing it would ever come.


Review/Music; An Orchestra's Spinoff Stands on Its Own Merits
The Cosmopolitan Symphony Orchestra is only a few years old, but it has already spun off its own chamber ensemble.
The aptly named Cosmopolitan Chamber Ensemble appeared at the Hotel Wales on Sunday evening, sharing its program with Ilan Rechtman, a pianist.
Mr.
Rechtman played the Prokofiev Sonata No. 7; Stephen Starkman then led the ensemble in Stravinsky's "Histoire du Soldat," with narration by Michael Dash.
This group is not always consummately polished, but "Histoire du Soldat" does not demand -- indeed, it explicitly forbids -- a pure and polished tone.
Alongside the primitive simplicity of the scoring, however, Stravinsky evolves a vocabulary of emotional neutrality and mechanical desolation.
Mr.
Starkman easily drew out the first quality, especially in the diabolic final march; but the neutrality eluded him.
The violin and percussion solos were sharply executed, the trumpet less so.
Still, it was a lusty performance, and Mr.
Dash's recitation added an edge of melodramatic boldness.


Review/Pop; A Pianist From Los Angeles Who Improvises and Swings
There wasn't much going on at Billy Childs's first set on Tuesday night at the Village Vanguard, just a few standards and indifferent originals and some basic mainstream piano-playing.
Mr.
Childs, a young pianist who lives in Los Angeles, has caught a few breaks on the way: he's recording for Windham Hill and is in the middle of a week working at perhaps the most respected jazz club in the world.
He may have been pushed into view a bit early in his career.
Mr.
Childs can improvise and swing, but his conception never quite seemed authoritative.
It's strange listening to a musician not based in New York.
While the best of the young pianists from New York -- Cyrus Chestnut, Stephen Scott, Jacky Terrasson -- have all delved deep into history, Mr.
Childs's improvisations were modern in an old-fashioned way, his references predictable.
The overt borrowings of the New York school, with its elements of stride, Thelonious Monk, gospel and the 1960's modernists, makes its players unsentimental and rich in narrative; Mr.
Childs used one or two colors for most of his show, never really setting up drama.


LAWMAKERS FIGHT OUSTER BY YELTSIN
Two days after President Boris N. Yeltsin issued a decree to suspend Vice President Aleksandr V. Rutskoi from office, the Russian Parliament voted today to suspend the President's decree, and threw the issue of Mr.
Rutskoi's status to the Constitutional Court.
The standoff over Mr.
Rutskoi's suspension is another example of the political paralysis gripping Moscow as Mr.
Yeltsin and his antagonists in the Supreme Soviet, or legislature, prepare for a showdown this fall over the President's call for early parliamentary elections.


Mets Sock 5 Homers, 3 Out of Park; They Lose, Too
Several more New York Mets got on Manager Dallas Green's nerves today.
His team hit five home runs in a single game for the first time in three years and were still beaten by the Chicago Cubs at Wrigley Field, 9-8.
The day began brilliantly when Dwight Gooden played a game of pain-free catch with the Mets' trainer, but by afternoon's end, the discussion turned to the sensitive arm of another Met: John Franco.
As if it were a team ritual, the Mets blew an 8-7 lead in the eighth inning, and did so with bombast.
Franco entered the inning after Mike Maddux issued a leadoff walk and subsequently allowed the Mets to be beaten by a player who had not hit safely in 16 months, Shawon Dunston.


The Odd Thing About Title VII
To the Editor:
The chart accompanying "New Reminders on Harassment" (At Work, Aug. 15) should have said that Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 has always prohibited sex discrimination.
The irony is that the sex prohibitions were only added at the last minute, supported by conservative Southern Congressmen who anticipated that adding sex would discredit the entire bill and lead to its defeat.
They were, of course, wrong.
JENNIFER S. GOLDSTEIN Washington, Aug. 25  The writer is an attorney with the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission.


Giants Begin Reeves Era With New Faces and a New Philosophy
One look around the Giants' locker room and it's what you don't see that is somewhat shocking.
The team that won the 1987 Super Bowl, the club's first, isn't there.
In fact, many of the faces that were around last year are gone.
There has been a major face lift, a substantial reconstruction.
Out with the old and in with the new.
These new-look Giants -- new coach, new inside linebackers, new wide receivers -- begin the season today against the Bears in Chicago.
In the past, this game might have had a much different tone, with the focus on the longstanding rivalry between these two teams.
But this year?
A rivalry?
Who cares.
This is about the beginning of a new era for the Giants.


Mom and Pop


DRUG AGENCY PLAN IS WIDELY OPPOSED
A plan to merge the Drug Enforcement Agency into the Federal Bureau of Investigation, advanced by Vice President Al Gore as a money saver, is receiving resoundingly unfavorable reviews from many of the people who know the most about what it would entail.
Members of Congress who have been most involved in anti-drug efforts and even President Clinton's senior officials in the State Department, the National Security Council and his Office of National Drug Control Policy are advising against the move.


Eggplant Stars in This Summer Stock
IT may be late summer but eggplant, zucchini, peppers, corn and tomatoes still beckon.
They are the makings of colorful and delicious meals or parts of meals.
Eggplant is one of the most versatile products of this abundant harvest.
The meatiness of eggplant gives it main-dish heft.
And even though the raw flesh soaks up oil like a sponge, slices of plain eggplant can be seared on the grill, then used in a vegetable ragout with only a bit of fat in the dish.


CRIME
The company's in trouble, the power brokers are ruthless, the players are greedy, and the investors are nervous.
But hold on, here -- it's a Broadway show, not a brokerage house, that Annette Meyers is clobbering in MURDER: THE MUSICAL (Perfect Crime/Doubleday, $18.50), the juiciest of her five witty mysteries featuring Leslie Wetzon, the ethical half of Smith &amp; Wetzon, a Wall Street headhunting firm.
Wetzon's friendship with a Broadway choreographer takes her uptown to the Imperial Theater for the gypsy run-through of "Hotshot: The Musical," a ritual rehearsal for industry insiders that we never get to see because the production stage manager is found murdered in the mezzanine.
For her friend's sake, Wetzon sticks with the show during its tempest-tossed tryout in Boston, where two more murders inspire extravagant displays of artistic temperament from members of the high-strung company.


Giuliani Faults Dinkins on Economic Issues
Standing in a steady rain and citing Federal labor statistics showing New York City lagging economically behind the rest of the country, Rudolph W. Giuliani yesterday faulted Mayor David N. Dinkins for sidestepping questions about the budget, saying he hopes to draw attention away from the city's poor economic performance.
"It's a city in which job losses are going up and a campaign for Mayor in which the Mayor's fund-raising seems to have dried up," he said in a reference to a report showing Mayor David N. Dinkins lagging behind Mr.
Giuliani in fund-raising.


San Diego Reviews Sex-Industry Regulations
Forty San Diego residents recently received an odd invitation: the police wanted them to accompany officers on a tour of adult-entertainment establishments.
So on four evenings last week the group, picked out of the telephone directory, went to an ocean-front bar and watched topless dancers and then crowded into a peep show at a sex parlor on the city's east side.
The evening was part of a $10,000 study to re-evaluate the vice squad's enforcement practices for businesses like peep shows, massage parlors and bars with nude dancers.
The tour was to determine whether people were offended by what they saw or whether the city's regulations reflect standards that went out of style with bobby socks.


Jennifer Gersten, Barry S. Price
Mr. and Mrs.
Neal Gersten of New Canaan, Conn., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Jennifer Sloane Gersten, to Barry Scott Price, the son of Barbara Z. Monohan of Hartsdale, N.Y., and Melvin A. Price of Somers, N.Y.
A November wedding is planned.
Miss Gersten, 27, is the general counsel of Gersten Slater &amp; Company, an accounting firm in New York, of which her father is a founding partner.
She graduated cum laude from Tufts University and received a law degree from Fordham University.
Her mother, Judith Gersten, is an art dealer in New York.


New Arms Scandal Adds to Nicaragua's Woes
Nicaraguan officials said today they had uncovered a huge cache of arms belonging to Guatemalan guerrillas, the latest in a series of weapons discoveries that has reverberated throughout Latin America and threatened United States aid to Nicaragua.
The armaments included assault rifles and machine guns, artillery and more than a half million rounds of ammunition.
It appeared to be nearly enough to equip all three of the small rebel armies that have been fighting to overthrow the Government of Guatemala since the 1960's.


'You Can't Look Away Anymore'
The Aug. 15 cover article "The Anguished Politics of Breast Cancer," by Susan Ferraro, has so far prompted four times the usual response to a major article.
The letters range across a spectrum of views, but most fall into two categories.
About a third are critical, particularly of the cover.
For instance, Margaret Richter of New York City wrote to say: "I do not think women have to have an obnoxious voice or chronically display anger to push for a cure for breast cancer. Nor do I think that it is necessary to use 'shock therapy' on the cover of your magazine."


Eggplant Stars in This Summer Stock
IT may be late summer but eggplant, zucchini, peppers, corn and tomatoes still beckon.
They are the makings of colorful and delicious meals or parts of meals.
Eggplant is one of the most versatile products of this abundant harvest.
The meatiness of eggplant gives it main-dish heft.
And even though the raw flesh soaks up oil like a sponge, slices of plain eggplant can be seared on the grill, then used in a vegetable ragout with only a bit of fat in the dish.


New &amp; Noteworthy Paperbacks
THE ANT AND THE PEACOCK: Altruism and Sexual Selection From Darwin to Today By Helena Cronin.
Cambridge University, $19.95.
The author examines Darwinian philosophy in light of a problem that has always dogged it: if natural selection prevails, how can we explain such counterproductive traits as the altruism of ants and the gaudiness of peacocks?
Last year our reviewer, Mark Ridley, called this a "fine book," in which "the subtlest and most original insights . . . concern differences between Darwin's ideas and modern ideas."


SCRIE Help
To the Editor:
Your article on July 11 indicated how difficult it is for seniors to process SCRIE applications for rent adjustments in an accurate and timely fashion.
It is equally difficult for an owner to negotiate the SCRIE certificate.


Siamese Twins Focus Health Care Issues
To the Editor:
Re "One Siamese Twin Survives an Extraordinary Separation" (front page, Aug. 21): Many question have been posed regarding the decision at Children's Hospital of Philadelphia to surgically separate Amy and Angela Lakeberg, conjoined twins.
Most of the questions have dealt with whether or not the risk exceeded the benefit.
Some have asked why such an expensive operation should be performed with little chance of survival.


Mideast Accord: The Secret Peace/A special report; How Oslo Helped Mold the Mideast Pact
At the time, in April 1992, the somewhat gray and academic meeting in Tel Aviv hardly seemed a place where dreams might be built.
But if the tentative and potentially momentous new agreement reached by Israel and the P.L.O. could be said to have a birthplace, it was the gathering in Tel Aviv.
There, Yossi Beilin, then an opposition Labor member of Parliament, got to know Terje Rod Larsen, head of a Norwegian institute researching conditions in the Israeli-occupied territories.
If Mr.
Beilin wished, Mr.
Larsen said, he could put him in touch with senior Palestinian officials.


Mideast Accord; Arafat Wins Approval of Fatah For Peace Agreement With Israel
After three days of contentious meetings, Yasir Arafat, the leader of the Palestine Liberation Organization, said today that he had won the support of his mainstream Fatah movement for a proposed peace agreement with Israel and that it could be signed within days.
"The project was approved and transferred to the other Palestinian leaderships," Mr.
Arafat said, apparently referring to the Executive Committee of the P.L.O., which was expected to begin reviewing the plan tonight or on Sunday.
Optimism Amid Opposition
But although Mr.
Arafat struck a resolutely optimistic tone in a brief meeting with reporters, insisting that a mutual recognition accord between Israel and the P.L.O. was also imminent, there were clear indications that he was encountering bitter opposition and was engaged in a tense battle for his own survival as leader of the organization.


Cheaper Chic
The cost of a new fall look need not exceed the sum of these very reasonable parts.


The Catskills For Walkers
Guided walks in the Catskill Mountains in New York State to see the scenic views made famous by the Hudson River School painters Frederic Edwin Church, Thomas Cole and Asher Durand are being offered by a new tour company, High Land Flings Footloose Holidays.
Trail lunches will be served on the rock ledges where the artists set up their easels more than 100 years ago.
Packages of two- and three-day walking tours include lodging at a historic Catskill Mountain inn, meals and local transportation.
Prices range from $299 to $399 a person; the trips run through the Columbus Day weekend.


Hands-On Summer in a Science Lab
SCIENCE has always been Enelyn Solivan's favorite school subject and this summer the 17-year-old New Haven high-school student put it to work.
Ms.
Solivan was a summer research assistant at the Connecticut Agricultural Experiment Station in New Haven, where she worked with scientists conducting genetic-engineering experiments in plants.
She was one of four minority students from New Haven hired for the summer by the station, which does agricultural and environmental research and tests food, consumer products and other materials.


Three Centuries of History Pervade Philipse Manor Hall
ADMITTEDLY, the qualified superlative, one of the oldest tricks in the publicity trade, comes in handy when all else fails.
Still, Philipse Manor Hall, here, deserves better than to be billed merely as the Taconic region's oldest historic site in an urban area.
For one thing, this late-17th-century brick-and-fieldstone mansion stands grandly on a grassy embankment overlooking the junction of Warburton Avenue and Dock Street.
For another thing, its multiple porticos and generous sash windows, together with the dormer casements projecting from a shapely hipped roof, put the surrounding architecture to shame -- not that this is hard to do in any modern downtown.


Lesley A. Kelman, David J. Koeppel
Dr. and Mrs.
Charles Kelman of New York have announced the engagement of their daughter, Lesley Ann Kelman, to David Joseph Koeppel, a son of Ruth and Alfred Koeppel of New York.
A January wedding is planned.
Ms.
Kelman, 25, graduated from the University of Michigan and received a Master of Social Work degree from New York University.
She is a medical social worker at the Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center in New York.
Her father, an ophthalmologist in New York, pioneered an ultrasound technique for removing cataracts.


NEWS SUMMARY
International 3-21  PEACE PLAN'S OSLO CONNECTION


Booing Boo-Boo
To the Sports Editor:
On behalf of Canadians who viewed the game between the Yankees and the Blue Jays at Yankee Stadium before which spectators saw fit to boo the Canadian National Anthem, I wish to comment.


Rebecca May, Charles Feldman
Rebecca May, a daughter of Dr.
Mark and Ida Ann May of Pittsburgh, and Charles T. Feldman, a son of Marvin and Frances Feldman of Scarsdale, N.Y., plan to marry in December.
Miss May is the corporate office manager for Conway Stores in New York.
She graduated from Yeshiva University, from which she also received master's degrees in Bible studies and Holocaust studies.
Her father is an otolaryngologist in Pittsburgh.


Lisa Yarin, Jason Alter
Lisa Robin Yarin, a daughter of Jack and Cynthia Yarin of East Windsor, N.J., was married last evening to Dr.
Jason Matthew Alter, the son of Morton and Alice Alter of Brooklyn.
Rabbi Andrew Warmflash officiated at Congregation B'nai Tikvah in New Brunswick, N.J.
Mrs.
Alter is a business manager with Sybase, a computer software company in New York.
She graduated from the State University at Binghamton, N.Y.


A la Carte; French Restaurants Are Coming to the Fore on the Island Again
BUMPER stickers seen in the Hamptons early last summer read, "Please, no more Italian restaurants." But they kept coming, not only on the East End, but also all over Long Island.
In fact, Italian restaurants have had things their own way for some years now.
Most of the Italian spots that have recently opened specialize in pasta dishes, have wood-burning pizza ovens and stress fresh seafood, vegetables and grilling of all sorts.
The Italian eating places, especially the moderately priced storefront cafes, became the accepted front-runners in the 80's.


DATA UPDATE
NATIONAL HOUSING TRENDS
*4*(In thousands of units, seasonally adjusted annual rates)
June 93
June 92
Change
Starts
1,246
1,141
+ 9.2%
Completions
1,145
1,181
- 3.0%
Sales
662
584
+13.4%
*4*Source: Census Bureau, U.S. Department of Commerce
*4*MORTGAGE INTEREST RATES (Averages)
Last Week
Previous Week
Year Ago
New York
7.01
7.17
8.18
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
4.35
4.41
5.44
New Jersey
Conventional (30-yr)
6.95
7.08
8.03
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
4.25
4.33
5.21
Connecticut
Conventional (30-yr)
6.94
7.07
8.07
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
4.05
4.08
5.12
Co-ops (N.Y.)
Conventional (30-yr)
7.10
7.31
8.24
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
5.24
5.24
5.96
*4*Indexes for Adjustable-Rate Mortgages*
1-yr. Treasury security
3.37
3.41
3.52
National Mortgage Contract Rate
6.95
7.02
7.78
*Rates on most adjustable mortgages are set 1 to 3 percentage points above these indexes.  (Source: HSH Associates)


F.B.I. Planning to Duplicate Bomb Used in Attack on Trade Center
The Federal Bureau of Investigation plans to build and detonate a bomb like the one used in the World Trade Center bombing, and Federal prosecutors have informed defense lawyers that the Government may videotape the explosion for use in the trial of those accused in the attack.
Lawyers for the defendants protested the plans within an hour of receiving notice on Friday afternoon, said Hassen Ibn Abdellah, who represents one of the defendants, Mahmoud Abouhalima.


Health Care and High Cost
To the Editor:
Mr.
Baumol's article should be mandatory reading for the Government task force on health reform.
It is the first article I have read that wasn't written either by someone attempting to radically redesign our current system with methods transplanted from other programs, or members of the medical profession with a commitment to their economic well-being that overshadows their dedication to the Hippocratic Oath.


Wendy Hoskins, Devry Pazant
Wendy Jo Hoskins, the daughter of James and Doris Hoskins of Englewood, N.J., was married there yesterday to Devry Brevaun Pazant, the son of Edward and Patricia Pazant of Teaneck, N.J.
The Revs.
Moses Knott and Lester Taylor, Baptist ministers, jointly officiated at Community Baptist Church in Englewood.
Mrs.
Pazant, 29, graduated from Brown University.
She is a second vice president, in Brooklyn, for the Chase Manhattan Bank.


A Razzle-Dazzle 'Grand Hotel' in Bellport
EVERY region that stakes a claim to professional theater demands a consistent showplace for big-time musicals six months out of every year.
Long Island, luckily, has the Gateway Playhouse.
Attend the current production of "Grand Hotel" in Bellport through next Sunday for verification.
No matter that the intertwined tales of Vicki Baum's 1929 novel -- the musical's attributed source, rather than the 1932 stage or star-strewn screen versions -- are represented as a set of down and upbeat variations on moral bankruptcy in Berlin, 1928, from portentous pronouncements ("Time is running out" and "Some have, some have not") to last-minute uplift ("Life goes on").


NOTES
Charles Masson, whose floral arrangements drew raves for 18 years at La Grenouille, the elegant East 52d Street restaurant, will soon show his two-dimensional work with flowers.
An exhibition of Mr.
Masson's landscapes and still lifes in oil, watercolor and pen and ink is scheduled to open on Oct. 5 at Stubbs Books and Prints, 153 East 70th Street.
Brooke Astor, an admirer of Mr.
Masson's paintings, had called Jane Stubbs, the store's owner, in his behalf.
"She knew about the paintings in the restaurant that are mine," Mr.
Masson said.
"She's the dearest friend one could have." Since starting a sabbatical in January as manager of La Grenouille, Mr.
Masson, 38, has also designed a line of dishes for Swid Powell, worked part time for the floral designer Robert Isabell and written a book, "The Flowers of La Grenouille," due out next year from Clarkson Potter.


Residential Resales
Closings in the week ended Aug. 21  MANHATTAN  Gramercy Park Area  $268,000
205 Third Avenue (20th St.)  2-bedroom, 2-bath, 1,400-sq.-ft. postwar co-op; 24-hr. doorman, dining foyer, balcony, 2 exposures; maintenance $1,245, includes utilities; 54% tax-deductible; (Corcoran Group)  Greenwich Village  $1.063 million
41 Charlton Street  6-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 4-story one-family 1829 town house; dining room, eat-in kitchen, library, study, 8 fireplaces, original molding and detail, historic district, 21- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $7,314;(William B. May)  Madison Square  $325,000
5 East 22d Street  (Madison Green)  2-bedroom, 2-bath, 1,100-sq.-ft. condo in a 10-year-old building; 24-hr. doorman, dining area, balcony, Hudson River view; common charge $507, taxes $4,704;(Newell &amp; Associates)  Upper East Side  $295,000
360 East 72d Street  2-bedroom, 2-bath, 1,300-sq.-ft. postwar co-op; 24-hr. doorman, concierge, new kitchen, c/a, sun deck, pool, 2 exposures; maintenance $1,045, includes gas and electricity, 55% tax-deductible; (Bellmarc Realty)  Upper West Side  $252,500
131 West 78th Street  2-bedroom, 2-bath, 900-sq.-ft. co-op in a brownstone; dining area, fireplace, balcony, brick walls; maintenance $570, 54% tax-deductible; (Klara Madlin Real Estate)  BRONX  Baychester  $130,000
3708 Rombouts Avenue  2-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, one-family detached, frame house; dining room, family room, eat-in kitchen, private driveway, 25- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $960; (Century 21/Metro Star Realty; Tri-County Equities Ltd.)  Wakefield  $221,000
1007 East 228th Street  2-family semi-attached brick house; 3 bedrooms, 1 1/2 baths, dining room in primary duplex unit; 1 bedroom, 1 bath in simplex; eat-in kitchens in both; hospitality suite in finished basement, 1-car garage, 25- by 109-ft. lot; taxes $1,900; (ERA/Besmatch Real Estate)  BROOKLYN  Clinton Hill  $270,000
12 Clifton Place  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, one-family, 4-story brownstone; dining room, eat-in kitchnen, marble mantels, original moldings and detail, 18- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $1,640; (Naida McSherry)  Ditmas Park  $225,000
454 Rugby Road  6-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, one-family detached frame house; center hall, dining room, eat-in kitchen, double parlor, den, 1-car garage, 47- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $1,800; (Jacob Gold Realty)  Park Slope  $480,000
612 3d Street  2-family, 4-story, Tudor-style town house; 2 baths, eat-in kitchen in primary duplex unit; 1 1/2 baths in simplex; dining room in each; south garden, original moldings and detail, 20- by 95-ft. lot; taxes $2,236; (Sommers Real Estate; William B. May)  QUEENS  College Point  $120,000
122-26 26th Avenue  2-bedroom, 1-bath, one-family detached bungalow; dining room, full basement, 1-car garage, 25- by 92-ft. lot; taxes $700; (Century 21/ Weber &amp; Rose)  Forest Hills  $191,000
67-70 Exeter Street  3-bedroom, 1-bath, one-family attached brick house; dining room, eat-in kitchen, full basement, 18- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $1,300; (Terrace Realty)  STATEN ISLAND  Annadale  $159,000
79 Ludlow Avenue  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, one-family detached house; dining room, eat-in kitchen, family room, 1-car garage, 30- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $1,400; (Coldwell Banker/Schlott Realtors)  Eltingville  $192,000
650 Barlow Avenue  4-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, one-family detached Colonial; dining room, eat-in kitchen, family room, 40- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $1,680; (Kingsley Real Estate)


AUG. 29-Sept. 4; U.S. and Russia: Spatial Relations
Like winning gold medals in the Olympic Games, accomplishments in space were a staple of the cold war.
But last week the United States and Russia virtually merged their manned space programs, agreeing to a joint effort that could lead to the construction of an orbiting space station.


Hill Ends Holdout
Phoenix Cardinals linebacker ERIC HILL ended his 50-day holdout by agreeing to a one-year contract, the Arizona Republic reported yesterday.
The newspaper said the contract was worth $467,500 -- a 10 percent increase from Hill's 1992 salary.
The Cardinals open their season today in Philadelphia, but Hill won't be eligible to play until Phoenix's fourth game of the season, Sept. 26 at Detroit. (AP)


Against All Odds, France Likes Its Premier
It is the sort of case to put political pundits out of work.
France's economy is in the doldrums, unemployment is still growing and relations with Germany, the country's main ally, are in disarray.
Yet Prime Minister Edouard Balladur's popularity continues to rise.
The presumption was that by now, after five months as head of France's new conservative Government, Mr.
Balladur's economic recovery program would have to be showing results or the 64-year-old Gaullist could expect disenchantment to be setting in.


John Meriwether Rides Again, Without Salomon This Time
Take the gutsy and aggressive multibillion-dollar trading style of George Soros and mix in the abstract exploration of Ivy League academics and you'll begin to understand the new investment firm formed by John Meriwether, former vice chairman of Salomon Brothers.
Mr.
Meriwether, known as J.M., grew famous for playing a high-stakes game of liar's poker with Salomon's former chairman, John H. Gutfreund.
But his real contribution to that firm was putting together a small group of mathematicians and academics who developed trading strategies that earned billions of dollars.


In a Stab at a Strategy, Hollywood Tries Some Variety
Time to take stock of the summer films.
What is known is that Nora Ephron can command a major movie.
That Sly is back on top (so to speak).
That too much hype can kill a weak movie (witness those made by Sharon Stone and Arnold Schwarzenegger).
That children like really, really big, big animals, whether orcas ("Free Willy") or dinosaurs ("Jurassic Park").
That Sean Connery, Tom Cruise, Harrison Ford and Clint Eastwood can't miss (at least this year).
And, most important, that if you put your cinematic eggs in a variety of baskets, the bottom line can look pretty impressive.
This is the wisdom in Hollywood about the record-breaking summer of '93, one characterized by an especially large number of films geared to especially diverse audiences.


If You're Thinking of Living in: North Brunswick
BEING smack in the middle of New Jersey, less than an hour's drive from either New York or Philadelphia, is both a blessing and a curse for the Middlesex County township of North Brunswick.
It makes two major employment centers accessible to residents and keeps taxes among the lowest in the county by attracting large corporate ratables, such as Johnson &amp; Johnson and Bristol-Myers Squibb.
On the other hand, it makes the township a natural corridor, chopped up by three major highways -- Routes 1, 27 and 130.


He's Gushing
Defensive tackle RAY CHILDRESS has agreed to a three-year contract extension with the Houston Oilers.
The four-time Pro Bowler, a first-round pick in 1985, is beginning his ninth season with the team.


Jeffrey Schaffer and Laura Zeligman
Mr. and Mrs.
Gerald L. Zeligman of East Rockaway, L.I., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Laura Ann Zeligman, to Jeffrey Andrew Schaffer, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Melvyn S. Schaffer of South Orange, N.J.
A December wedding is planned.
Miss Zeligman, 25, is an associate at the New York law firm of Dewey Ballantine.
She graduated from the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa.
She received a law degree from New York University.


The Woodstock War
THREE American men in their late 40's have to get up every morning and consider this fact as they shave: They created Woodstock.
This, as it turns out, is a lot to consider, and has probably resulted in a few nicks.
Now here's what those three men think of next, after they get done thinking about those few rainy days in August 1969, when, in their minds, they changed the world:


MOB PROSECUTOR TO AID IN INQUIRY
A commission looking into accusations of ethical improprieties by Chief Justice Thomas F. Fay of the State Supreme Court has retained a Boston lawyer who specializes in prosecuting organized crime.
The lawyer, Jeremiah T. O'Sullivan, spent 10 years as head of the New England Organized Crime Strike Force.
He will act as special counsel to the investigating commission.


Help in Making Nursing-Home Decision
The article appearing in the Aug. 8 Westchester Weekly, "Helping the Ill and Aged Control Their Destinies," presented an important dimension to nursing-home life.
And while residents learn that they can turn to such people as Charles Aguado, it is family members who must learn, before placement, that services, such as the Ombudsman program, exist.


One Hunts, the Others Don't
To the Editor:
We are writing regarding John Haines's review of "Deer Camp," by John M. Miller, and "A Hunter's Road," by Jim Fergus (Aug. 15).


This Architect's Eyes Are Fixed Upon the Sea
When he was 10 years old, Der Scutt, the New York architect who designed Trump Tower on Fifth Avenue, built model boats from orange crates at his family's home near Reading, Pa.
While studying architecture in 1958, he began a decade-long project photographing every ocean liner that docked in New York Harbor.
"I rarely missed a ship," the 59-year-old Mr. Scutt said recently.


The Men Who Would Beat O'Rourke
ALMOST every weekday morning, Andrew J. Spano, the County Clerk, can be found at one of Westchester's commuter railroad stations, seeking support for his bid to become County Executive.
Asked who he is running against, Mr.
Spano says, "O'Rourke," referring to the two-term Republican incumbent Andrew P. O'Rourke.
But to face Mr.
O'Rourke in the November election, Mr.
Spano must first defeat a Democratic rival, Assemblyman Richard L. Brodsky, in the Sept. 14 primary.
"Why give Brodsky any extra publicity?" Mr.
Spano asks.


Poets: Real Vs. Wannabe
To the Editor:
Caryn James apparently knows as much about poetry as the pseudo-poets who appear in popular clubs and on MTV.
Is her statement that this is "poetry returned to its roots in song and chant" supposed to convince me that I am witnessing the rebirth of Homer?
These "poets" are doing nothing more than romanticizing vulgarity and degrading poetry, which is of the highest, most concentrated and illuminating forms of language.


Music of Many Lands at Grace Church's 'Noonday Getaway'
THE Westchester concert season is off to an early start, with at least four harbingers of the many events to come.
First off the mark is the sixth year for Downtown Music at Grace, an umbrella title for the many imaginative programs at Grace Episcopal Church in White Plains.
There are two sets actually: a Wednesday "Noonday Getaway" cycle of half-hour programs and a mostly Friday evening series presenting, among many other artists, the Howard University Chorale, the pianist Andrew Armstrong and, from Italy, the Baroque violinist Enrico Gatti.


Comedy Is A Male Bastion
To the Editor:
The real explanation for "Why Late-Night TV Is a Man's World"  [ Aug. 22 ]  is that myths are perpetuated by articles like this -- i.e., women's humor is too self-deprecating, not gag oriented or not "put down" enough for late night.


Smarter TDs
To the Sports Editor:
The college football section (The Times, Aug. 23) brought forth some interesting, and to me at least, little-known data i.e., graduation rates.
For example, No. 1 Alabama's rate is (an embarrassing) 35 percent, while No.2 Notre Dame's was 85 percent.
Then, this year's schedules are also of interest: I wonder where Alabama would finish in the polls if the Crimson Tide played N.D.'s schedule and vice versa.
We'll never know but wouldn't it be fun to speculate?


Your Home: Covenants; Flouting Rules Can Be Costly
WHEN Lee and Barbara Jones decided to paint the trim on their four-bedroom neo-Victorian home a deep shade of mauve they thought they were well within their rights as private property owners, especially since they weren't violating any zoning laws in their town, Redmond, Wash.,
Not so.
Their neighbors took them to court and won, requiring them to change the color to a more conservative shade of blue.


Melinda Fellner, Mark Bramwit
Drs.
Fredda Ginsburg-Fellner and Michael Fellner of New York have announced October wedding plans for their daughter, Melinda Beth Fellner, and Dr.
Mark Paul Bramwit, a son of Lois Bramwit and Dr.
David Bramwit of Old Tappan, N.J.
Ms.
Fellner, 25, is an associate in the law office of Susan Courtney Chambers &amp; Associates in New York.
She graduated from Cornell University and received a law degree from Yeshiva University.
Her parents work at Mount Sinai Medical Center in New York, where her mother is the director of the Young People's Diabetes Treatment Unit and her father is a clinical professor of dermatology.


Jazz Composer Ventures Into Other Fields
TEO MACERO of Quogue carries a sketch pad with him, a musical one.
It helps him keep track of all the music he composes in his head, sometimes three or four scores a day.
"I keep notes on the melodic lines, which later I can orchestrate," he said.
That accounts for the more than 3,000 albums that Mr.
Macero has produced, plus 15 gold records and the two Guggenheim Fellowships he has earned for compositions.


Oprah, Meet Mary Baker Eddy
For three weeks, a small television set has sat in a window at the Tenth Church of Christ, Scientist, on Macdougal Street, just below Eighth Street.
The name "Oprah" is pasted on the screen, and taped to the window above the set is the message: "Ever watch TV talks shows? Want the answers 'new age' personalities are just beginning to question?"
Are Christian Scientists urging people to stop watching Ms.
Winfrey's show?
"I love Oprah," said Renee Jakobsen, a member of the church who created the window display.


Defining the B.L.S. Data
To the Editor:
"Faulty Data Play Down Job Injuries" (Viewpoints, Aug. 15) suggests that safety and health experts might be grossly underestimating the nation's job injury problems if they focus solely on one Bureau of Labor Statistics measure -- annual estimates of workdays lost to injury on the job.
In fact, these experts generally zero in on the number and frequency of work injuries to judge the magnitude of this country's workplace safety problems.
B.L.S. data have reflected these priorities ever since they were established by the 1970 Occupational Safety and Health Act.


Mary Lawson-Johnston, N. S. Howe 3d
Mary Stevenson Hammond Lawson-Johnston, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Peter Lawson-Johnston of Princeton, N.J., was married yesterday to Nathaniel Saltonstall Howe 3d, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Howe Jr. of Greenwich, Conn.
The Rev.
Carl Reimers officiated at the Trinity Episcopal Church in Princeton.
Mrs.
Howe, 26, teaches kindergarten at the Princeton (N.J.) Junior School.
She graduated from Trinity College in Hartford.
Her father is the president of the Solomon R. Guggenheim Foundation, which was established by Mr.
Guggenheim, the bride's paternal great-grandfather.
The foundation operates the Solomon R. Guggenheim Museum in New York and the Peggy Guggenheim Collection in Venice.


Peace In Our Time?
A seductive promise of a quick and easy peace is a potent anesthetic to dull the senses of an embattled people.
All Israelis yearn for peace.
Most would support the Camp David arrangement in which Israel controls the strategic area of the West Bank while the Arabs conduct their own affairs in such matters as health, education and commerce in their towns and villages.
This would give Israel security and Palestinians autonomy.
It is supposedly what the Rabin-Arafat deal proposes.
Unhappily, it does not.
Under the guise of the term "autonomy," which most Israelis accept, the Israeli Government has struck a deal leading to the creation of a P.L.O. state on Israel's fragile pre-1967 borders, which most Israelis reject.


Schools Open Soon (With Luck), To More Trouble Than Usual
IN these last days before school starts, the news has been less about innovation than desperation: New York City schools will not open on time because a previously botched asbestos inspection left them unsafe; a New Jersey state judge ruled that income gaps between rich and poor school districts are still unacceptable; and the absence of a balanced budget may delay the opening of schools in Chicago.
In what seems to be a collective throwing up of hands, the proferred solutions to the problems of American schools reflect both exasperation and radical reaction.
Facing growing anger about the cost of education, Michigan will no longer use property taxes as a source of education money by 1994 -- but what will replace them is so far unclear.


Corrections
An article last Sunday in copies distributed on Long Island, about sales of foreclosed houses, misstated the telephone number to call for lists of properties being sold by the Resolution Trust Corporation.
It is (800) 782-6326.


No Parallel Parking
West 57th Street turns into a drag strip for Bike Night at the Hard Rock Cafe, Aug. 30.


Nicaragua Has No War, And No Peace, Either
AS Nicaraguans fought a civil war in the 1980's, family gatherings at the Chamorro home here were often uncomfortable affairs.
One of Violeta Barrios de Chamorro's sons was editing the newspaper of the governing Sandinista Front, the other working in exile for the American-backed rebels who fought to overthrow it.
One daughter was a Sandinista diplomat, the other an editor of the family's anti-Sandinista newspaper, La Prensa.
Since Mrs.
Chamorro was elected President in 1990, defeating the Sandinista leader Daniel Ortega, the tensions have eased.
Pedro Joaquin, the son who joined the contra rebels, is back at La Prensa.
Antonio Lacayo, Mrs.
Chamorro's son-in-law and Minister of the Presidency, worked out an accommodation between her Government and the Sandinistas that sometimes allows her other children to support both.


Wilander Turns Back Clock, but Slowly
It began at 10:26 P.M. as a contest between two old friends blasting backhands and forehands past one another from 10 feet behind the baseline.
As the fourth set progressed in the wee hours of Saturday morning, everyone present knew they were witnessing something special.


Up From Under


Behind Producing 'Drinks Before Dinner'
We are astonished by the revelation in "For Playwrights, a New Breed of Angel"  [ Aug. 15 ]  that Perry and Mitzi Pazer produced "Drinks Before Dinner" by E. L. Doctorow last summer through their "old boy network." So that the record is clear about this we wish to make it known that we presented the production to the Pazers as a complete package.
Gaby Rodgers negotiated with Mr.
Doctorow for more than a year for his permission to present a reading that she directed.
Bebe Antell, as producer, recruited the performers, took care of all logistics and arranged for much publicity.


'You Can't Look Away Anymore'
The Aug. 15 cover article "The Anguished Politics of Breast Cancer," by Susan Ferraro, has so far prompted four times the usual response to a major article.
The letters range across a spectrum of views, but most fall into two categories.
About a third are critical, particularly of the cover.
For instance, Margaret Richter of New York City wrote to say: "I do not think women have to have an obnoxious voice or chronically display anger to push for a cure for breast cancer. Nor do I think that it is necessary to use 'shock therapy' on the cover of your magazine."


String Septet
Claire McCardell, the celebrated American sportswear designer of the 1940's who made sophisticated classics like wraparound dresses, would have loved the new apron dresses that a few women have been experimenting with this summer.
The aprons, with their dangling yards of stringlike ties, are baffling to many when seen on a store hanger.
But some women were not put off.
Among the designers who put the apron back in style are Martin Margiela and Ann Demeulemeester, both from Belgium.
The strings create a high or low waist and often crisscross in back over T-shirts, tailored blouses, turtleneck sweaters or leotards.
Polly Mellen, center, the creative director of Allure magazine, wore her checked apron as a midcalf wraparound dress teamed with a white T-shirt.
Other women topped slim, ankle-length skirts with different lengths of wraparound aprons.
One of the most popular was a black apron that young women wore in the evening.
The dresses provide a sophisticated counterpoint to 70's revivalism.


The Way It Really Was, Hotchner Style
AARON'S father is a flier "sort of for the government." He can't say exactly because "foreign spies might intercept our mail." His mother is playing in a mah-jongg tournament.
But then, sometimes, Aaron says that his parents are archeologists on a dig.
Aaron himself imagines he's personal adviser to Charles Lindbergh.
In truth, Aaron's father peddles candles without wicks door to door until he gets a job on the road, selling Hamilton watches door to door.
His consumptive mother is sent to a sanitarium.
At dinnertime, Aaron, alone, fixes soup (ketchup and water), eats a roll (20 for 25 cents; they last) or, when there's nothing, cuts out pictures of food from a magazine and swallows those.
Aaron has been left behind in Room 309 of the Empire Hotel (really the Avalon) in St.
Louis on the floor where almost everybody's behind in rent ($35 a month).
The time is the dread year 1933.
The story is that of the movie "King of the Hill," the adaptation of A.(for Aaron) E. (for Edward) Hotchner's boyhood memoir published in 1972.
The movie opened on Aug. 20 in New York.


Jordan Endorses Mideast Accord While Lebanon Has Reservations
King Hussein of Jordan offered a strong public endorsement today of the draft peace agreement between Israel and the Palestine Liberation Organization, while Prime Minister Rafik al-Hariri of Lebanon said the Palestinians had weakened their own cause.
In remarks to reporters in Amman, King Hussein praised both Israel and P.L.O. leaders for their courage and called on Palestinians everywhere to unify in support of the accord.


Correction
A review in this column last Sunday, about the new book "In the Rings of Saturn," by Joe Sherman, misstated its format.
It will be published in November as a hardcover.


Corrections
The illustration with the Workbook column in The Times Magazine last Sunday carried an erroneous credit.
The illustrator was J. Otto Seibold.


Always a Market For Luxury Housing
WHO buys those multi-million-dollar spreads in Bedford and those waterfront estates in Larchmont so enticingly pictured in glossy magazines?
Japanese businessmen?
Hollywood producers?
Occasionally, but most often such well-heeled buyers come from no more than 30 miles away, say the people who know the market best.
"In Westchester, within a 40-mile radius of Manhattan, we have the highest concentration of luxury homes worth $1 million or more than almost anywhere else in the world," said Lisa Harness, director of previews, the Coldwell Banker division that markets upscale and antique properties for the Katonah office of Coldwell Banker Schlott Realtors and nine other of its offices in Westchester.
"What's more," Ms.
Harness continued, "88 percent of the buyers live in the state and almost all come from Manhattan."


Tips From Professionals To Handle Pesky Tasks
PROFESSIONALS who build and repair houses gain subtle skills from intensive experience.
Amateurs seldom derive such knowledge.
The following tips may interest both groups.
MEASURING Metal tape measures have a small hook on the end that may seem annoyingly loose.
But do not return the tape to the store or try to tighten the hook.
It is designed to slide back and forth on the tape by an amount exactly equal to the hook's thickness, thereby producing accurate measurements whether the end of the tape is hooked over a board to measure its outside dimensions or placed between the sides of an opening to measure its inner dimensions.


'You Can't Look Away Anymore'
The Aug. 15 cover article "The Anguished Politics of Breast Cancer," by Susan Ferraro, has so far prompted four times the usual response to a major article.
The letters range across a spectrum of views, but most fall into two categories.
About a third are critical, particularly of the cover.
For instance, Margaret Richter of New York City wrote to say: "I do not think women have to have an obnoxious voice or chronically display anger to push for a cure for breast cancer. Nor do I think that it is necessary to use 'shock therapy' on the cover of your magazine."


Begonias: Celebrating an Old Favorite
IMPATIENS seem to be planted everywhere now to provide summer flower color.
This is a good thing because the plants are showy and provide ample display for little care.
But as bright and colorful as these succulent plants are, another succulent, durable annual needs to have its merits talked about because it is also showing off brightly: the bedding begonia.
These plants have come a long way since grandmother's time.


'You Can't Look Away Anymore'
The Aug. 15 cover article "The Anguished Politics of Breast Cancer," by Susan Ferraro, has so far prompted four times the usual response to a major article.
The letters range across a spectrum of views, but most fall into two categories.
About a third are critical, particularly of the cover.
For instance, Margaret Richter of New York City wrote to say: "I do not think women have to have an obnoxious voice or chronically display anger to push for a cure for breast cancer. Nor do I think that it is necessary to use 'shock therapy' on the cover of your magazine."


In a Quiet Long Island Village, Gunfight Erupts at Train Station
Labor Day weekend in the Victorian village of Sea Cliff started with a shootout today when at least four youths pulled out guns and began firing at each other from across the Long Island Rail Road train tracks in the middle of the afternoon.
According to the police, an "old-fashioned shootout" erupted about 4 P.M. in the parking lot of the Sea Cliff train station, which is surrounded by middle-class homes and garden apartments.
There were no injuries, the police said.


Track Found Not Liable
The death of stock car driver J. D. McDUFFIE in a 1991 crash at the Watkins Glen, N.Y., race track was caused by his car's mechanical failure, not the design of the track, United States District Judge MICHAEL TELESCA ruled Friday.
Telesca dismissed a $4.25 million lawsuit filed against the track and Nascar by McDuffie's widow, IMA JEAN McDUFFIE.
The lawsuit claimed that the turn where McDuffie, 52, died was dangerously designed and that a safety barrier did not meet racing standards.
In his ruling, Telesca said it was "inconceivable that a driver with McDuffie's extensive experience at the Glen" would not be familiar with the dangers of the track, an irregularly shaped road course.


Sound Bytes; Penn Jillette Finds Magic In His Personal Computer
PENN JILLETTE is the larger and more vocal half of the comedy and magic team Penn &amp; Teller, which performs regularly on television, film and stage.
He became a professional juggler and met Teller while he was still in high school.
The two have been performing together since 1975.
But his love of computers is so consuming that Mr.
Jillette fills his spare time at the keyboard, both as a columnist for PC/Computing magazine and as a denizen of electronic bulletin boards.
He believes, among other things, that computers can be fun, that people should decorate and customize their PC's, and that the actress Uma Thurman is a goddess.


Giving Aliens New $10 Bills Loses U.S. Subsidy as 'Art'
In the face of ridicule from its critics, the National Endowment for the Arts has withdrawn its backing from a project in which three conceptual artists hand out $10 bills to illegal immigrants near the Mexican border.
Noting that United States currency is neither supplies nor materials as specified in the grant to the sponsoring museum in San Diego, the endowment announced late Friday that the $4,500 in cash handouts was an "unallowable expense."


Wall Street; Bond Buyers' Gain, Taxpayers' Loss
ALL the uproar over the generous fees awarded to municipal bond underwriters who are in turn so generous to campaigning politicians may be missing a critical point.
The fees are a one-time hit, but higher interest costs on these bonds can grind away at taxpayers for decades.
These bonds have higher interest costs than they might have because they are sold for less than buyers would pay.
The surest sign of that is when major buyers can get only a fraction of the bonds they want.


Begonias: Celebrating an Old Favorite
IMPATIENS seem to be planted everywhere now to provide summer flower color.
This is a good thing because the plants are showy and provide ample display for little care.
But as bright and colorful as these succulent plants are, another succulent, durable annual needs to have its merits talked about because it is also showing off brightly: the bedding begonia.
These plants have come a long way since grandmother's time.


HAZARD IS DOUBTED FROM SUNKEN SUB
Western scientists who examined a sunken Russian submarine have found that it was torn by a violent explosion and has possibly leaked plutonium from its nuclear torpedoes.
But they concluded that any radioactivity would lie on the sea floor near the submarine rather than be swept toward rich North Atlantic fisheries, because the currents around the hulk were far weaker than previously believed.
"If you're looking for a place to put it, this isn't as bad as we thought," Charles D. Hollister, senior scientist at the Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution on Cape Cod, said in a telephone interview last week on returning from the voyage.


When an Opponent Knows and You Don't
THE grandmaster's nightmare is stumbling into something that is unknown to him but an open book to his opponent.
When an adversary takes just a few minutes to produce an extraordinarily complicated attack involving a daring piece sacrifice, you can be sure you are in for trouble.
That is how it went in the game between Alexander Shabalov, a 25-year-old former Latvian grandmaster who now lives in Pittsburgh, and Joel Benjamin, 29, a grandmaster from Manhattan, at the United States Open championship in Philadelphia, which ended on Aug. 15.
Shabalov's brilliant victory in Round 7 helped him to score 8-1 and win the $5,000 first prize.


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
POP HISTORY EYES ON THE PRESIDENT George Bush: History in Essays and Cartoons.
Edited by Leo E. Heagerty.
Chronos Publishing, 18450 Willow Creek Road, Occidental, Calif. 95465, $24.95.


Small Nations With Big Talent
SMALL countries with few players and little tradition in the game never make much impact on bridge.
Never?
Well hardly ever, as Gilbert and Sullivan's Captain Corcoran is wont to say.
At the first World Team Olympiad, played in Turin, Italy, in 1960, the favored teams in the women's division were the United States, Britain, France and Denmark.
But the gold medal went to Egypt, then undergoing a brief metamorphosis as the United Arab Republic.
This created considerable difficulty at the final banquet when the orchestra was called on to play the U.A.R. national anthem.
Although the prototype of bridge had been played in Cairo a century earlier, before it came to the West, Egypt had few players and no competitive record.


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
EROTIC RUMINATIONS LOVE LOVE AND LOVE By Sandra Bernhard. HarperCollins, $20.


Robert Zeppa, 68, a Developer of Surgery for Cirrhosis Patients
Robert Zeppa, a surgeon who developed a life-saving operation for cirrhosis patients, died on Thursday at Jackson Memorial Hospital in Miami.
He was 68 and lived in Miami.
The cause was a pulmonary embolism, his family said.


WESTCHESTER GUIDE
KENNEL CLUB DOG SHOW
Picture it: More than 2,300 dogs, all purebred, putting their best paws forward at Lyndhurst in Tarrytown next weekend in the 76th Annual Westchester Kennel Club Dog Show.


'You Can't Look Away Anymore'
The Aug. 15 cover article "The Anguished Politics of Breast Cancer," by Susan Ferraro, has so far prompted four times the usual response to a major article.
The letters range across a spectrum of views, but most fall into two categories.
About a third are critical, particularly of the cover.
For instance, Margaret Richter of New York City wrote to say: "I do not think women have to have an obnoxious voice or chronically display anger to push for a cure for breast cancer. Nor do I think that it is necessary to use 'shock therapy' on the cover of your magazine."


Caroline Sullivan, John M. Cathey
Mr. and Mrs.
William W. Sullivan 3d of Columbia, S.C., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Caroline Harper Sullivan, to John Murray Cathey, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Sterling E. Cathey of Locust Valley, L.I.
An October wedding is planned.
Miss Sullivan is a fashion designer at the Carlisle Collection, a line of women's clothing, in New York.
She graduated from Hollins College.
Her father is the founder, president and chief executive of the Sullivan Agency, an advertising concern in Columbia.


Q and A
Condo Committees  Question: My condominium is run by a board of managers, which is assisted by committees that make recommendations to it.
What entitles one to join a committee? . . .
Marvin Kommel, Manhattan Answer: According to Eric Davis, a Manhattan lawyer, as long as the board is acting with a legitimate corporate purpose and not in bad faith, it has almost unquestioned authority in selecting committee membership.
"A condo board has expanded powers with regard to governing and running its operation," he said.
"Generally, a legal battle where an individual is seeking membership on a committee is unlikely to be successful. Further, when someone is denied membership, it is usually based on the fact that a committee is filled."


The Games Dinkins and Giuliani Play
George Bush was a polysport.
Racing from the golf course to the running track to a horseshoes game and out to his sleek cigarette boat, he seemed a manic manager ever on the go.
He was loved for it at first; then criticized as too patrician.
Bill Clinton is more or less a unisport.
He takes his daily run at a respectably fast clip but sometimes ends it at McDonald's.
Despite the occasional golf game, he keeps the face (and the physique) of Everyman.


As Schools Open, Many Ask if the State Knows How to Add
AS the 1993-94 school year opens this week, the focus is once again not on the classroom but on the more fundamental question of how much New Jersey should pay for public education.
To be sure, there will be a few differences in schools:


A Birthday Honoring la Creme de la Motorcycle


Giants' Goal to Go: Better Nutrition
HEIDI SKOLNIK summoned all 5 feet 4 inches of her authority, which put her just about equal with the seated 6-foot-5-inch football player.
The lecture of the moment concerned a grilled chicken breast sandwich heaped with slices of cheese that he was about to demolish.
Eyeing the cheese, Ms.
Skolnik, the nutritionist for the Giants, said, "I'm not talking about your selection of food, Howard, just the proportions."


Gladden Adam, Philip Falivene
Gladden Van Zandt Adam, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Bruce Adam of Stanton, N.J., was married yesterday to Philip James Falivene, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Alfonso Falivene of Parsippany, N.J.
The Rev.
Richard Miller, a Presbyterian minister, officiated at the Stanton (N.J.) Reformed Church.
The Rev.
Joseph Garbarino, a Roman Catholic priest, took part in the ceremony.
Mrs.
Falivene, 25, is a brokerage assistant at Paine Webber Inc., the securities firm in New York.
She graduated from Sweet Briar College.
Her father is a first vice president in Morristown, N.J., for Prudential Securities.
Her mother, Parry Adam, owns the Stanton Salvage Consignment Shop.


Once Rutgers Got Rolling, It Couldn't Be Stopped
After Rutgers fumbled on its first three possessions of the season, Coach Doug Graber presumably wanted to start over.
But the Scarlet Knights were able to regroup, thanks in part to the redshirt freshman running back Terrell Willis, and soon their game with Colgate was no contest.


Rocket Grounded
The Los Angeles Raiders did not activate RAGHIB (ROCKET) ISMAIL by yesterday's deadline for today's game against the Minnesota Vikings.
No team official was available to explain the decision.
Ismail, who has played the past two seasons in the Canadian Football League, was signed by the Raiders on Tuesday and was expected to be activated as a kickoff-return man and for limited duty as a wide receiver.


Charlotte Milholland, John Houshmand
BEFORE they met, Charlotte Milholland and John Houshmand often saw each other around the TriBeCa neighborhood both have lived in since the mid-80's.
He'd catch her eye as he drove by in his blue pickup truck, usually wearing jeans and cowboy boots and looking in general like someone on the way to Montana.
Her headgear invariably attracted his attention.
"She was the girl with the funny hats," Mr.
Houshmand recalled recently.
"Leopard skin, pillbox, who knows what. I was mystified."


Susan O'Callahan and James Pratt
Susan Gwyn O'Callahan, a daughter of Mary Anne and John O'Callahan of Bronxville, N.Y., was married there yesterday to Ens.
James Lewis Pratt, a son of Charles and Jean Pratt of Atlanta.
The Rev.
Patrick V. McNamara officiated at St.
Joseph's Roman Catholic Church.
Mrs.
Pratt is an administrative assistant with the Buckhead Life Restaurant Group, which owns and manages restaurants in Atlanta.
She and her husband graduated from Duke University.
Her father is a partner in the New York law firm of Breed, Abbott &amp; Morgan.
Her mother is a lawyer in Bronxville.


Near Zurich, Art and Industry
SAY "Winterthur," and many Americans will think of the du Pont mansion in Delaware with its recently enlarged museum of Americana.
Wall Street types instead may perceive a reference to Winterthur Insurance, a financial giant.
The du Pont estate and the insurance company both derive their names from a thriving industrial city -- today also a trove of fine art -- just 12 miles northeast of Zurich.
James Antoine Bidermann, who married into the du Pont clan and in 1839 built himself the chateau-like residence in Delaware's Brandywine Valley, called it after his native town in Switzerland.
And the concern that covers risks in many parts of the world has its headquarters in the Swiss Winterthur.


Streetscapes: Readers' Questions; The Beekman Theater, a French School, Old Initials
This is another in a series of columns answering questions from readers about New York's changing streetscapes.
The Beekman Theater
Q.
Who was the architect of the Beekman Theater, on the East Side of Second Avenue between 65th and 66th Streets?
It is similar to the 1952 Manhattan House across the street, designed by Mayer &amp; Whittlesey and Skidmore, Owings &amp; Merrill. . . .
Thomas Mellins, Robert A.M.
Stern, Architects, Manhattan.
A.
Like Manhattan House, the two-story-high store, theater and bank building was built in 1952 by the New York Life Insurance Company.
But its architects were Fellheimer &amp; Wagner, often identified with bank design.
New York Life apparently decided on a low-rise development it to protect its investment in the apartment house across the street; the company also bought the entire northerly blockfront and key parts of the blockfronts on the west and south.  161 West 75th Street
Q.
My apartment house at 161 West 75th Street, like a number of others on the Upper West Side, has two intertwined initials over the door, an "A" and something else.
Whose initials?
And was it the architect or developer? . . .
Ivan Berger, Manhattan.
A.
Your building was built in 1924 to 1926 by Anthony Paterno -- they are his initials -- and was designed by Rosario Candela.
Paterno was one of four brothers, all developers, who generally worked separately.
Other brothers also used their initials on buildings they put up.
Joseph Paterno's architect on 905 West End Avenue, at 104th Street, designed an elaborate cartouche with "JP" over the door and annotated the 1917 drawing, "Architect is to approve the plaster model of this ornament before execution." Other developers, like the Halls, the Campagnas and the Crystals, also left such traces of their ownership.
I have never seen written accounts of this practice by developers, but after the turn of the century the architectural press often urged architects to "sign" their creations.
However, only a few architects, usually designers of speculative apartment houses, regularly did this.
The Paternos started building modest walk-ups around 1900 but by the 1920's had become one of New York's reigning builder-families.
Joseph Paterno built buildings like 1220 Park Avenue, at 95th Street, and 30 Sutton Place, at 58th Street; Charles put up luxury apartments as well as Hudson View Gardens and Castle Village, north of the George Washington Bridge; Michael built 775 Park Avenue, at 72d Street, and 2 East 67th Street, and Anthony built 1040 Fifth Avenue, at 85th Street.
Generally the Paternos' legible presence on their buildings decreased as their product ascended the economic ladder.
On Michael Paterno's 1105 Park Avenue, built in 1922 at the corner of 89th Street, there is only the letter "P" and even such modest inscriptions largely vanished on their top-grade buildings on Fifth and Park Avenues.
This is consistent with the development in the 1910's of a general upper-class preference for apartment houses known by their street addresses rather than by a name.  126 East 24th Street
Q.
In 1945 the real estate broker Charles H. Voorhees had dinner at my apartment at 126 East 24th Street.
Mr.
Voorhees said that as a child he had attended a French school in the same building and that it was converted to apartments only later.
Was he right? . . .
Kathryn Guyler, Manhattan.
A.
Yes.
What is now a single structure at 126 East 24th Street was originally built as a string of four-story rowhouses in 1847 by Lawson Carter, a lawyer.
They were at first occupied as private houses, but in 1856 Elie Charlier moved his "French and English Institute for Young Gentlemen" to at least one of the buildings.
Voorhees was born about 1860 so he could have attended the Charlier school, which accepted boys at age 7.
In 1875 Charlier moved up to Central Park South between Sixth and Seventh Avenues and the Carter family hired the architects Renwick &amp; Sands to add a floor and change the building into modest apartments.
Frances Nightingale lived there from 1904 to 1909, just as she was establishing what became the Nightingale-Bamford School.
In 1939 the architect Samuel Lichtenstein modernized the ground floor and the building now has a definite tripartite effect from three different eras -- a Moderne ground floor, the original Italianate middle section and a top section with an elaborate Victorian brick cornice.  3 East 81st Street
Q.
There is an interesting building (very tiny) wedged just behind 998 Fifth Avenue.
Could this have been an old carriage house? . . .
Sylvia Steinbrock, Manhattan.
A.
The first building at 3 East 81st Street was one of a row of brownstones completed in 1879.
In 1908 the actress Maxine Elliott bought the house and had the architects Hunt &amp; Hunt redesign it with a limestone front.
She occupied it with a cousin and five servants.
Miss Elliott's obituary in The New York Times in 1940 described her as "one of America's most noted actresses," with a 30-year career beginning with her debut in 1890.
She retired around 1920 and moved to France.
In 1928 she sold the house to the owner of 998 Fifth Avenue, the apartment building at the corner.
The house was then demolished but the first-floor facade was retained with a garden behind, apparently as a light protector for the larger building.
This structure, with Maxine Elliott's doorway, is what survives on the site. 910 Fifth Avenue
Q.
Is it true that the white brick apartment house at 910 Fifth Avenue at 72d Street is really an older structure?
The ceilings are pretty high for a postwar building. . . .
John Foreman, Halstead Property Company, Manhattan.
A.
You're right.
Another giveaway clue is the surviving trace of limestone on the easterly lot line wall, toward Madison Avenue.
In 1920 the developer Fred F. French put up a limestone-front apartment house of simplexes and duplexes of up to 18 rooms with a sheltered driveway.
In 1955 the architects Sylvan and Robert Bien filed plans to add four new floors and rebuild the interior according to "new concepts of space utilization" as The New York Times put it in 1959.
These concepts meant apartments of three and a half to eight rooms renting for $500 to $1,415 a month.
Robert Bien, now a partner at Eggers &amp; Higgins, says changes in window patterns required the changes in the facade, which would have been done anyway.
"In those days," he said, "we wanted it to look like a new building, adding that "white glazed brick was the most expensive, and the most elegant" material available in the industry at the time.


Developing a South Carolina Mountaintop
A South Carolina developer is building a golf course-housing complex atop Glassy Mountain, a landmark in the northwestern section of this state.
The 3,100-foot mountain's smooth granite face rises prominently beside Route 11, a scenic highway edging a portion of the Blue Ridge Escarpment.
The escarpment is that point where the flatlands of the Piedmont rise abruptly to meet the Blue Ridge Mountains.


Conversations: Robert M. Kimmitt; An Envoy Departs Germany Upbeat Despite All the Sturm und Drang
THE Bush Administration sent Robert M. Kimmitt to be the United States' Ambassador in Bonn two years ago, but he has only just left the post because it took the Clinton Administration until this summer to name his successor -- Richard Holbrooke, who hasn't yet been confirmed by the Senate.
Mr.
Kimmitt, a West Point graduate and ex-Army officer who spent most of his teen-age years in Germany growing up in a military family, has seen German euphoria over reunification turn to deep disillusionment as the economy has faltered and right-wing violence against foreign asylum-seekers has flared alarmingly.


BMW Adds V8 Power to Its 5-Series
WALK around BMW's new 540i sedan on a sunny August morning and you will find yourself nodding and talking to yourself, saying things like "Hmmm" and "Uh-huh," all of it with a summery smile on your face.
That's what I was doing, in fact, having brought the car home the night before and just then being able to look at it in broad daylight.
The car was dark green, a midsized four-door and the top of the 5-Series line.


Shelley Slomowitz, Jonathan Hymes
October wedding plans have been announced for Shelley Ann Slomowitz, a political consultant and fund-raiser in Washington, and Jonathan F. Hymes, the chief of staff to Representative Peter T. King, Republican of New York.
Ms.
Slomowitz, 26, is a former special assistant to the chairman of the President's Council of Economic Advisers in the Bush Administration.
She graduated from Rollins College.
She is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Marvin L. Slomowitz of Kingston, Pa.


HEALTH AIDES SEE A TAX ON BENEFITS BEYOND BASIC PLAN
Administration officials said today that workers would have to pay Federal income tax on health benefits provided by an employer if the benefits exceed those in the standard package to be guaranteed to all Americans.
In addition, they said, employers could not take a tax deduction for the money they spend on such extra benefits.


Husky Injustice
To the Sports Editor:
"Winners never quit. And quitters never win" has alway been applicable to those engaged in athletic competition.
But unfortunately for Don James and the Washington Huskies, there was no competition when it came to the ruling of the Pacific-10.
They did not allow James or the University of Washington to crossexamine witnesses against them.
This was no American court of law, equal justice and all that.


Sports of The Times; The Leather That Saved A No-Hitter
IT took awhile to get into this no-hitter by Jim Abbott on a clammy early September afternoon.
It took awhile because Abbott was putting down these Cleveland Indians so ordinarily, with the odd walk thrown in.
It took a desperate defensive act to wake up Yankee Stadium.
It took a lunge by Wade Boggs in the seventh inning to turn on the juice.


Carol Kentler, David Reynolds
Carol Marie Kentler, the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Charles J. Kentler of Sea Girt, N.J., was married yesterday to David Linn Reynolds, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Arthur Reynolds 3d of Occoquan, Va.
Msgr.
Thomas Luebking officiated at St.
Catherine's Roman Catholic Church in Spring Lake, N.J.
Mrs.
Reynolds is an account executive for Working Mother magazine in New York.
She graduated from Purdue University.


'I Didn't Want To Do Another Chinese Movie'
Amy Tan's debut novel, "The Joy Luck Club," emerged in 1989 as a major critical and commercial success, but it frightened the movie studios.
Virtually all the central characters were Chinese women, there was a mosaic of interwoven stories of mothers and daughters, and the settings were San Francisco and China.
There was simply no precedent for a mainstream Hollywood film with an all-Asian cast.
Moreover, Wayne Wang, perhaps the foremost Chinese-American film maker and the obvious choice to direct, was reluctant to do so.
"I didn't want to do another Chinese movie," said the bespectacled, 44-year-old Mr.
Wang.
"I said for years that I was being stereotyped. Yet I loved the book. The stories reminded me so much of the stories I heard from my parents, and I felt the book transcended just being Chinese."


Sunflowers To Fall For
MAYBE it was paying $4 for two of those big sunflowers with the chocolate-brown centers at the Korean market last summer.
Maybe it was lingering amazement that the Japanese paid $39.9 million in 1987 for one of Van Gogh's "Sunflowers."
Or maybe it was just the spring catalogues having their way with me.
Velvet Queen is "an exquisite sunflower," murmured Cook's Garden from Londonderry, Vt.
Its "rich, dark burgundy petals surround charcoal black disks on 6-foot plants."


Parolee Rejected All Across Texas
On Jan. 3, 1982, the body of 8-year-old Kendra Page was discovered in an Austin elementary school Dumpster.
On June 21 of this year, Raul Meza, the man who confessed to her rape and murder, was released from prison.
His release touched off a furor and caused Mr.
Meza to be shifted from place to place across the state under the auspices of parole officials as each community he was placed in protested and picketed until he was moved.
Six weeks, six towns and many hotel rooms later, Mr.
Meza's odyssey ended when he filed a lawsuit against the Pardons and Parole Division of the Texas Department of Criminal Justice, claiming that the constant moving amounted to illegal detention.


Open Rehearsals as Prelude to Discovery
ATTENDING an orchestra rehearsal can be like visiting a foreign country you are familiar with from postcards.
Famous landmarks are easy to spot, but there is so much more to discover along the way.
Similarly, musical adventurers may be as surprised by the path leading to a performance of Beethoven's Sixth Symphony as by a work they have never heard before.
Such are the delights of open rehearsals, some music lovers say, that the experience can be more fun -- not to mention more enlightening -- than the black tie-and-tails performance itself.


On Killing Horses for Money: A Craftsman's Dirty Secrets
Tommy Burns has done some nasty deeds in his 32 years but he is no rat.
He wants everyone to be clear on that score.
He knows how to keep his mouth shut.
And he wants everyone to be crystal clear about one more thing: The only reason he is cooperating with Federal agents investigating deadly acts of cruelty and fraud in the glittering show- horse business is that those rich skunks he worked for turned their backs on him the second he got busted doing their dirty work.


Telescope Peak
To the Editor: After reading "Looking Down on Death Valley" by Daniel McNeill, about Telescope Peak in California (April 4), we decided to fit a climb into our summer schedule.


A Last Rose for James: Huskies Maul Stanford
So, you think it's easy being a genius in the 90's?
On his long-awaited return to Husky Stadium, where Bill Walsh's views on the University of Washington's troubled football program had made him public enemy No. 1, the coach of the Stanford Cardinal found that he had more serious problems today than his local popularity ratings.
Problems like an inexperienced defensive secondary and an inability to establish a rushing game, two of the factors that helped the Huskies construct an impressive and emotional 31-14 victory in their first game under their new coach, Jim Lambright.


Holly Burford, John Cunningham
Mary Holland Burford, the daughter of Mrs.
Robert S. Argabright 2d of Richmond and Douglas G. Burford of Roanoke, Va., was married yesterday to John Berton Cunningham, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
W.
Thomas Cunningham of Richmond.
The Rev.
Randolph Hollerith officiated at St.
Stephen's Episcopal Church in Richmond.
Mrs.
Cunningham, who is known as Holly, is an account executive at Ogilvy &amp; Mather Direct, a direct marketing agency in New York.
She and her husband graduated from the University of Virginia.


Technology; The Risks for High Tech, When Non-Techies Take Over
When the supercomputer maker Thinking Machines Corporation announced last week that it was bringing in a non-technologist -- Richard P. Fishman, a lawyer -- to run its day-to-day business as chief operating officer, the move continued a remarkable trend in Corporate America: technology companies hiring non-techies to run their business.
The highest-profile example, of course, was I.B.M.'s recruitment in April of Louis V. Gerstner Jr. from the consumer-products conglomerate RJR Nabisco to run the world's biggest computer company.
Since then, Westinghouse has hired as its chairman Michael R. Jordan, a longtime Pepsico executive.
And the search committee hunting for a replacement for Eastman Kodak's lame-duck chief executive, Kay R. Whitmore, has indicated that technical skills are not a priority. (Mr. Whitmore, a 35-year company man, started at Kodak as a chemical engineer.)


Tour Company Closes Its Doors
Asti Tours, a New York wholesale operator specializing in tours to Mexico, has shut its doors after 38 years.
Paul Kleepsies, the president, said that over the last two years, the recession, heavy competition in the Mexican tour business and consumer eagerness for discounts squeezed profit margins too tight to support the company.
It stopped taking reservations Aug. 9.
Another specialist in Mexico tours, American Leisure of Houston, went into Chapter 11 bankruptcy in March and closed in May.


Eggplant Stars in This Summer Stock
IT may be late summer but eggplant, zucchini, peppers, corn and tomatoes still beckon.
They are the makings of colorful and delicious meals or parts of meals.
Eggplant is one of the most versatile products of this abundant harvest.
The meatiness of eggplant gives it main-dish heft.
And even though the raw flesh soaks up oil like a sponge, slices of plain eggplant can be seared on the grill, then used in a vegetable ragout with only a bit of fat in the dish.


Bringing a Slow-Moving Auto Maker Up to Speed
AT any other company a quarterly net profit of $889 million would be cause to open champagne.
Not so, at the General Motors Corporation.
A reversal of horrendous losses, attributable mostly to a recovering United States economy and earnings from nonautomotive subsidiaries, surely was welcome when G.M. announced its second-quarter earnings this summer.
Yet the biggest company in the country is by no means out of the woods.
Despite cost-cutting, it remains slow, insular and ill prepared to contend with competitors like the Toyota Motor Corporation, the Ford Motor Company and even the much smaller, weaker Chrysler Corporation.


Russel Nye, Historian, Dies at 80; A Student of Comics, Jazz and TV
Russel B. Nye, a retired professor and historian of American culture and literature who won the 1945 Pulitzer Prize for biography, died on Thursday at a hospital in Lansing, Mich.
He was 80 and lived in East Lansing.
The cause was complications from a fall, his family said.


Siamese Twins Focus Health Care Issues; Compassion Also
To the Editor:
One surgeon you quote in "One Siamese Twin Survives an Extraordinary Separation" (front page, Aug. 21) states: "The doctors in Philadelphia thought there was a chance, and in that situation I think we have to respect the family's choice for intervention, just as we would have respected their choice if they requested that we stop treatment."


Corrections
A report in the Connecticut Guide column on Aug. 22, about a Newtown Kennel Club fund to help animals affected by the Midwest floods, misstated the box number for donations.
The address is NKC-Flood Relief Project, Post Office Box 4022, Danbury, Conn. 06813.


Future Is Now at Korea Show
An international exposition that seeks to answer the question "What sort of world do we want to live in tomorrow?" is being held in Taejon, South Korea, about 90 miles south of Seoul.
It is scheduled to run until Nov. 7 and is expected to attract at least 10 million visitors.


On the Run


In Tel Aviv, Thousands Join 'Battle for Peace'
Tens of thousands of Israelis filled a square in central Tel Aviv tonight to call for peace and to show support for the tentative agreement on a gradual transfer of authority to Palestinians in the Israeli-occupied territories.
Organizers said the demonstration had drawn 200,000 people.
The police put the figure near 50,000.
Whatever the real number, it was one of the largest public rallies in Israel in years, and many thought it exceeded any gathering since an enormous protest a decade ago to denounce Israel's invasion of Lebanon.


Freewheeling Images at Coney
At Coney Island amusement parks, the artwork adorning attractions and lining the midway breaks free of the mundane and flies off to fantasy realms that, however ribald, assume a certain poignancy on the last weekend of summer.
Lurking about Coney are floating serpents, two-headed babies, roaring devils, bone-chomping fish and disembodied skulls seemingly cut loose from the world of Hieronymous Bosch.
In this photo essay by Jack Manning is a selection of Coney art by several contemporary artists.
Don't look for this kind of thing at Disneyland.


RELIGIONS ENDORSE PEACEFUL PATHS
After a week of colorful and sometimes divisive events, an assembly of religious leaders from around the world closed this evening with an appeal from the Dalai Lama for religious peace.
In the crowd of thousands who gathered to hear the Tibetan leader in Grant Park here, turbans and saris were as common as baseball caps and T-shirts.
"We must accept the existence of different religions," he said.
"Spiritual harmony is essential. The next question: is it possible? My answer is definitely yes, yes, yes."


One Year Later, Stoicism and Words of Concern From Vincent
As the first anniversary of his resignation as baseball commissioner approached, Fay Vincent noted a certain irony in his forced departure and recent developments on the game's labor front.
"Being soft on labor was one of my defects, according to some of those owners," Vincent said.
"They're softer than I ever dreamed of being."


New Address For Austrians
The Austrian National Tourist Office in New York is moving and curtailing its services.
The new mailing address is Post Office Box 1142, New York, N.Y. 10108-1142.
The telephone number, (212) 944-6880, is unchanged.
All tourism inquiries must now be made by telephone or by mail.
In an effort to reduce overhead expenses, special services, like the distribution of brochures to walk-in visitors and travel counseling in person, are no longer available.


Business Diary/August 29 - September 3
THE ECONOMY Dr. Clinton Writes a New, Shorter Prescription


Double Trouble


Schools Chief Seen as Intense, Effective Manager
From 6 to 7 each morning, Ramon C. Cortines would sit behind his desk, unprotected by secretaries, and field telephone calls from parents, teachers, principals, custodians, government officials and corporate executives, all of whom knew he would be available at that hour for their questions, complaints and requests.
Talk to just about anyone involved in education in San Francisco about Mr.
Cortines's six-year tenure as superintendent of schools -- and his prospects as Schools Chancellor in New York City -- and they cite that daily telephone time as the unmistakable signature of his intense, hands-on administration.


In Westport, the Sequel to 'Nunsense'
QUESTION: If "Send in the clowns" is the circus master's traditional cry for help, what does the manager of a theater in trouble say?
Answer: Bring on the nuns.


Where Is Cheever Country?
To the Editor:
Fernanda Eberstadt, in her review of "The Liberty Campaign," by Jonathan Dee (Aug. 15), says, "This is John Cheever territory" -- i.e., Belmont, L.I.
And then in the same issue, when we come to the review of Sallie Bingham's "Upstate," James Salter says, "We are two or three stops beyond Cheever country . . . more than an hour from Manhattan."


Clinton Calls Packed Agenda 'One Goal'
Responding to criticism that he is trying to do too much at once, President Clinton said today that the proposals he planned to send Congress this month to overhaul the nation's health care system, remove trade barriers within North America and make the Federal bureaucracy more efficient were aimed at the same target, a stronger economy.
"Health security, expanded trade and reinventing government really aren't separate goals," the President said in his weekly radio address.
"They are part of a comprehensive strategy to promote long-term growth, increased incomes, more jobs and a stronger American community."


PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: September 5, 1993
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Fiction
1
2
THE STARS SHINE DOWN, by Sidney Sheldon. (Warner, $5.99.) A businesswoman's fortunes are imperiled by past and present secrets.
2
36
RISING SUN, by Michael Crichton. (Ballantine, $5.99.) The investigation of a woman's death involves the American-Japanese rivalry.
3
29
THE PELICAN BRIEF, by John Grisham. (Island/Dell, $6.99.) A law student probes the murder of two Supreme Court justices.
4
84
THE FIRM, by John Grisham. (Island/Dell, $6.99.) A young lawyer learns that his firm is engaged in secret, possibly illegal activities.
5
73
A TIME TO KILL, by John Grisham. (Island/Dell, $6.99.) Racial tensions surface during the trial of a man charged with murder.
6
13
CONGO, by Michael Crichton. (Ballantine, $5.99.) An American team seeks to discover why a group of archeologists died among ruins.
7
59
JURASSIC PARK, by Michael Crichton. (Ballantine, $6.99.) A biotechnician clones dinosaurs for use in a theme park.
8
20
SPHERE, by Michael Crichton. (Ballantine, $5.99.) Four scientists explore an alien spaceship found on the ocean floor.
9
4
DECKED, by Carol Higgins Clark. (Dove/Warner, $4.99.) Her former roommate's death haunts a woman during a trans-Atlantic voyage.
10*
10
ALL THAT REMAINS, by Patricia D. Cornwell. (Avon, $5.99.) Searching for the truth behind the strange deaths of five young couples in Virginia.
11
9
COLONY, by Anne Rivers Siddons. (Harper Paperbacks, $6.50.) A 90-year-old woman recalls her summers at a Maine resort.
12
5
WHERE IS JOE MERCHANT? by Jimmy Buffett. (Avon, $5.99.) On the trail of a dead rock star who has been sighted in the Caribbean.
13
11
GERALD'S GAME, by Stephen King. (Signet, $6.99.) Twenty-eight hours of horror suffered by a woman handcuffed to a bedpost.
14
5
ALL THE PRETTY HORSES, by Cormac McCarthy. (Vintage, $12.) The adventures of a 16-year-old Texas vaquero in the Mexico of 1950.
15
1
FOREVER IN YOUR EMBRACE, by Kathleen E. Woodiwiss. (Avon, $6.50.) A countess and a soldier of fortune in 17th-century Russia.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
NonFiction
1
3
UH-OH, by Robert Fulghum. (Ivy, $5.99.) Reflections on life's commonplaces.
2
513
THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $10.95.) Inspiration.
3
8
EVERY LIVING THING, by James Herriot. (St. Martin's, $6.99.) The veterinarian's memoirs.
4
6
A ROSE FOR HER GRAVE, by Ann Rule. (Pocket, $5.99.) Six true-crime stories.
5
29
I KNOW WHY THE CAGED BIRD SINGS, by Maya Angelou. (Bantam, $4.99.) Memoir.
6
19
THE SILENT PASSAGE, by Gail Sheehy. (Pocket, $5.50.) Menopause and today's women.
7
99
A YEAR IN PROVENCE, by Peter Mayle. (Vintage, $10.) A sojourn in the south of France.
8
16
TRUMAN, by David McCullough. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $15.) A biography of the 33d President.
9*
2
I CAN'T BELIEVE I SAID THAT! by Kathie Lee Gifford with Jim Jerome. (Pocket, $5.99.) The autobiography of the television talk-show host.
10
12
A WORLD LIT ONLY BY FIRE, by William Manchester. (Little, Brown, $11.95.) History.
11
120
YOU JUST DON'T UNDERSTAND, by Deborah Tannen. (Ballantine, $10.) The different languages men and women speak.
12*
30
TOUJOURS PROVENCE, by Peter Mayle. (Vintage, $10.) The charms of rustic France.
13
7
ACQUIRED TASTES, by Peter Mayle. (Bantam, $9.95.) Essays on the 1980's.
14
16
WHERE THE BLUEBIRD SINGS TO THE LEMONADE SPRINGS, by Wallace Stegner. (Penguin, $11.) Essays on the American West.
15*
136
LOVE, MEDICINE, AND MIRACLES, by Bernie S. Siegel. (Harper Perennial, $12.) The importance of a patient's mind and emotions.
16*
9
LINCOLN AT GETTYSBURG, by Garry Wills. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $12.) The great address.
17*
1
MARILYN: The Last Take, by Peter Harry Brown and Patte B. Barham. (Signet, $6.50.) The final four months of Marilyn Monroe's life.
18*
1
PRINCESS, by Jean P. Sasson. (Avon, $5.50.) Life as lived by a member of the royal family and other women in Saudi Arabia.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Advice, How-To and Miscellaneous
1
133
THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE, by Stephen R. Covey. (Fireside/S&amp;S, $9.95.) Principles to practice in the pursuit of success.
2
149
THE T-FACTOR FAT GRAM COUNTER, by Jamie Pope-Cordle and Martin Katahn. (Norton, $2.99.) How to reduce fat in one's diet.
3
108
LIFE'S LITTLE INSTRUCTION BOOK, by H. Jackson Brown Jr. (Rutledge Hill, $5.95.) A collection of some 500 tips for achieving a self-fulfilling life.
4
14
RAND MCNALLY ROAD ATLAS. (Rand McNally, $7.95.) The 1993 edition of a guide to the United States, Canada and Mexico.
Rankings reflect sales figures, for the week ending Aug. 21, at 3,050 bookstores plus wholesalers serving 38,000 other retailers, statistically weighted to represent sales in all such outlets nationwide.
An asterisk indicates that a book's sales are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.


'You Can't Look Away Anymore'
The Aug. 15 cover article "The Anguished Politics of Breast Cancer," by Susan Ferraro, has so far prompted four times the usual response to a major article.
The letters range across a spectrum of views, but most fall into two categories.
About a third are critical, particularly of the cover.
For instance, Margaret Richter of New York City wrote to say: "I do not think women have to have an obnoxious voice or chronically display anger to push for a cure for breast cancer. Nor do I think that it is necessary to use 'shock therapy' on the cover of your magazine."


For an Envoy, A Fond Adios From Mexico
Before John D. Negroponte ever arrived in Mexico City as the United States Ambassador, he had made a good many enemies.
In the early 1980's, as Ambassador to Honduras, where he helped to establish a rear guard for the Reagan Administration's guerrilla war against the Sandinista Government of Nicaragua, he was often called "The Proconsul," after the imperious governor of a pliant colony.


County and State Offer Aid to Buy Hastings Site
WITH the announcement last week of a county and state plan to help local officials preserve Hillside Woods here, this tiny Hudson River village moved a step closer toward reaching what has been an elusive goal.
The county has offered to contribute one-third of the $3.35 million cost of purchasing the 48-acre woods, and the state has indicated that it would contribute another third.
That leaves the village with the task raising the other third through a bond issue, which is much less that it had originally thought it would have to pay.


Pooled Genes


Washington at Work; Campaign for Free-Trade Agreement Creates Capital's New Power Couple
Maybe it was the August blue moon, but romance and policy making, it seems, are suddenly in convergence.
Representative Bill Paxon proposed on the House floor last month to a fellow New York Republican, Representative Susan Molinari. (She accepted.) Senator Bob Dole this summer filibustered a national service plan backed by his wife, Elizabeth Hanford Dole, the president of the American Red Cross.
Mary Matalin, the political director of the Bush Presidential campaign, announced her engagement to Bill Clinton's chief campaign strategist, James Carville, during her cable television talk show a couple of weeks ago.


A Vest That Goes To Extremes
The best vest of the season could be this 100 percent wool cardigan with exposed stitching taken to a decorative extreme.
Whipstitched X's march along the edges of the fitted, waist-length vest, which comes in black or brown with metal buttons.
It would work over the striped ribbed tops and blouses with big collars that are in favor with women.


Begonias: Celebrating an Old Favorite
IMPATIENS seem to be planted everywhere now to provide summer flower color.
This is a good thing because the plants are showy and provide ample display for little care.
But as bright and colorful as these succulent plants are, another succulent, durable annual needs to have its merits talked about because it is also showing off brightly: the bedding begonia.
These plants have come a long way since grandmother's time.


'You Can't Look Away Anymore'
The Aug. 15 cover article "The Anguished Politics of Breast Cancer," by Susan Ferraro, has so far prompted four times the usual response to a major article.
The letters range across a spectrum of views, but most fall into two categories.
About a third are critical, particularly of the cover.
For instance, Margaret Richter of New York City wrote to say: "I do not think women have to have an obnoxious voice or chronically display anger to push for a cure for breast cancer. Nor do I think that it is necessary to use 'shock therapy' on the cover of your magazine."


Reburial Is Both a Ceremony and a Test for Today's Hungary
The remains of Adm.
Miklos Horthy, the Hungarian leader who collaborated with Hitler and who promoted the idea of Hungary's expansion, were buried in his hometown today as tens of thousands of people, including several members of the Cabinet turned out in a show of admiration for him.
For many, the ceremony was a test of this nation's post-Communist politics, a measure of how much the anti-democratic, and many would argue anti-Semitic period of Mr.
Horthy, clings to the Hungarian present.


No Marseilles Decision
The French soccer league's disciplinary commission, after daylong questioning of the principals in the Olympique Marseilles game-fixing scandal, said yesterday that it still lacked enough information to penalize anyone.
The announcement left the future of both Marseilles and the French national soccer team in doubt.
Marseilles faces possible expulsion from the European Champions Cup, and France has been threatened with suspension from international soccer unless its soccer federation takes action by Sept. 23.
The disciplinary commission said its eventual action hinged on the outcome of criminal investigations now under way.


Hey, There's a Corpse in Freud's Study
HENRY JAMES' MIDNIGHT SONG By Carol De Chellis Hill. 445 pp.
New York:  Poseidon Press/Simon &amp; Schuster. $23.


Washington Memo; In Trying to Streamline Government, Gore Fights a Battle Many Have Lost
When Vice President Al Gore steps into the spotlight on Tuesday to remove the wraps from a hefty volume of suggestions on how to streamline the Government, he will be treading a well-worn path.
Politically, the National Performance Review, as it is called, will be big.
Americans have told pollsters for decades that they believe the Federal Government is bloated and inefficient.
The Clinton Administration is hoping to capitalize on this public discontent.


AUG. 29-Sept. 4: Less Dental, Less Mental; Having Trouble With Bills, Clinton Cuts the Dosage Of His Health-Care Cure
President Clinton spent last week trying to answer some of the many remaining questions about his plan to guarantee health insurance for all Americans.
At the White House, the foremost question was how to pay for it all.
Mr.
Clinton has said he is likely to propose an increase in the Federal excise tax on cigarettes.
In addition, he would require employers to pay at least 80 percent of the cost of health insurance premiums for their employees.


At Work; A Union Buster Confesses
FOR years, unions have complained that companies do not fight honorably when they fend off organizing drives.
Instead, the unions say, the tactics range from questionable to scurrilous.
For years, unions have grumped that the legal system favors business, blunting all of labor's potential strategic arsenal, including the strike, and fostering loopholes the size of Henry Frick's art collection for the bosses to prance through.
For years, unions have accused companies of using the National Labor Relations Board to delay, undermine, disrespect and generally sashay around enforcement of the National Labor Relations Act.
Tish tosh, labor's adversaries said.
Unions were (choose one, two or all): whiny, wimpy, ineffective, irrelevant, delusional.
Sometimes, it turns out, many of labor's paranoid fantasies are true.
In "Confessions of a Union Buster," soon to be published by Crown Books, Martin Jay Levitt recounts his 20-year career as a Pinkerton-in-pinstripes who subsidized a spectacular and turbulent life style practicing "preventive labor relations," the Orwellian circumlocution for the art of keeping a company union-free.


Profile: Paul J. Severino; After This Many Hits, It Can't Be Luck
TRURO, Mass.
HIGH on the bluffs overlooking Cape Cod Bay, Paul J. Severino shifts uncomfortably on the deck of his summer home here.
Usually, this secluded spot offers a haven, but today a photographer snaps away while a reporter hovers nearby.
Mr.
Severino hates having his picture taken, just as he disdains the flash of a wealthy life style.
But if his company continues its astonishing run of success, he'll have to get used to the attention.


A Touch of South Carolina, Home Style
ANYONE nostalgic for the home-style cooking of South Carolina will find reasonable facsimiles at the Meeting Street Grill in Westport.
The new restaurant has a name that recalls the center of Charleston's historic district and a menu that combines South and North Carolina specialties with other regional American dishes.
Add the skillfully prepared food to the softly lit, romantic decor (champagne-color draperies, lace curtains, comfortable banquettes and chairs, ceiling paintings that evoke skylights) and the friendly, well-trained staff, and the results can be a very memorable dining experience indeed.


'You Can't Look Away Anymore'
The Aug. 15 cover article "The Anguished Politics of Breast Cancer," by Susan Ferraro, has so far prompted four times the usual response to a major article.
The letters range across a spectrum of views, but most fall into two categories.
About a third are critical, particularly of the cover.
For instance, Margaret Richter of New York City wrote to say: "I do not think women have to have an obnoxious voice or chronically display anger to push for a cure for breast cancer. Nor do I think that it is necessary to use 'shock therapy' on the cover of your magazine."


The City's Rewards
Some unplanned pyrotechnics at the Met, a waterside still life, smiles from a birthday boy.


Promised Land; Israel and the Palestinians See a Way to Co-Exist
ON Nov. 2, 1917, the British Foreign Secretary, Arthur Balfour, issued a declaration in London stating that His Majesty's Government was ready to support the creation of a national home for the Jewish people in Palestine.
The Zionist movement took that one paragraph promise, and from it, step by step, erected the state of Israel.
Nearly 76 years later, on Aug. 30, 1993, the Israeli Government approved an agreement reached in secret with the Palestine Liberation Organization sanctioning the creation of an autonomous Palestinian homeland in the Gaza Strip and Jericho.
This is nothing less than the Israeli Balfour Declaration for the Palestinians, and if they build on it as the Zionists did, there is every chance it will lead to their own state.


Hillary Bidwell, Rupert Mackay
Hillary Day Bidwell, a daughter of Gail S. Bidwell of Greenwich, Conn., and J. Truman Bidwell Jr. of New York, was married yesterday to Rupert Mackay, a son of Stuart M. Mackay of Durban, South Africa, and Anne Mackay of Bourne End, Buckinghamshire, England.
The Rev.
Hugh Palmer performed the Church of England ceremony at Southwark Cathedral in London.
Mrs.
Mackay teaches Bible studies at St.
Helen's Church in London.
She graduated from Yale University and received a master's degree in English from King's College in London.
Her father is a partner in the law firm of White &amp; Case in New York.
Her paternal grandfather, the late J. Truman Bidwell, was a chairman of the New York Stock Exchange.


Correction
An article on Aug. 22 about doctors in the movies misstated the affiliation of Joseph Turow.
He is a professor at the University of Pennsylvania, not the University of Maryland.


Real Meaning Of Freedom of Speech
In "Towns Battle Growth of 'Adult' Businesses"  [ July 11 ]  a gentleman who advocates the complete banning of adult book and video stores asserts that "he did not believe that the Founding Fathers meant such businesses to be protected by the First Amendment."
"Freedom of speech was intended to cover political freedom," he said.
"Our Founding Fathers would be offended at what we call freedom of speech today."


'You Can't Look Away Anymore'
The Aug. 15 cover article "The Anguished Politics of Breast Cancer," by Susan Ferraro, has so far prompted four times the usual response to a major article.
The letters range across a spectrum of views, but most fall into two categories.
About a third are critical, particularly of the cover.
For instance, Margaret Richter of New York City wrote to say: "I do not think women have to have an obnoxious voice or chronically display anger to push for a cure for breast cancer. Nor do I think that it is necessary to use 'shock therapy' on the cover of your magazine."


Recent Sales
Dobbs Ferry, N.Y.  $131,500
100 Cedar Street  2-bedroom, 1-bath, 41-year-old condominium; dining room, hardwood floors, outdoor pool; taxes $2,180; common charges $300.
Larchmont, N.Y.  $500,000
16 Locust Avenue.  5-bedroom, 3 1/2-bath, 70-year-old center-hall colonial; fireplace, sunroom, finished basement; taxes $8,691.
Tarrytown, N.Y.  $122,000
222 Martling Avenue.  2-bedroom, 2-bath, 29-year-old co-op; entry hall, den, terrace, outdoor pool; maintenance $612.
Hamden, Conn.  $330,000
395 Still Hill Road  5-bedroom, 3-bath, 33-year-old contemporary; country kitchen, window wall in family room, office area, 1.3 acres; taxes $4,326.
Madison, Conn.  $184,000
Dorest Lane
3-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, new colonial; formal dining room, 2-car garage, wooded lot, 1.2 acres; taxes to be determined.
Westport, Conn.  $260,000
4 Brook Lane  2-bedroom, 2-bath, 38-year-old ranch; heated pool, skylights, 0.50 acre; taxes $2,556.
OTHER AREAS Great River, L.I.  $227,000
8 Woodhollow Road  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 34-year-old ranch; dining room, eat-in kitchen, finished basement, den; taxes $7,000.
Montgomery, N.J.  $298,000
19 Charleston Road  5-bedroom, 2.5-bath, 10-year-old colonial; study, fireplace in family room, h/w floors; taxes $5,284.
Vernon, N.J.  $133,000
50 Birch Drive  3-bedroom, 3-bath, 7-year-old raised ranch; deck, level backyard, mother/daughter entry; taxes $2,250.


M. C. Van Buren, Thomas Brown
Marcia Cameron Van Buren, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert Van Buren of Plainfield, N.J., was married there yesterday to Thomas William Brown, a son of Marion E. Brown of Syosset, L.I., and the late Robert J. Brown.
The Rev.
William R. Harvey performed the ceremony at the Crescent Avenue Presbyterian Church.
Mrs.
Brown is a vice president at the Bank of New York in Manhattan.
She graduated from Hollins College and received an M.B.A. from New York University.
Her father retired as the chairman of the Midlantic Corporation, a bank holding company, in Edison, N.J.


Is Landfill Mining An Alternative?
Your article concerning the future of the Huntington landfill  [ "2 Ex-State Aides Now Side With Town Over Dump," July 18 ]  omits a major issue, landfill mining.
Landfill mining is now seriously being looked at by Huntington officials, consultants and citizens as an environmentally sensible and cheaper alternative to capping the Huntington dump.
It is an odor-controlled method of permanently removing all materials by recycling and in-vessel composting.


'You Can't Look Away Anymore'
The Aug. 15 cover article "The Anguished Politics of Breast Cancer," by Susan Ferraro, has so far prompted four times the usual response to a major article.
The letters range across a spectrum of views, but most fall into two categories.
About a third are critical, particularly of the cover.
For instance, Margaret Richter of New York City wrote to say: "I do not think women have to have an obnoxious voice or chronically display anger to push for a cure for breast cancer. Nor do I think that it is necessary to use 'shock therapy' on the cover of your magazine."


Seeds to Munch
If you have any big sunflowers and like to eat the seeds, cut the flower heads off when their green backs have turned completely brown and hang them in an airy place to dry.
When the seeds begin to loosen, pick them off and store them in airtight containers.
But leave a few heads in the garden for the birds.
Continue to pinch back basil and parsley for continued growth.
Gardeners in balmier climes, like Long Island or southern New Jersey, can plant one more crop of dill, cilantro or spinach.


Julia Murphy, Frederick Klein
Julia Elizabeth Murphy, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Joseph Murphy of West Hartford, Conn., was married yesterday to Frederick Miles Klein, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
Gary Klein of Hauppauge, L.I.
Cantor Nancy Ginsburg performed the ceremony at the Hartford Club.
Mrs.
Murphy-Klein, 25, is a foster-parent recruiter for P.S.I.
Services Inc., a social services agency in Philadelphia.
She graduated from Mount Holyoke College and received a master's degree in social work from the University of Pennsylvania.


Bookshelf
BACK TO BATAAN.
By Jerome Charyn.
Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux. $15. (Ages 10 and up) It's 1943, Jack's father has died on Bataan, and now the New York schoolboy, who wants to join the Army, runs away from home.
In the ensuing adventure, a writer is born.
STELLA &amp; ROY.
Written and illustrated by Ashley Wolff.
Dutton. $12.99. (Ages 2 to 5) Stella has almost outgrown her blue-wheeled tricycle, and she zooms ahead while little Roy just coasts along on his small four-wheeler.
Who reaches the popcorn stand first?
Remember the tortoise and the hare, then guess.


With Practice, Texas Is the Execution Leader
It is unlikely that Johnny James cared, as he sat awaiting his death on Friday in Texas's execution chamber in Huntsville, that he would have a macabre distinction, one which could make him a footnote in the annals of capital punishment.
The 39-year-old former truck driver, convicted of a 1985 rape and murder, made no final statement.
Witnesses said he kept his eyes closed from the moment he was seated until he was pronounced dead by means of a lethal injection at 12:17 A.M.
But Mr.
James's death, the seventh execution in Texas in the past six weeks and the 14th this year, was something of a statistical landmark.
Texas has now executed more people in 1993 than any year since the Supreme Court reinstated the death penalty in 1976 and more than in any year since 1938, when 18 people were sent to the electric chair.


Focus: Landrum, S.C.; Golf and Housing on a Mountaintop
A SOUTH CAROLINA developer is building a golf course-housing complex atop Glassy Mountain, a landmark in the northwestern section of this state.
The 3,100-foot mountain's smooth granite face rises prominently beside Route 11, a scenic highway edging a portion of the Blue Ridge Escarpment.
The escarpment is that point where the flatlands of the Piedmont rise abruptly to meet the Blue Ridge Mountains.


Braving a Grand Canyon Hydro-Rodeo
I REMEMBER the colors of the Grand Canyon: the reds and blue-greens of the steep walls, the bright yellow of our rafts, the rabid whites of the rapids and the dark purple of my wife's toenails.
Each of these shades was moving, especially the last.
When we returned to civilization from our eight-day adventure in early July, my wife, Lesley Stahl, had to have the nails on both big toes surgically removed.
And I had broken a bone in my left foot.
It was a great trip.
Our 15-year-old daughter, Taylor, enjoyed it the most.
Every day, we could see her getting stronger, gaining more confidence, growing more and more independent, glorying in her ability to do easily what her parents couldn't do at all.
Our expedition began with a 9.5-mile hike from the top of the Grand Canyon to the bottom.
We were to start walking at Grand Canyon Village on the south rim and finish at a mule corral called Phantom Ranch at Mile 88.
It took the mighty Colorado River between 5.5 and 6 million years to work its way down to its present depth.
Lesley and I cautiously worked our way down at an equivalent speed while Taylor raced ahead.


Advertisers' Target Audience
To the Editor:
Women may be present in late-night television audiences, indeed may even predominate, but young men are the reason advertisers buy late night.
Women are available throughout the broadcast day, but young men are a scarce commodity, and late night is one of the few times outside of sports when they are watching.
If you doubt this, just look to the beer and car commercials.
As with all commercial media, late night is cast and written for its target audience.
LYNNE THOMSON Chicago


In America; Mental Health Failures
The State of New York spends $1 billion each year on mental health services in local communities.
It's a lot of money and it's allocated with the best of intentions.
But it is not money well spent.
One problem is that too often the individuals most in need of help are the ones least likely to seek it.


POSTINGS: Beaux-Arts for Bard; Decorative Arts Get a Home In Town House
It was the first house on its block.
When the six-story Beaux-Arts town house at 18 West 86th Street was completed in 1906, it was a lovingly designed private residence.
But over eight decades, the house, which is in the Upper West Side Historic District, slowly deteriorated.
It changed hands several times.
It became a multiple dwelling.
Many of its rooms were cut up into small apartments, and much of its intricate period detail fell into disrepair.
That's the way it was when it was found by Susan Weber Soros, who decided it would make a perfect home for the Bard Graduate Center for Studies in the Decorative Arts.
"The building was in a remarkable state of decay, but I could still feel its Old World elegance," said Ms.
Soros, director and founder of the center, Bard College's newest graduate school.
"It's one of the few town houses I looked at that was light in most of the rooms. And the 86th Street location means it's accessible by subway and crosstown bus and is very close to the city's libraries and museums."


Susan Horst and Robert Morelli
Alice A. Horst of Windsor, Conn., and John C. Horst of New Britain, Conn., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Susan Alberta Horst, to Dr.
Robert Michael Morelli, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Ondino A. Morelli of Rye, N.Y.
A December wedding is planned.
Miss Horst, 25, is a fourth-year medical student at the University of Connecticut.
She graduated cum laude from Harvard University.
Her father retired as a biology and chemistry teacher at Windsor (Conn.) High School.
Her mother teaches mathematics at the St.
James Elementary School in Manchester, Conn.


Fear and Intimidation Slow Identification of Six Bodies
Nearly three months after the Golden Venture ran aground in June, only 4 of the 10 bodies that were recovered in the aftermath have been identified.
Family members and advocates of Chinese immigrants in New York say that some Chinese people believe they know some of the victims but have not come forward to identify the bodies for fear of being caught by immigration officials.


Wendy Hartman and J. C. del Real
Wendy Anne Hartman, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Michael L. Hartman of Winston-Salem, N.C., was married yesterday to Juan Carlos del Real, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Juan A. del Real of Washington.
Msgr.
Kenneth Roeltgen performed the ceremony at the Duke University Chapel in Durham, N.C.
Mrs. del Real, 25, is to join the Morristown, N.J., law firm of Riker, Danzig, Scherer, Hyland &amp; Peretti as an associate in October.
She and her husband graduated from Duke University, from which she also received a law degree and he an M.B.A.


Jerusalem
A few hours before the sun fades on Friday and the Jewish Sabbath sets in, the town shuts down.
A visiting American writer once groused that it made him feel claustrophobic, but Jerusalemites, non-Jews as well as Jews, would find his complaint strange.
True, most shops and restaurants close (although not nearly as many as a few years ago) and sometimes this causes inconvenience.
But in a city of palpable tension and permanent strife, the enforced quiet of the Sabbath is a spiritual and social massage for a weary body politic, a gift beyond price.
A succession of Jewish holy days, starting with the New Year, Rosh ha-Shanah, on the evening of Sept. 15, will provide the equivalent of many Sabbaths for a month.
Most extraordinary is Yom Kippur, the Day of Atonement, Sept. 25 this year, when local custom dictates that even non-observant Jews leave their cars at home, giving pedestrians and children on bicycles full control of deserted streets.
The holy period ends with the long festival of Succoth, from Sept. 30 to Oct. 7.


A Whole Lot Going On
To the Editor:
Thank you for having Caryn James take an unbiased look at the "MTV culture." Not only have I long felt that the line between rap and poetry is artificial but, being nearly 18, I have become a little sick of my elders' practice of sneering at MTV, rap and other expressions of my generation's spirit.


Many Disappear in Haitian Terror Campaign
Two images are vying in the public mind these days to remind the Haitian people of their need for a professional police force.
The first is a slickly produced advertisement that runs each evening on national television showing current members of the blue-uniformed corps directing traffic and politely escorting pedestrians across congested streets.


Wall Street; Good News on Dividends, After Two Bad Years
FOR shareholders, a bigger dividend check is the kind of good news that grew very rare in the early 1990's.
But in August, 116 companies announced higher payouts, 30 percent more than a year earlier and 61 percent more than in 1991.
"After two terrible years, we are getting back to a more normal situation with regard to dividend actions," said Arnold Kaufman, editor of The Outlook, a Standard &amp; Poor's newsletter.
For the first eight months of the year, 1,027 dividend increases were announced, up 18 percent over 1992 and up 44 percent over 1991.
Similarly, the number of companies cutting or eliminating dividends is down 54 percent from 1991.


For School, Romance and Ripped Seams
WHAT to wear on the first day of school used to be a major decision.
Often, it meant the debut of a new identity invented over the summer that would set one up for the year as a member of the cool crowd.
Not anymore.
To judge by the casual responses of teen-age shoppers last Sunday afternoon at Urban Outfitters, a downtown emporium of ephemeral fashion trends, clothes worn on the first day of school may not differ much from those worn during summer vacation.


AUG. 29-Sept. 4: New Cable TV Rates; Mad as Hell Because They Have to Pay Still More
Some couch potatoes got an unpleasant surprise last week when they opened their September cable TV bills: higher rates, despite Federal formulas intended to save users more than $1 billion a year.
The Federal Communications Commission, which wrote the 600-plus pages of formulas on which the new rates are based, estimated that two-thirds of the nation's 11,000 cable systems would trim prices by 10 percent for basic monthly service, rental of the converter that unscrambles the cable signal and the remote control that changes the channels.


Whose Cords Were Those?
To the Editor:
In your recent article on neck cords (Thing, Aug. 29), my wire cross was prominently featured.
However, the design was not attributed to me.


Health Care and High Cost
To the Editor:
It amazes me that Mr.
Baumol has so little understanding of a physician's workday.
His underlying assumption is that physicians spend 100 percent of their time delivering patient care.
I, as do most primary care physicians, devote part of each day to paperwork.
On one frustrating day, I spent one half-hour on the phone arranging a preapproval from an H.M.O. for a polysomnogram.
This chore took so long because the H.M.O. employees were not familiar with the test nor with their company's particular requirements for preapproval.


Canine Consciousness
To the Editor:
As a dog trainer and the author of a book about dog training, I would like to take notable exceptions to Jeffrey Moussaieff Masson's review of "The Hidden Life of Dogs," by Elizabeth Marshall Thomas (Aug. 1).


U.S. Tightens Asylum Rules For Chinese
Lin Ping's long journey to America seemed to be over at dawn one Sunday in June, when he set foot on a beach in Queens after a frantic, freezing swim ashore from the Golden Venture, the aging freighter that ran aground off the Rockaway Peninsula after a trip halfway around the world.
Even after being taken into custody, Mr.
Lin says, he was thrilled to learn that his case would be heard in a court of law.
He knew that thousands of Chinese before him had won the right to stay in the United States by saying they had been persecuted for violating China's strict one-child policy, and by saying that they faced fines or sentences in labor camps if they returned.


IN SHORT: FICTION
LOVE AND FRIENDSHIP THE CORRESPONDENCE By Evelin Sullivan. Fromm, $20.


BEST SELLERS: September 5, 1993
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Fiction
1
1
2
WITHOUT REMORSE, by Tom Clancy. (Putnam, $24.95.) John Kelly becomes involved in a Pentagon project to rescue prisoners held in North Vietnam.
2
2
56
THE BRIDGES OF MADISON COUNTY, by Robert James Waller. (Warner, $16.95.) A photographer and a lonely farmer's wife in Iowa.
3
3
4
VANISHED, by Danielle Steel. (Delacorte, $23.95.) The abduction of their young son creates a crisis for a New York man and woman and for the woman's first lover.
4
4
5
STREETS OF LAREDO, by Larry McMurtry. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $25.) A Texas bounty hunter goes south of the border in pursuit of a train robber and killer.
5
6
21
LIKE WATER FOR CHOCOLATE, by Laura Esquivel. (Doubleday, $17.50.) Frustration, love, hope -- and recipes -- sampled by a woman on a Mexican ranch.
6
5
25
THE CLIENT, by John Grisham. (Doubleday, $23.50.) A deadly secret, revealed by a lawyer just before he kills himself, presents problems for an 11-year-old boy.
7
7
8
THE NIGHT MANAGER, by John le Carre. (Knopf, $24.) A Zurich hotelman's life in the world of arms dealers, dope smugglers and international terrorists.
8
8
3
THE SHINING ONES, by David Eddings. (Del Rey/Ballantine, $22.) The second volume of "The Tamuli," a fantasy saga.
9
9
11
PIGS IN HEAVEN, by Barbara Kingsolver. (HarperCollins, $22.) The stresses and strains that befall a mother and her adopted Cherokee daughter.
10
14
6
A CASE OF NEED, by Michael Crichton writing as Jeffery Hudson. (Dutton, $18.95.) A 1968 novel about the mysterious death of a surgeon's daughter.
11
10
14
PLEADING GUILTY, by Scott Turow. (Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux, $24.) A lawyer in pursuit of his firm's missing partner and a multimillion-dollar fund.
12
11
8
HONOR AMONG THIEVES, by Jeffrey Archer. (HarperCollins, $23.) Saddam Hussein plots to steal and destroy the Declaration of Independence.
13
13
THE SCORPIO ILLUSION, by Robert Ludlum. (Bantam, $23.95.) A former naval officer tracks down a terrorist conspiracy headed by a vengeful woman.
14
12
11
CRUEL &amp; UNUSUAL, by Patricia D. Cornwell. (Scribners, $21.) Dr.
Kay Scarpetta investigates mysteries involving a man executed for murder.
15
1
VIRTUAL LIGHT, by William Gibson. (Spectra/Bantam, $21.95.) A scramble in the year 2005 for a pair of virtual-reality eyeglasses that disclose secrets.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Nonfiction
1
3
17
EMBRACED BY THE LIGHT, by Betty J. Eadie with Curtis Taylor. (Gold Leaf Press, $14.95.) A woman's near-death experience.
2
4
3
MAYBE (MAYBE NOT), by Robert Fulghum. (Villard, $19.) Essays suggesting that inspiration can be found in most unexpected ways and places.
3
1
56
WOMEN WHO RUN WITH THE WOLVES, by Clarissa Pinkola Estes. (Ballantine, $23.) How myths and folk tales can enable women to understand their psyches.
4
2
8
LISTENING TO PROZAC, by Peter D. Kramer. (Viking, $23.) A psychiatrist discusses mood-changing medications and their effects on a person's self.
5
5
13
REENGINEERING THE CORPORATION, by Michael Hammer and James Champy. (Harper Business, $25.) A manifesto for business innovation.
6
6
51
THE WAY THINGS OUGHT TO BE, by Rush H. Limbaugh 3d. (Pocket, $22.) Anecdotes and opinions offered by the talk-show host.
7
12
2
THE HIDDEN LIFE OF DOGS, by Elizabeth Marshall Thomas. (Davison/Houghton Mifflin, $18.95.) An analysis of canine behavior.
8
7
38
CARE OF THE SOUL, by Thomas Moore. (HarperCollins, $22.50.) A psychotherapist's discussion of spirituality and everyday life.
9
8
12
THE FIFTIES, by David Halberstam. (Villard, $27.50.) A journalist's social, political, economic and cultural history of the 1950's.
10
9
8
GIRL, INTERRUPTED, by Susanna Kaysen. (Turtle Bay/Random House, $17.) A memoir of a young woman's mental illness.
11
10
13
MAMA MAKES UP HER MIND, by Bailey White. (Addison-Wesley, $17.95.) Life in a tiny Georgia town; by a first-grade teacher and radio commentator.
12
13
29
HEALING AND THE MIND, by Bill Moyers. (Doubleday, $25.) Conversations with physicians and others about the relationship of sickness to thoughts and emotions.
13
11
11
DAYS OF GRACE, by Arthur Ashe and Arnold Rampersad. (Knopf, $24.) The memoirs of the late tennis star.
14
15
14
SECRET CEREMONIES, by Deborah Laake. (Morrow, $20.) The unhappy marriages of a woman raised as a Mormon.
15
3
THE LAST BROTHER, by Joe McGinniss. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $25.) A biography of Senator Edward M. Kennedy.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous
1
1
6
AGELESS BODY, TIMELESS MIND, by Deepak Chopra. (Harmony, $22.) A physician's advice about aging.
2
2
10
EAT MORE, WEIGH LESS, by Dean Ornish. (HarperCollins, $22.50.) Counsel from a physician about diet and nutrition.
3
3
16
MEN ARE FROM MARS, WOMEN ARE FROM VENUS, by John Gray. (HarperCollins, $20.) Communicating.
4
1
FOOD -- YOUR MIRACLE MEDICINE, by Jean Carper. (HarperCollins, $25.) Ways to prevent and treat many illnesses and complaints.
Rankings reflect sales figures, for the week ending Aug. 21, at 3,050 bookstores plus wholesalers serving 28,000 other retailers (gift shops, department stores, newsstands, supermarkets), statistically weighted to represent sales in all such outlets nationwide.
An asterisk indicates that a book's sales are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
And Bear In Mind (Editor's choices of other recent books of particular interest) CRAZY IN ALABAMA, by Mark Childress. (Putnam, $22.95.) Southern American humor yet again, but in a novel that pounds every convention of the genre into submission; not even the dead bodies interfere with the funniness.
"DADDY'S GONE TO WAR": The Second World War in the Lives of America's Children, by William M. Tuttle Jr. (Oxford University, $30.) A historian finds that some "home front children" still feel indoctrinated in fright and hate, while others believe the war enhanced their understanding of this country and its culture.
EPSTEIN: Artist Against the Establishment, by Stephen Gardiner. (Viking, $35.) This polemical book defends at every point a major artist who all his life defied bourgeois conformity yet managed to die the proprietor of a knighthood.
FOXFIRE: Confessions of a Girl Gang, by Joyce Carol Oates. (William Abrahams/Dutton, $21.) A dark and troubled epic of women who revenge themselves on men, set in the slow-witted 1950's, before female bonding had been discovered.
THE KOMMANDANT'S MISTRESS, by Sherri Szeman. (HarperCollins, $17.50.) A powerful novel, forged from refractory materials: the personal narratives of a death camp commander and the Jewish woman he chose as his mistress.
LET THE SEA MAKE A NOISE . . .: A History of the North Pacific From Magellan to MacArthur, by Walter A. McDougall. (Basic Books, $30.) Lively narrative, bold analysis and prodigious research adorn this popular history of a vast sea surrounded by mutually mistrustful peoples.
SADE: A Biography, by Maurice Lever. (Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux, $35.) A life of the French aristocrat and novelist (1740-1814) so wicked they renamed wickedness in his honor, so to speak.
SECOND SIGHT, by Robert V. Hine. (University of California, $20.) A splendid, highly literate personal account by the fortunate recipient of a miracle, a distinguished historian who slowly lost his eyesight and suddenly got it back.
SIGNS OF DEVOTION: Stories, by Maxine Chernoff. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $19.) Smart, antic short stories in which people understand new experiences by recalling old ones, and the trivial is examined until its importance transpires.
STRIP TEASE, by Carl Hiaasen. (Knopf, $21.) The author, a reporter for The Miami Herald, delights to foul his front yard in hilarious fiction.
What a horrible place!
One nice woman in the book only makes things worse, the poor thing.
THEIRS WAS THE KINGDOM: Lila and DeWitt Wallace and the Story of the Reader's Digest, by John Heidenry. (Norton, $29.95.) A hugely detailed, engagingly written history of a single bright idea and the preacher's kids who ran that idea into a multibillion-dollar global enterprise.
THE WRESTLER'S CRUEL STUDY, by Stephen Dobyns. (Norton, $22.95.) Probability has no place in this entertaining post-modern novel, governed by the presence of a wrestler's manager who talks and thinks like Nietzsche.


AUG. 29-Sept. 4: Bokassa Is Back; Loathed African Ex-Dictator Is Unexpectedly a Free Man
Probably the last face the people of the Central African Republic ever expected to see in public again was that of Jean-Bedel Bokassa, the country's former self-proclaimed emperor, who became notorious for his bizarre ideas of glory, his brutality and his greed.
He was sentenced to death after a 1986 trial, a punishment that was later commuted to life imprisonment.
Last week Mr.
Bokassa, in failing health, was freed by the country's departing military ruler, Gen.
Andre Kolingba, who was defeated in elections last month.
As one of his last acts in office, General Kolingba freed all of the country's criminals -- a move his opponents said was retaliation for his defeat at the polls.


At Riot's Epicenter, Housing Market Is Thriving
It is only a few minutes' walk from the infamous corner of Florence and Normandie Avenues in South-Central Los Angeles, where last year's racial disorders started, to the two-bedroom green bungalow Estella and Jose Otero recently bought as their first home.
But to Mr.
Otero, a 30-year-old immigrant from Honduras, the house behind a waist-high cyclone fence and a big ficus tree on quiet West 69th Street is the ideal place to raise his two little children.
"I got my American dream already," he said with a broad smile in halting English.


Riding Dangerously
To the Editor:
It was with sadness and frustration that I read of George Plimpton's bicycle circuit (The Night, Aug. 15), ridden without a helmet.
Four years ago, E. Mark Beckman, a gifted surgeon and remarkable man, died of a head injury sustained while bicycle riding in Central Park without a helmet. (I was a nurse at the hospital where many of Dr. Beckman's patients were located.)


'The Forgotten Plague'
To the Editor:
The review of "The Forgotten Plague" suggests "parallels between tuberculosis and AIDS."


Tips From Professionals To Handle Pesky Tasks
PROFESSIONALS who build and repair houses gain subtle skills from intensive experience.
Amateurs seldom derive such knowledge.
The following tips may interest both groups.
MEASURING Metal tape measures have a small hook on the end that may seem annoyingly loose.
But do not return the tape to the store or try to tighten the hook.
It is designed to slide back and forth on the tape by an amount exactly equal to the hook's thickness, thereby producing accurate measurements whether the end of the tape is hooked over a board to measure its outside dimensions or placed between the sides of an opening to measure its inner dimensions.


'You Can't Look Away Anymore'
The Aug. 15 cover article "The Anguished Politics of Breast Cancer," by Susan Ferraro, has so far prompted four times the usual response to a major article.
The letters range across a spectrum of views, but most fall into two categories.
About a third are critical, particularly of the cover.
For instance, Margaret Richter of New York City wrote to say: "I do not think women have to have an obnoxious voice or chronically display anger to push for a cure for breast cancer. Nor do I think that it is necessary to use 'shock therapy' on the cover of your magazine."


Not a Tennis White in the House
The Women's Tennis Association awards dinner in Manhattan, Aug. 30.


Corrections
An article on Aug. 8 about Tivoli Gardens in Copenhagen incorrectly characterized the amusement park.
At the age of 150, it is not the world's oldest; Bakken, in Klampenborg, Denmark, began as a spa in 1583 and evolved into an amusement park, clearly before Tivoli was founded.


Rules of a No-Hitter: No Talking, No Mistakes
The crowd was so loud that he could not hear the ball come off the bat.
Randy Velarde was primed for this moment, aching to make the big play, but he did not want it to happen like this.
With Jim Abbott one out away from a no-hitter yesterday afternoon at Yankee Stadium, Cleveland's Carlos Baerga hit a soft grounder toward Velarde at shortstop.
The ball seemed to be moving slowly, oh so slowly, as Velarde charged forward to make the final play.


Corporate America Focuses on Real Estate
H.
BRUCE RUSSELL well remembers the day, about five years ago, when Colby Chandler, then Eastman Kodak's chairman, asked him to head its real estate department.
"I said to Colby, 'I know absolutely nothing about real estate,' " recalled Mr.
Russell, whose background included finance, manufacturing, technology -- almost everything but real estate.
"Colby's reaction was, 'Great! I want you to think about strategies, not about doing deals.' "


THE WORLD: Israel and the Palestinians See a Way to Co-Exist; Milestones on the Road to Peace
The Israeli-Palestinian draft agreement on self-rule in the West Bank and Gaza Strip is the latest milestone in the slow process of reconciliation between Israel and its Arab neighbors.
Here is a brief chronology of the developments that led up to it, beginning in the late 1970's.
November 1977 -- The first major breakthrough: Egyptian President Anwar el-Sadat travels to Jerusalem and offers peace in exchange for a withdrawal from the territories occupied by Israel in the June 1967 Arab-Israeli war.


Correction
Because of an editing error, the Aug. 22 Stamps column, which reviewed three books including "Chicago's Crabgrass Communities" by Dr.
Harvey M. Karlen, misattributed a phrase describing Chicago.
It was Carl Sandburg, not Robert Frost, who wrote, "Player with railroads and the nation's freight handler."


CURVES AHEAD
There's a new spirit shaping the design of everyday objects, and its sleek contours recall the aerodynamic lines of the 1930's, when everything from airplanes to pencil sharpeners was streamlined.
Streamlining is a distinctly American phenomenon.
While European design movements like the Bauhaus were driven by social concerns, streamlining appealed to America's faith in progress and technology.
One of the first modernist styles to appeal to the masses, it said speed, glamour and thrust.


'You Can't Look Away Anymore'
The Aug. 15 cover article "The Anguished Politics of Breast Cancer," by Susan Ferraro, has so far prompted four times the usual response to a major article.
The letters range across a spectrum of views, but most fall into two categories.
About a third are critical, particularly of the cover.
For instance, Margaret Richter of New York City wrote to say: "I do not think women have to have an obnoxious voice or chronically display anger to push for a cure for breast cancer. Nor do I think that it is necessary to use 'shock therapy' on the cover of your magazine."


Dresden Bombing
To the Editor: It may be fashionable but it is certainly anti-historical to write of the bombing of Dresden late in World War II as Stephen Kinzer does in "Saxon Capital Reconstructs Glories of Old" (July 18): "The war's end was only weeks away, the outcome already clear."
The statement is wrong.
The bombing was in February 1945.
The war ended in May.
That's months, not weeks, in which Jews, dissidents and Gypsies were slaughtered by the trainload, and tens of thousands of Russian, British, American, Canadian, French and other Allied soldiers, as well as equal numbers of Germans (some as young as 13 years old) were killed or maimed.


'You Can't Look Away Anymore'
The Aug. 15 cover article "The Anguished Politics of Breast Cancer," by Susan Ferraro, has so far prompted four times the usual response to a major article.
The letters range across a spectrum of views, but most fall into two categories.
About a third are critical, particularly of the cover.
For instance, Margaret Richter of New York City wrote to say: "I do not think women have to have an obnoxious voice or chronically display anger to push for a cure for breast cancer. Nor do I think that it is necessary to use 'shock therapy' on the cover of your magazine."


Bari Cohen and Alexis Malas
December wedding plans have been announced for Bari Cohen and Alexis Malas, by her parents, Gabe and Ina Cohen of Woodhaven, Queens.
Mr.
Malas is a son of Spiro and Marlena Malas of New York.
Miss Cohen, 27, is an assistant teacher at the Christ Church Day School in New York.
She graduated from Syracuse University.
Her father is the president of I &amp; G Cutting Inc., a clothing manufacturer in Forest Hills, Queens.
Her mother is an executive assistant at the E. Gluck Corporation, a jewelry manufacturer in Long Island City, Queens.


The Executive Life; The Search for Jobs That No Longer Exist
It is not an easy time to be a senior manager.
Terms like "trim corporation" sound trendy, but they really mean you can now get fired even if you have done a great job.
"The first thing you have to learn is that nothing is forever anymore," said Sid Wilkins, president of the outplacement specialist Wilkins &amp; Wilkins International in Palo Alto, Calif.
"There is no such thing now as job security."


IN SHORT: FICTION
FAMILY SECRETS SWEET WATER By Christina Baker Kline. Aaron Asher/HarperCollins, $20.


Seeking Leniency, Wachtler Blames Adversaries
In what are likely to be his final days of freedom, New York State's former Chief Judge, Sol Wachtler, is now orchestrating an intense campaign that seeks leniency in the court of public opinion by impugning those who brought him down.
Although he pleaded guilty to threatening to kidnap the 14-year-old daughter of his former lover, Joy Silverman, after two decades of judging others, Mr.
Wachtler is now on the other side of the bench, and deems himself both culprit and victim.
He blames the Federal Bureau of Investigation, the United States Attorney's Office and Mrs.
Silverman for failing to stop his campaign of harassment against Mrs.
Silverman with an order of protection.


Three Guides To Hostels
Travelers seeking information on hostels -- accommodations where beds rent for $5 to $22 a night -- now have at least three guides to choose from.
The newest is a 23-page booklet listing more than 400 places, "The Hostel Handbook for the U.S.A. and Canada." It is published by the Sugar Hill International House, an unaffiliated New York hostel near City College in Harlem.
Some hostels operate on certain floors of regular hotels, others occupy entire buildings.
Hostels operating under the aegis of American Youth Hostels are included, as are those affiliated with the American Association of Independent Hostels and unaffiliated ones such as Sugar Hill.
To receive the booklet, send $1 and a stamped, self-addressed business envelope to Sugar Hill International House, 722 St.
Nicholas Avenue, New York, N.Y. 10031.
The latest edition of the American Youth Hostels directory of nearly 300 hostels, Hostelling North America, is given free with membership, which costs $25 a year for people 18 to 54 years old; $10 for those under 18 and $15 for those 55 and over.


Cooking Books: How Hurricane Losses Vanished
INSURANCE companies paid out a lot of money last year for Hurricane Andrew.
But now it turns out they did not completely admit to their losses, thanks to an accounting gambit that is breathtaking in its audacity.
For those who think accounting regulators are always asleep at the switch, it is reassuring to know that this particular trick was caught rather early, and a rule has been issued.
As a result, says James Leisenring, the vice chairman of the Financial Accounting Standards Board, "in the third quarter, a whole bunch of insurance companies are going to have to take big hits."


World Markets; Investors Say 'Si' to Spanish Stocks
AUGUST is the month when stock brokers in Spain usually take vacations as most business activity and politics come to a near standstill.
Last month, however, traders rushed back from beaches to cash in on an unprecedented rally as the Madrid stock exchange index set new records.
Spurred by expectations of lower interest rates here, as well as by frenzied foreign investment, the Madrid index topped 304 points by the end of August and rose near the 1990 pre-Gulf war level of 312 on several volatile days.


One Hunts, the Others Don't
To the Editor:
First let me say that as far as I know, Jim Fergus and I are not related -- except that we both hunt game birds.


Now A's Can't Buy a Division Race, or Even a Series Victory
They played six games for the American League pennant last October.
Then they both set out to reduce their payrolls, the two richest in baseball history.
They willingly let established, productive players leave.
Now, with four weeks left in the season, the Toronto Blue Jays are in position to return to the playoffs while the Oakland A's have deteriorated into the worst team in the league.
The Athletics did not resemble a contender early in the season, but in a three-week period beginning in mid-June they won 15 of 21 games and suddenly were only four and half games from first place.
But Sandy Alderson, their general manager, knew better than to delude himself into thinking the team was ready to claim its fifth division championship in six seasons.
"We'll see where we are at the end of the month," he said in early July, discussing possible plans for trading high-priced players.


Princeton Proposes Ban on Many Cigarette Machines
It's hard to find anyone who says it's O.K. for teen-agers to smoke.
And that's why, the Princeton Regional Health Commission wants to ban cigarette vending machines in bars and restaurants in Princeton Borough and Township.


'The Forgotten Plague'
To the Editor:
I would like to thank Stephen S. Hall for his considered appraisal of my book "The Forgotten Plague" (Aug. 1), though this means I have to swallow the critical barbs as well.
I think there are a couple of points that merit clarification.


Cigarettes a Thriving Industry in Bleak Sarajevo
Industry has almost completely collapsed in Sarajevo after 17 months under siege, but a factory here is still churning out the one scarce commodity people grumble about more than food, water or even ammunition: cigarettes.
In Bosnia, where the idea of long-term health is a matter for black humor and cold turkey is something you wish you had for dinner, warnings like those on packs of American cigarettes would produce the same sarcastic grunts as Washington's threats of military intervention against the Serbs.
And anyone who proposed or, God forbid, tried to enforce a smoking ban in restaurants, offices or anywhere else would surely find himself gazing down the wrong end of a gun, to the glee of everyone present.


Centered on Focused
By sticking fast to a focused, no-nonsense strategy," Fortune writes this month about Laurence A.  Tisch, the chairman of CBS, "Tisch, 70, has triumphantly built CBS back to the No. 1-rated television network."
In an Arkansas Times article about the apparent suicide of the deputy White House counsel, John Brummett quoted a stunned former employer as saying of Vincent Foster, "He was the most focused person I ever knew, with the possible exception of his friend Hillary."


Clinton's Practice
To the Editor:
In "The Military Is Not a Social Program" (Op-Ed, Aug. 18), James Webb, former Navy Secretary, is mistaken in stating that President Clinton "has never held a nonbureaucratic or even a private-sector job." In 1981 and 1982, Bill Clinton practiced law with Wright, Lindsey &amp; Jennings, where I practice.
This firm was then, as it is now, a partnership and not a government agency.
If it should show any sign of turning into a government agency, I'll let you know.
NANCY BELLHOUSE MAY  Little Rock, Ark., Aug. 20, 1993


From Mod to Mad To Miasmic
NAME: Peggy Lipton.
IDENTITY: Actress.


Piety on Parade: Fashion Seeks Inspiration
As returning vacationers empty their mailboxes of fall department store catalogues and glossy magazines, they may well wonder whether the financially strained fashion industry is seeking salvation from above.
The fashionable woman is pictured cloaked in a shroud, shod in high-laced boots worthy of Chaucer's pilgrims and draped in a clutch of crosses.
It isn't just Christianity's symbol that is being fervently appropriated.
Runways, fashion advertisements and magazine layouts are rife with what could be the wardrobe at a religious summit meeting: Hare Krishna silks, hooded and rope-belted monks' robes, clerical tunics, the plain garb of the Amish and even the black gabardines of the Hasidic Jews.
Nothing, it seems, is sacred.


Diana M. Hendry, C. A. Westfield 3d
Diana M. Hendry, a legal editor, was married yesterday to Dr.
Charles A. Westfield 3d, a veterinarian.
The Rev.
Randolph L. C. Weber, a Presbyterian minister, officiated at the Fifth Avenue Presbyterian Church in New York.
The Rev.
Edward W. Billia, a Roman Catholic deacon, took part in the ceremony.
Ms.
Hendry, who is keeping her name, graduated from Harvard University and received a law degree from Brooklyn Law School in June.
Later this month, she is to join Matthew Bender &amp; Company, a legal publishing concern in New York.
She is the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Archibald W. Hendry of Bloomington, Ind.
Her father is a physics professor at Indiana University in Bloomington.


Health Care and High Cost
To the Editor:
Mr.
Baumol has missed the point.
The problems of excessive expenditures in health care have been clearly identified as excessive utilization of testing, surgical procedures and high technology as well as abuses of the insurance industry, the malpractice system and pharmaceutical industry.


Like a Horse, Only Smaller
The pony set enlivens the opening day of the Hampton Classic horse show, Bridgehampton, L.I., Aug. 29.


As the Guests From Hell, Two Actors Invade a Party
In "Later Life," A. R. Gurney's Bittersweet comedy of what if's, Maureen Anderman and Josef Sommer meet in middle age at a Boston cocktail party.
As they explore who they have become since their youthful romance, a variety of eccentric party guests, all played by Carole Shelley and Anthony Heald, interrupt them.
Providing a special assist are Daniel Platten, who designed the hair and wigs, and Jennifer von Mayrhauser, who created the costumes.
The Playwrights Horizons hit, directed by Don Scardino, reopens next Sunday at the Westside Theater, where it is now in previews.


The View From: Wilton; Should Movies Give Way to Clothes?
AS in many small towns, the movie theater in Wilton has been about the only place to go for entertainment at night, especially since the town was dry until two years ago.
Even today, with liquor available at a few Wilton restaurants until 11 P.M., the Wilton Cinema remains the sole source of entertainment.
It is also the only movie theater between Norwalk and Danbury and one of the few single-screen cinemas left in the area.


A Boy's Adventure in Botswana
MY son, Tom, going on 4, knows nothing of Nintendo yet, but he can tell a wildebeest from a buffalo, and knows to look for a climbable tree when one of the latter glowers at you from the brush.
He can take or leave Legos, but he was in a joyous engineering frenzy when, on a dirt airstrip in Botswana, we built a corral of thorny acacia branches around our little twin-engine six-seat Beechcraft to keep hyenas from gnawing on the undercarriage.
He has watched a pride of lionesses gorging on the carcass of a giraffe.
He has been drenched by the vapor of Victoria Falls.
In the Okavango swamp, an elephant splashed across the bow of his dugout canoe.
Top that, Disney World!
These are all experiences from a single week, the most rewarding outing yet in my family's search for child-friendly Africa.


Fishing for a Cause: Access to Rivers for All
Rivers are immortal.
Anglers are not.
Sooner or later, knees stiffen, backs tighten, eyesight blurs and bodies succumb to the illnesses and accidents that bedevil us all and the short slopes that separate bank from stream become impassable obstacles for disabled and elderly.
Joan Stoliar, who has long been the Den Mother to New York fly-fishers, decided something had to be done.
She could not, of course, alter the mortality side of the equation but she felt we all could make it easier for less able anglers to get to the fishing.
The result of Stoliar's resolution has been Project Access, the nation's first attempt at providing the disabled with access to public fishing streams.
The Project Access sites, on the Beaverkill, are marked by a simple wood sign reading "Access." "The whole idea is to bring disabled and able-bodied anglers together, not to segregate them," Stoliar explained as she reflected on the catalyst for the project.
"Dave Olesan is a good friend from Theodore Gordon Flyfishers who happens to need crutches to get around. He loves to fish and I love to fish with him and there was no place where we could fish together on the Beaverkill. And I was struck with the thought that when disabled sportsmen and women can't be with us on the stream, we're all the losers. Building these sites means terrific people can be part of a very important part of our lives."


Missing the Point On Photographers
Charles Rotkin's Aug. 8 critique of the interview of the photographer Bob Buchanan  [ "Photographers Find Strength in Unity," July 4 ]  completely missed the point.
Mr.
Buchanan stated that 65 commercial photographers from the Westchester-Fairfield region formed an organization to address the specific needs of its members in this region.
Many of us are members of the various photographic societies within a 50-mile radius of New York City, and we are familiar with the scope and limitations of these organizations.
However, none address the problems unique to Westchester-Fairfield commercial photographers.


A No-Hitter That Stands Out From the Rest


Margaret Larkin, Farid Maluf
Margaret Rovine Larkin, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert Rovine of Elkins Park, Pa., was married yesterday to Farid Rafael Maluf, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Rafael Maluf of Richmond Hill, Queens.
The Rev.
H.
Scott Matheney, a Presbyterian minister, officiated at Alger House, a carriage house in New York.
Mrs.
Maluf, 29, is a mathematics tutor in New York.
She graduated from Vassar College and received a master's degree in mathematics education from Columbia University.


Pursuing Indian Designs and Art Glass
FOR craft gallery owners, summer can be a time to meld vacations with their vocations.
Rather than trying to get away from it all, Tedd Schwartz, owner of Adobe East in Summit, heads for the Southwest every August to hunt down pots and jewelry for gallery.
Elissa Goldstein visits antiques and craft fairs across the country, in search of art glass for her Elvid Gallery in Englewood.
Since his specialty is Indian crafts, Mr.
Schwartz and his wife, Phyllis, make an annual trip to the Indian Market in Santa Fe, N.M., where more than 1,000 Indian artists sell their art and craft works along the sidewalks of the central plaza.
This juried fair attracts collectors and dealers from around the world.
Visits with artist friends who live and work on nearby reservations provide opportunities to see and place orders for the latest work.


Health Care and High Cost
To the Editor:
It is probably true that, as currently proposed, "Health Reform Can't Cure High Costs" (Viewpoints, Aug. 8).
William Baumol, the author of that article, also argues that, as a "handicraft service," health care will have lower-than-average productivity growth and therefore consume an ever larger proportion of national income.


State Seeks to Open a Bottleneck
NEARLY everyone living or working in the New Haven area has a story to tell about the Quinnipiac River Bridge, that part of Interstate 95 that crosses New Haven Harbor.
Rush-hour traffic jams on the Q Bridge, as the span is called, have given it a dubious reputation, and drivers swap stories about the best routes to take around it.


Amy A. Buynak, Craig Albrecht
Amy Anne Buynak, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
William J. Buynak of Bayville, L.I., was married yesterday to Craig Thomas Albrecht, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Alfred C. Albrecht of Port Washington, L.I.
The Rev.
Thomas Hammond performed the ceremony at the Lutheran Church of Our Savior in Manhasset, L.I.


Oases In the Desert
To the Editor:
Natalie Angier's article lamenting the paucity of television and film images of "good" doctors overlooked the excellent PBS mini-series based on A. J. Cronin's novels and short stories: "The Citadel," in the mid-1980's, starring Ben Cross, and more recently "Dr. Finlay." Both recounted the vicissitudes of British family doctors and, especially relevant for today, the debate over the future National Health Service in Britain.
JOAN M. COOPER  Brooklyn


Begonias: Celebrating an Old Favorite
IMPATIENS seem to be planted everywhere now to provide summer flower color.
This is a good thing because the plants are showy and provide ample display for little care.
But as bright and colorful as these succulent plants are, another succulent, durable annual needs to have its merits talked about because it is also showing off brightly: the bedding begonia.
These plants have come a long way since grandmother's time.


Man Held in Bus Shooting
A man who commandeered a Transit Authority bus for more than 30 blocks along Broadway in Harlem was arrested yesterday and charged with criminal possession of a weapon and unlawful imprisonment, the police said.
The man, Larry McCalister, 32, of 1430 Amsterdam Avenue in Manhattan, held the bus driver at gunpoint early yesterday on 138th Street and commandeered the bus to 162d Street, said Sgt.
Frances Haimeck, a police spokesman.
Sergeant Haimeck said that shortly after midnight, Mr.
McCalister and another man boarded the bus and began arguing with a group on board.
The men fired shots at the group, but no one was injured.


A Chute for the Cessna Itself
UNTIL recently, an airplane passenger fearing a crash was imminent needed to exit the aircraft before deploying a parachute.
Now, anyone in a Cessna 150 or 152 trainer equipped with a GARD (General Aviation Recovery Device) can sit tight.
Release the GARD and the entire plane floats to terra firma under a 1,600-square-foot canopy.
"The planes don't usually come out entirely unscathed, but the people do," said Dan Johnson, head of marketing for Ballistic Recovery Systems Inc. of St.
Paul, Minn., which makes the GARD.
Generally, there may be some wing damage.


Bodies of an Artist's Work Are Parked On Park Ave.
The orange trucks that rolled down Park Avenue at 10:30 A.M. yesterday looked no different from the many moving vans that invade Manhattan on most weekends, installing new residents or carting others out.
But when workers pulled the blankets from their unlikely cargo -- 14 massive bronze sculptures in the shape of a horse, a cat, a bird and an assortment of abdominous humans -- doormen at the stately apartment buildings that line the street suddenly edged out into the drizzle.


Mutual Funds; Weighing Up the Sales Loads
DOES paying a sales commission, or "load," to buy a mutual fund make sense?
Amy Dacyczyn, author of "The Tightwad Gazette," a compilation of strategies to save money, thinks so.
The self-described "frugal zealot" -- who recommends, among other things, reusing tinfoil and buying tuna fish by the case -- owns a portfolio of about 10 load funds bought on the advice of a financial consultant.
"When your income goes up," she said, referring to the success she's with her newsletter and book of the same name, "things get more complicated." So she and her husband, Jim, chose to work with financial advisers.


Investigators See Progress In School Asbestos Inquiry
As officials grapple with the disruption in New York City's schools caused by the asbestos scandal, investigators say they have made progress in their efforts to learn who mishandled the asbestos testing and why.
They have also widened the focus to include fraud in other areas.
Though the city and Federal investigations remain in early stages, with criminal charges, if they come, still weeks or even months away, the investigators say they have compiled considerable evidence of wrongdoing by the unit of the Board of Education that conducted the asbestos testing program in the late 1980's.


Patricia Salvador, Brian Hayum
Patricia Ojeda Salvador, a daughter of Lautaro Ojeda and Carmen Salvador de Ojeda of Quito, Ecuador, was married there yesterday to Brian Richard Hayum, a son of Walter and Jane Hayum of Marshfield, Mass.
The Rev.
Francisco Eguez officiated in the Chapel of the Colegio San Gabriel.
The bride, 25, is a senior at Catholic University in Quito, where her mother is an administrator and the bride's father is a sociology professor.
He also teaches sociology at Central University in Quito.


Donna Campbell, Benjamin Hartman
Donna Marie Campbell, an editor at Reader's Digest General Books, and Benjamin Todd Hartman, an associate at the management consulting firm of Booz, Allen &amp; Hamilton, both in New York, were married yesterday.
The Rev.
Gretchen van Aken, a Methodist minister, performed the ceremony at St.
Luke's Church in Clermont, N.Y.
The bride, who is keeping her name, is a daughter of Roseanna Campbell of Hannah, N.D., and the late Don Campbell.
She graduated summa cum laude from the University of North Dakota, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa, and received a master's of fine arts degree from Brooklyn College.
Her mother, who is retired, and her father were farmers.


How to Tell the Players in 'The Joy Luck Club'
After a preview screening of "The Joy Luck Club," several strangers approached Amy Tan and Janet Yang in the theater lobby to congratulate them on their performances.
"You were wonderful in the movie," one man said.
The compliment would have been appreciated, except that Ms.
Tan and Ms.
Yang are the co-screenwriter and co-executive producer, respectively, of the film based on Ms.
Tan's novel, and they are about a decade older than the Chinese-American actresses for whom they were mistaken.
Rosalind Chao, an actress who does appear in the movie, is not surprised by the fan's blunder.
She said: "When a friend heard I was going to be in 'The Joy Luck Club,' he asked, 'Won't it be confusing, with such a large cast?' I asked him what he meant, and he said, 'Well, you know, you all sort of resemble each other.' "


Governments Take a Share
NEW YORK CITY still has by far the highest taxes in the country on hotel rooms.
When the New York State Legislature adjourned on July 8, the New York City Convention and Visitors Bureau was vexed that the legislators had failed to repeal a 1990 state tax of 5 percent on hotel rooms costing $100 or more.
The tax -- which is collected as part of general state revenues -- means that a visitor to New York City who rents a room costing $100 will pay $121.25 for the night: 8.25 percent state and city sales tax, 6 percent city occupancy tax, plus the 5 percent state tax, plus a $2 city tax for rooms over $40.
Visitors to New York have the biggest burden, but a multitude of other cities in the United States put a double-digit bite on overnight visitors, who come to enjoy and spend money, but are not there to vote or picket council members who decide to tax transients.
The lawmakers' motives are not always so bald as in Denver, where the 12 percent bite on a hotel room comprises an 8 percent sales tax and a 4 percent levy called a "travelers' tax," but even elsewhere no one is deceived.


An Exhibition Sails Into the South Street Seaport From Points North
New York City may be the center of the universe when it comes to theater and the arts.
But it is largely a black hole when it comes to boat shows -- other than the New York National Boat Show, which surfaces like a summer solstice in the dead of winter.
Some New Yorkers choose to travel outside the area -- mainly to Connecticut and Rhode Island -- for the spate of autumn boat shows.
But now there is another choice.


2 Held in Dumping Next to a Reservoir
Two brothers who own a residential septic-tank cleaning business were arrested on Friday and accused of illegally dumping liquid manufacturing wastes near the largest reservoir in northern New Jersey, the Passaic County Prosecutor, Ronald Fava, said yesterday.
The suspects, Gilbert and Lester Redner of Wanaque, N.J., were arrested moments after starting to dispose of 1,000 to 2,000 gallons of the waste from a small tanker truck on their undeveloped property, Mr.
Fava said.
The land is across a highway from the Wanaque Reservoir.


Arrest in Kidnapping of Tuxedo Executive
A Queens man was arrested in his home yesterday and charged with taking part in the kidnapping of Harvey Weinstein, the tuxedo manufacturer who was rescued after his abductors kept him in a pit for 12 days in upper Manhattan, the police said.
The police said the man, Victor Tejada, 23, of 109-37 Sautell Avenue in Corona, Queens, was the fourth of six people they are seeking in the plot.


On Sunday; A Nurse For the Age of Aquarius
JUDY WICKER, a registered nurse and unregistered metaphysician, hurries through the West Village with the same no-nonsense efficiency that she used in cancer wards in New York City hospitals.
From a distance she looks like Nurse Ratched, except shorter.
Of course, the 47-year-old practitioner finds the chunks of amethyst crystal she hangs from her neck considerably more practical than a stethoscope.
"When Pluto acts up I have to radiate light or there is simply no reason to proceed with individual treatments," she says, brusquely.


This Week's Numbers
Last
Consensus
Period
Estimates
(I.D.E.A. Inc.)
Monday
Barbecues, millions, seasoning adjusted
41
46
Wednesday
Wholesale sales, July, percent change
-1.5
0.3
Consumer credit, July, change in billions
$7.7
$3.6
Thursday
Weekly jobless claims, thousands
324
325
Nonfarm productivity, 2d qtr., pct. change
-2.3
-2.4
Friday
Producer prices, August, percent change
-0.2
0.1
Monday: Labor Day holiday  Tuesday: Congress returns  Wednesday: Federal Reserve issues beige book  Thursday: Bundesbank Council meeting


British Rockers Trot Out the Flag
In rock-and-roll just as in politics, the United States and England have a special relationship.
Together, they have dominated global pop.
Over the decades, rock's center of gravity has shifted back and forth between each nation.
In the 60's it passed from swinging London to San Francisco, in the 70's from Southern California's soft rock to British punk.
The rest of the planet has never had much of a look in.
Musical innovations generally originate in America, and in particular from black music (rhythm-and-blues and soul in the 50's and 60's, funk and disco in the 70's, rap and house in the 80's).
But usually it's British bands that respond quickest to black American innovations, adding a vital element of art-school conceptualism, style and attitude, then promptly selling this repackaged black American music to white America.
This is what happened with 60's white blues or 80's New Pop (funk given a video-friendly gloss).


In the Region: Westchester; Transforming Cast-Offs Into Affordables
FOR years, it seemed that the small church in North Tarrytown, built in the Gothic Revival style in 1925, had outlived its usefulness.
It sat idly next to the much larger Immaculate Conception Church and seemed dwarfed by the passage of time.
The Roman Catholic parish couldn't find a use for its old church, until a housing group suggested converting it into affordable condominiums.


AIDS Is Merely a Player, Too
Some people who have AIDS decide to act up.
Tonya Hall, 29, a former admissions official for the State Department of Education, is acting instead.
She is now a member of two theater groups made up mainly of people who have AIDS or the virus that causes it.
The six-member, eight-year-old AIDS Theater Project performs educational plays at city high schools.
"We do a show based on the lives of the six original members," said Ms.
Hall, who learned at 18 that she had the virus.
"When one of us is in the hospital, we rehearse in their room. We've lost about 11 cast members so far, but we are there for each other."


'What I Didn't Get to Do This Summer'
BE glad no one can see under your bed.
For beneath it likely lie all the broken promises you made to yourself this summer -- all those things you said you were going to do and never quite got around to.
Labor Day is designed to commend labor; yet, it also inspires guilt over not having had enough . . . something all summer.
Following are the regrets of a random sampling of Manhattan subway riders: BOBBY CARMAN , 35, photographer: "I didn't meet a nice companion. I placed a personal ad and I got some responses, but nothing good came."


The Executive Computer; Is Borland Using a Two-Edged Sword in Battling for Sales?
WHEN they are in danger of being consumed by a rapidly spreading forest blaze, firefighters often light a second fire parallel to the first.
If all goes as planned, the secondary fire will destroy the fuel for the oncoming blaze and deprive it of oxygen.
It is a very risky maneuver, since firefighters must also survive their own flames.
And that is the position of Borland International Inc., which decided late last month to sell its new Quattro Pro for Windows 5.0 spreadsheet for less than $50.
Trapped between not one but two onrushing infernos, in the form of Lotus 1-2-3 and Microsoft Excel, Borland chose to light a fire under its own spreadsheet.


AUG. 29-Sept. 4; Hurricane Emily Pulls Its Punch


Poetry Drives Her Wild
IOVIS All Is Full of Jove.
By Anne Waldman. 336 pp.
Minneapolis: Coffee House Press.
Paper, $15.
TROUBAIRITZ By Anne Waldman. 62 pp.
Berkeley, Calif.: Fifth Planet Press/Small Press Distribution.
Paper, $10.


'You Can't Look Away Anymore'
The Aug. 15 cover article "The Anguished Politics of Breast Cancer," by Susan Ferraro, has so far prompted four times the usual response to a major article.
The letters range across a spectrum of views, but most fall into two categories.
About a third are critical, particularly of the cover.
For instance, Margaret Richter of New York City wrote to say: "I do not think women have to have an obnoxious voice or chronically display anger to push for a cure for breast cancer. Nor do I think that it is necessary to use 'shock therapy' on the cover of your magazine."


SURFACING
IMAGE -- Totally cute child stars: Kathryn Zaremba, 9, the new Annie Warbucks.
Jacqueline Nazarov, 3, the Guess? jeans model.
And Milton Davis, 7, who intimidates the basketball star Shaquille O'Neal in a Pepsi commercial. (Meanwhile, Macaulay Culkin, 13, turns demonic in the upcoming movie "The Good Son.") MUSIC -- Fish bands: Including Fishbone, An Emotional Fish, School of Fish and Phish. (Better keep them away from Flock of Seagulls.) REVIVALS -- Meat Loaf: As in the 1970's rock star.
After being conspicuously quiet for a decade, he'll be in concert at the Hudson Theater in Manhattan for four dates in mid-September.
The sold-out shows coincide with the release of his album "Bat Out of Hell 2: Back Into Hell."


Where Northern Exposure Means Peace and Quiet
WHEN Ronald Reagan and Mikhail Gorbachev wanted to sit down for serious negotiations in 1986, they had their pick of any of the world's great cities.
They chose Reykjavik, the tiny capital of remote Iceland.
More than a decade earlier, when the Americans, the Soviets and other major nations got serious about negotiating human rights protections and ratifying the national boundaries established after World War II, they settled on another quiet corner of Scandinavia and began talking in Helsinki, Finland's capital.


An Open Door to Mideast Peace
It could be this week.
As soon as the Palestine Liberation Organization formally announces its recognition of Israel and abandonment of terrorism, Israeli and P.L.O. leaders will fly to Washington and sign the deal on self-government for the West Bank and Gaza they have already worked out.
With luck, other Arab countries may quickly follow suit, thereby completing a diplomatic revolution that burst only a week ago on an unsuspecting public across the Middle East.
Israeli politics is unlikely ever to be the same.
And Palestinian politics could be just as sweepingly transformed.


Dead Deer on Road? Company Gets a Call
DON COOPER stopped the truck and got out.
The deer was a buck fawn, about two months old.
"That hurts," he said. "He ain't even had a chance to lose his spots."


Dresden Bombing
To the Editor: My impression of Dresden was quite different from Bernice Rothschild's (Letters to the Editor, Aug. 15).
Your article of July 18 reminded me of my visit in September 1990, three weeks before unification.
I stayed at the Dresdnerhof, then eight months old and now, apparently, a Hilton hotel.
I saw the "Sistine Madonna" in the Albertinum before the Old Masters were moved to the Zwinger, heard the Kreuzchor in the Kreuzkirche and High Mass at the Hofkirche, and saw the Semperoper from the outside.


Back-to-Back Breaks Prove the F.B.I. Still Has Its Stuff
THE jubilant swearing-in of Louis J. Freeh as the fifth Director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation last week sent morale soaring at the agency, which is trying to get moving again after five years under the disengaged leadership of William S. Sessions.
Other signs of an upturn in the agency's fortunes had already been visible recently.
First there was the Justice Department's decision to ask for an indictment of Sheik Omar Abdel Rahman and 14 of his followers.
The far-reaching conspiracy charges indicated that, after months of hand-wringing about whether to simply deport the sheik or to charge him with terrorist acts, the Clinton Administration had chosen a hard-nosed approach, in which the F.B.I.'s work, not that of the Immigration and Naturalization Service, would figure most heavily.


Tipping in China
To the Editor: Nicholas D. Kristof wrote in the Travel Advisory (June 27): "Travelers should be wary of some travel agencies in China and Hong Kong requiring advance payment for tips to be given to Chinese tour guides. Despite what tourists may be told, tipping tour guides is not customary."


Victorian's Secret
THE CULTIVATION OF HATRED The Bourgeois Experience: Victoria to Freud.
Volume 3.
By Peter Gay.
Illustrated. 685 pp: New York: W. W. Norton &amp; Company. $30.


Sports of The Times; The Credibility Of Great Coaches
IF Bill Parcells were still the Giants coach and he cut Pepper Johnson, the commotion would have been minimal.
As the coach of two Super Bowl championship teams, Parcells attained the stature that erased most of the questions about any of his decisions.
If he did it, it must be correct.
In molding the Knicks into a championship contender after winning four titles as the Los Angeles Lakers coach, Pat Riley has the same stature.
If he does it, it must be correct.


AUG. 29-Sept. 4: Talks Stall; There Is Still No Map For Peace in Bosnia
The hope was that the first anniversary of the peace conference on the former Yugoslavia would be celebrated in Geneva last week with an agreement to end the war in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
It almost happened.
Muslims, Serbs and Croats had accepted a plan to partition the country into three ethnic republics and only a few territorial details were unresolved.
But, as one United Nations official had warned, "the devil is in the details." And when the Muslims asked for extra bits of land that the Serbs and Croats refused to cede, the negotiations abruptly ended.
The specter of a new Bosnian winter of war and suffering reappeared.


Tips From Professionals To Handle Pesky Tasks
PROFESSIONALS who build and repair houses gain subtle skills from intensive experience.
Amateurs seldom derive such knowledge.
The following tips may interest both groups.
MEASURING Metal tape measures have a small hook on the end that may seem annoyingly loose.
But do not return the tape to the store or try to tighten the hook.
It is designed to slide back and forth on the tape by an amount exactly equal to the hook's thickness, thereby producing accurate measurements whether the end of the tape is hooked over a board to measure its outside dimensions or placed between the sides of an opening to measure its inner dimensions.


Wrong Ammunition
To the Editor:
If you must send such a big gun as Maureen Dowd out to shoot such a little bitty duck as Roger Clinton out there in his Hollywood barrel ("Bubbrother," Aug. 15), you should at least insist that she understand the meaning of the words she fires with such relish at her target.


SCRIE Help
To the Editor:
We were pleased to see you take up the gauntlet for seniors who find it hard to battle the vagaries of applying for a simple rent relief under New York City's SCRIE program ("Keeping Red Tape At Bay," July 11).


Chiefs Solve a Problem
Defensive end NEIL SMITH ended his holdout yesterday, signing a series of one-year contracts in time to join the Kansas City Chiefs in the regular-season opener against Tampa Bay today.
Smith was the team's most valuable player in 1992 and has played in two straight Pro Bowls.
Last season, he tied for the team lead in sacks with a career-high 14 1/2.
He also had 77 tackles. (AP)


'You Can't Look Away Anymore'
The Aug. 15 cover article "The Anguished Politics of Breast Cancer," by Susan Ferraro, has so far prompted four times the usual response to a major article.
The letters range across a spectrum of views, but most fall into two categories.
About a third are critical, particularly of the cover.
For instance, Margaret Richter of New York City wrote to say: "I do not think women have to have an obnoxious voice or chronically display anger to push for a cure for breast cancer. Nor do I think that it is necessary to use 'shock therapy' on the cover of your magazine."


Self-Expression Or Self-Indulgence?
To the Editor:
In an otherwise palatable review of the MTV series "Unplugged"  [ "Poetry Gets Real, Flashing Its Form on MTV," July 25 ] , Caryn James comes up short on some important, if not entirely relevant, distinctions.
Pop culture indeed has a great deal to do with self-expression.
Literature, I am given to understand, has more to do with expression (in the sense of clarification) of humanity as perceived by an artist.
How is "blurring the line" between the two valid, much less desirable?


Volleying Over Queens Tennis Center Deal
In recent weeks, Rudolph W. Giuliani has used the proposed expansion of the United States Tennis Center to chide Mayor David N. Dinkins about his fondness for the sport but also to question whether the city got a good deal in its agreement with the United States Tennis Association.
The U.S.T.A. moved the tournament from Forest Hills to the center, in Flushing Meadows-Corona Park, in 1978.
Tennis officials say the size of 20,000-seat Louis Armstrong Stadium, a shortage of practice courts, tight parking and limited space for walking reduce the opportunities for growth of the event, one of the top four international tennis tournaments.


No Remorse
DR.
MARTIN SULLIVAN had "good hands," his colleagues said, supple and efficient, and at 68, he was still steady with the knife.
He loved his work as a plastic surgeon, just as he loved his family and his vintage cars.
He showed no sign of giving any of it up.
At a time of life when most men have retired, Dr.
Sullivan still rose early each morning in his Chicago home, made rounds at several hospitals and was scrubbed and in the operating room by 7:30 A.M.
After surgery, he would drive to one of his two offices and see patients until late afternoon.
That is what Dr.
Sullivan was doing the day a man he had never met showed up for an appointment, filled out several forms, followed him into an examination room and shot him four times in the chest.


Jonathan Kwitny, Wendy Hood
Wendy Wood and Jonathan Kwitny, writers in Middletown, N.Y., were married there yesterday.
The Rev.
Blase Bonpane, a Roman Catholic priest, officiated at the couple's home.
Mrs.
Kwitny, who is also a poet, graduated from Bennington College.
She is a daughter of James and Gayle Wood of Cincinnati.
Her father is the vice president of the Booth American Company in Detroit, a television and radio station group for which he is also the general manager of two Cincinnati radio stations, WSAI-AM and WWNK-FM.
Her mother is the president of the Memories Video Company, a video production company in Cincinnati.
The bride's previous marriage ended in divorce.


Consummate Boulevardier in His Milieu at Heckscher
IS Huntington the Paris of Long Island?
That is perhaps one claim that even the most ardent civic booster has not ventured.
But the Heckscher Museum is transforming Huntington into a kaleidoscope of art from the City of Light until Nov. 14.


Hits, Misses and Also-Rans of Summer
For those who wonder how early the summer movie season really began, consider May 7, the day "Dave," "Much Ado About Nothing" and "Dragon: The Bruce Lee Story" opened.
As it turns out, "Dragon" had a surprisingly strong opening, "Dave" has made $63 million and "Much Ado" an impressive (for Shakespeare) $20 million.
Both "Dave" and "Much Ado" continue to play in movie theaters.


Democratic Politicians Back Dinkins, but Very Skittishly
Nine days before a mayoral primary whose outcome is not in doubt but whose victor has no guarantee of success in November, New York City's Democratic officials are edgy and dour, with most unwilling to openly abandon Mayor David N. Dinkins but few eager to cling too closely.
The signs of unease are apparent all over town as the Mayor's fellow partisans worry about his rematch against Rudolph W. Giuliani, the Republican-Liberal candidate, and whether Mr.
Dinkins's problems will increase their own.


Military Conversion Jump Starts Electric Car
The end of the cold war means that James Worden will finally get to crash-test one of his electric cars.
Mr.
Worden, whose story combines elements of Thomas A. Edison and Henry Ford, was a high school sophomore when he built his first electric car, in his parents' living room in suburban Arlington.
A few years later, as a student at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, he created the nation's first solar-car race team.


On Wheels: American at 10 M.P.H.; Slowly Savoring the Approach to Home
Here in the home of baseball's Hall of Fame, it's hard to avoid baseball fans, baseball memorabilia or baseball metaphors.
You can stay at the Major League Motor Inn just west of town and for dinner drive up the west shore of Lake Otsego to TJ's Restaurant for some "home run cooking." In that spirit, as a bicyclist who has made it here from the West Coast, I would say my trip was in the ninth inning.
Actually, the last week has had the feel of a rain delay, a putting off of an inevitable conclusion, part languorous and pleasurable, part a test of patience.
I have slowed down a little on purpose, to make sure my eagerness to complete the coast-to-coast excursion simply for the sake of finishing did not keep me from having at the end what I've had all along: a good look at a place.
Upstate New York may not be exotic to a New Yorker, but it turns out to be worth a look from behind handlebars.


A Labor Day Message No One Asked to Hear
WHAT do you do?
Drive a bulldozer.
Bend the steel and weld the seams to make the bulldozer.
Supervise and feed and mend the driver and the welder.
Bring home the bacon.
Keep up with the Joneses.
Buy Chevrolets and Frigidaires and make the economy turn.


Debra Immergut and John Marks
Debra Jo Immergut, a writer in Berlin, was married last evening to John Humphry Marks, the Berlin bureau chief for U.S.
News and World Report magazine.
Cantor David Schneyer officiated at the summer home of the bride's parents, Dr. and Mrs.
Mark A. Immergut, in St.
Michael's, Md.
Ms.
Immergut, 29, is keeping her name.
She is the author of a collection of short stories, "Private Property" (Random House, 1992).
The bride graduated from the University of Michigan.
She and her husband received master's degrees in English from the University of Iowa.


Ms. Iverson, Mr. Finali
Annemarie Iverson, the beauty and health editor of Harper's Bazaar magazine in New York, was married yesterday to Alberto-Maria Finali, an executive director of Lehman Brothers International in London.
The Rev.
Beniamino Nicolin, a Roman Catholic priest, officiated at San Bartolomeo Church in Bassano del Grappa, Italy.
The bride graduated summa cum laude from Vanderbilt University, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa, and received a master's degree in journalism from New York University.


Dispute Steps on The Gas In Gazelle
The filly Dispute gave the first bravura performance of the Labor Day weekend and the fall racing season at Belmont Park when she won the $150,000 Gazelle Handicap yesterday by seven and a half lengths over Silky Feather.
Sky Beauty, the queen of the 3-year-old fillies, was back in the barn resting for her next appearance one month from now, so Dispute didn't have the same driving incentive that has spiced their rivalry.
But she had all the incentive of a horse aiming for a year-end championship as she raced to her fifth victory in eight starts this year.


Woman and Pit Bull Accused In Robbery
A 23-year-old Brooklyn woman accused of using a pit bull in a convenience-store robbery yesterday in Bensonhurst, Brooklyn, received additional charges after the police found her three children living in "squalid conditions," officers said.
Police officers tracing the woman and the dog found the children and they were taken into the custody of city social workers, the police said.


Russians Give U.S. More P.O.W. Documents
Documents that could shed light on a 1973 report found in Soviet archives about American prisoners of war held by North Vietnam have been handed over to American researchers during a meeting of the joint committee on P.O.W.'s, an American co-chairman of the committee said this week.
Both Malcolm S. Toon, who heads the American side of the joint committee, and his Russian counterpart, Gen.
Dmitri A. Volkogonov, said on Thursday that they were certain of the authenticity of the disputed 1973 document, which was a Russian translation of a report to the ruling Politburo in Hanoi contending that North Vietnam was holding 1,205 American prisoners of war in September 1973.


John Bolduc and Stacy Hinds
Mr. and Mrs.
Don Hinds of Fremont, Neb., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Stacy Lyn Hinds, and John Paul Bolduc, a son Mr. and Mrs.
J.
Paul Bolduc of Clarksville, Md., and Boca Raton, Fla.
A December wedding is planned.
Ms.
Hinds, 29, is the manager of worldwide operations analysis at the Haagen-Dazs Ice Cream Company in Teaneck, N.J.
She graduated from Southern Methodist University and she and her husband received M.B.A. degrees from the University of Virginia.


West Can Compete With East in Skilled Labor
To the Editor:
As a visitor from Britain, I have been interested to observe the debate over the minimum wage and other aspects of labor market regulation in the United States.
At a time when Secretary of Labor Robert Reich is proposing an increase in the United States minimum, the British Government is altogether abolishing Britain's minimum wage system.
For the first time in many years, the United States and Britain are moving in opposite directions on labor market policy.
Which of them is correct?


A Florio Ad Angers More Than the Usual Critics
With the Labor Day weekend heralding the traditional start of the all-out campaign season, the Republican and Democratic state committees in New Jersey are preparing to bombard the airwaves with new ads that have already raised some eyebrows.
The Democrats presented their ad to a packed audience of journalists on Thursday, a day after it began running on television stations in New York City and Philadelphia and after it had already ignited a controversy.


New Roles at Site Of Seville Expo
Two-thirds of the site of Expo '92 in Seville have been converted into high-tech research and development centers.
But the rest of Cartuja Island has a more frivolous role, having reopened as the Cartuja Discovery Park, a privately owned amusement center, on a two-year lease.
Many of the popular theme pavilions, like Navigation, the Universe, and the Spain pavilion, have reopened, this time with shorter lines.
And there are plenty of new attractions along the familiar Expo skyline, as well as concerts, circuses, and outdoor movies.
A Birds of Prey demonstration in the Guadalquivir Gardens features birds from Government recovery centers that rehabilitate wounded or orphaned hawks, eagles and other raptors for their eventual return to the wild.


A Competition's Four Winners Plus Two Artists' Commotion
LAST March the Stamford Museum and Nature Center held its annual "Connecticut Art Competition," inviting the Manhattan dealer Paula Cooper to act as judge.
As usual, the prizes were four solo exhibitions and these, awarded by Ms.
Cooper to Jane deJonge, Ellen Mason, Maureen Renahan-Krinsley and Amos Prahl, are now on view.
Ms. deJonge dominates the show with her constructions incorporating plastic dolls, beads, marbles and other mass-produced items mounted, for the most part, on Lazy Susans covered with mirrors.


Schubert Program Closes Season in Falls Village
THIS afternoon is the last program of the summer season at Music Mountain, Falls Village, where an all-Schubert program will be offered at 3 P.M.
The Borromeo String Quartet will play the Quartetsatz, the G Major Quartet, and with the guest cellist Laurence Lesser, the C Major Quintet.
Southbury's second annual Jazz Festival on the Green at Heritage Village also takes place this afternoon.
Small combos to big bands will perform styles ranging from Dixieland to bop to traditional big band swing.
For details, call 264-4270 or 264-8403.


Trevania Dudley, John Henderson
Mr. and Mrs.
Guilford Dudley of Nashville have announced the engagement of their daughter, Trevania Dallas Dudley, to John Traylor Henderson, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert Paul Henderson of Wellesley, Mass.
An October wedding is planned.
Miss Dudley is the marketing manager for The Tennessean and The Nashville Banner newspapers in Nashville.
She graduated magna cum laude from Duke University.
Her father, a former United States ambassador to Denmark is the chairman and chief executive of International Financial Services Ltd. in Nashville.
Her mother, Jane Dudley, is a corporate accounts executive in Nashville for Tiffany &amp; Company, for which she also is a member of the board of directors.


Two Generations, Looking for Romance
THANKS to Florence, a fun-loving widow, Frank is brought out of his inertia some eight months after the death of his wife.
Now, he's ready to remarry.
Only Robert, the oldest of his three sons, gets in the way.
For a time.
Robert, a whopping case of arrested emotional development signified by terminal negativity, deep-rooted self-centeredness and errant sexism, hasn't found "the right girl," just as he hasn't found "the right apartment" or "the right car."


Are Divorce Lawyers Really the Sleaziest?
ARE divorce lawyers really sleazier than other lawyers?
That, in a nutshell, is the question before a committee of New York lawyers who are trying to decide whether sweeping new ethical rules for divorce lawyers should be extended to all attorneys.


No Headline
That was the difficult part -- keeping our mouths shut.
PROF.
YAIR HIRSCHFELD, a go-between in the Mideast peace negotiations.  [ 10:1. ]


Sox Class Act
To the Sports Editor:
Re: "Finally, a Reason to Hate the 'Hated' Red Sox" (The Times, Aug. 10): I grew up in New Hampshire, where every summer brings the promise that the Red Sox may finally win the World Series title that has eluded them for so many decades.
Yes, the Yankees broke every New Englander's heart in 1978 and the Mets did the job in 1986.
Some years the Red Sox manage to implode all by themselves.


Correction
A picture caption in the Evening Hours column last Sunday misidentified a reveler at the annual Morning Party on Fire Island to benefit the Gay Men's Health Crisis.
He is Kennan Gault, not David Rehbein.


Elizabeth Scovitch and Eric Berman
Elizabeth Ann Scovitch, the director of research for the Democratic Congressional Campaign Committee, and Eric Andrew Berman, the research director of the Democratic National Committee, both in Washington, were married there last evening.
The Rev.
Francis Gignac, a Roman Catholic priest, and Cantor Arie Eisner officiated at the Jefferson Memorial.


Strawberry Arrested On Abuse Charge
DARRYL STRAWBERRY, the Los Angeles Dodgers outfielder, was arrested yesterday for investigation of spousal abuse, the police in Glendale, Calif., said.
Strawberry, 31, was arrested for allegedly cutting an unidentified 26-year-old woman above the eye.
The police were not sure whether the woman was Strawberry's wife, although they said the two apparently lived together.
The woman was treated at Verdugo Hills Hospital after the 5:45 A.M. incident, said Glendale Police Sgt.
LIEF NICOLAISEN.


New Game Plan: Go for It All, Now
The National Football League kicks off its 74th season today.
It could be called "the Open Season" or the year of the "One-Shot Deal."
There has never been one like it.


Gains Seen By Women In Unions
KATHLEEN KING began her working life as a social worker for the State of New Jersey.
Carol Leidy was once a cocktail waitress in an Atlantic City hotel.
Both drew on their experiences to become officials of large New Jersey labor unions, and they have also observed and participated in much of the vast changes that have taken place in organized labor over the last 15 years.
For one thing, the face of organized labor has lost its 5 o'clock shadow.
Women accounted for 33.3 percent of the unionized work force in 1983, according to the United States Bureau of Labor Statistics.
Now, 38 percent of union members are women.


Down Time
I CONFESS THAT I DID not run to see Woody Allen's "Manhattan Murder Mystery" because I heard it was a good movie.
I didn't even care if it was good.
I went to see "Manhattan Murder Mystery" to solve a mystery that plagued my own prurient mind and had nothing to do with the one on screen.
Here, after all, was the film that Allen persisted in shooting around New York last year even as he found himself starring in a real-life drama that would seem to leave very little energy for making art.
"Manhattan Murder Mystery," I felt, would show me the outer limits of human struggle with depression.
For what kind of movie could anyone make, let alone someone as gloomy as Woody Allen, at a time when he was being accused of child molestation and quasi-incest, when his every public step was dogged by television cameras and reporters ravenous for red meat?


'Nightline' Has The Right Idea
To the Editor:
Hurray to the women who stand up to the "boy's club" and compete comedically in the late-night arena.
To think that females cannot comment on news and politics deprives the audience of a much-needed point of view.
Perhaps if more women were contributing to the monologues and sketches, the quality of the product would improve.
Until then, I'll stick with "Nightline," which at least has the sense to allow individuals of both sexes to pass judgment on world events.
JOAN CORDELL  Los Angeles


Abbott: Not a Hit, Not a Run, Not a Doubt
Jim Abbott has spent his entire career -- his entire life -- exceeding expectations, and that was no different yesterday afternoon.
The Yankees handed the baseball to Abbott, their struggling left-hander, and asked that he simply keep the team competitive in this pennant-race game against the Cleveland Indians.
Abbott gave them much more.


Holiday Tomorrow
Tomorrow is Labor Day. Here are holiday schedules. NEW YORK


Role of Regional Library Cooperatives
In regard to the recent article " 'Looming Colossus' of the Library World":
I co-chair the children-young adult committee of the Essex-Hudson Regional Library Cooperative.
This committee represents more than 200 school libraries that are members of the cooperative, as well as the children's-young adult departments of more than 20 public libraries in the region.
Thus, our committee members serve thousands of students, teachers and parents across Essex and Hudson Counties.


Inside the Country Cottage, a Hospital Birth Center
PICTURE a house surrounded by a Victorian white picket fence, with landscaping suitable for an English country cottage.
Behind the doors is a cozy living room with a brick fireplace.
And beyond that, three birthing rooms with the most up-to-date medical equipment tucked discreetly behind cabinet doors.
If everything goes according to plan, that image will become reality when the Hudson Valley Family Birth Center opens its doors in Peekskill in January.


Data Bank/September 5, 1993


In Debate Over Airport, Focus on Parking Plans
IN this election year, it is perhaps not surprising that the debate about the future of the County Airport has taken on political overtones, pitting members of the County Legislature against the County Executive's office.
The County Board of Legislators' defeat in July of a proposal to build a 1,100-space parking garage has apparently fueled the conflict between the environmental and commercial interests that have stakes in the modernization of the airport.
"It's no longer a question of there being a garage," said Stephen P. Tenore, a Republican who represents New Rochelle, Pelham and parts of Mount Vernon and is the chairman of the County Board of Legislators.
"Everyone agrees there has to be a garage. We're concerned about limiting the number of the cars out there until we reach an agreement with the airlines.


Editorial Notebook; Paris, for the Few
New Yorkers gush when they roam Paris.
The visitor is awed by the user-friendly Metro, the excellent buses and the tidy streets, complete with recycling bins and spotless public toilets.
As before, a truly bad meal in Paris is as rare as a tasteless tomato.
Granted, Paris has its slums and its homeless, but by comparison with New York, it seems an urban Eden, a metropolis that works.
Still, in some respects a visiting Yank can feel a parochial pride in America's civic democracy.
France's Eden has a turnstile.
Though exceptions are made for students, pensioners and the press, admission fees at museums are high (up to $7).
Even that republican shrine, the Pantheon, burial place of Voltaire, Rousseau and Hugo, costs $5.
Imagine the uproar if such a fee were charged at the Lincoln Memorial.


The Poet of Death
To the Editor:
William H. Pritchard's review of Andrew Motion's biography "Philip Larkin: A Writer's Life" (Aug. 1) is characteristic of his wit and ability to compress usefully an engaging range of details.
His summary provokes all the old questions about Larkin's hermetic defensiveness and reminds his fellow poets that he certainly earned the hard way all he seemingly got.


Health Care and High Cost
To the Editor:
Mr.
Baumol tries to prove to us that soaring health care costs are natural, inevitable and impervious to Government intervention.The argument that leads to those Panglossian conclusions begins with the alleged lag of productivity in medical care.
Mr.
Baumol proceeds by measuring medical productivity in terms of patients treated per hour -- which may in truth show no advances -- instead of measuring the advancing extent of tests and treatments and cures done per patient per hour.


The Popes Could Look It Up
Can a collection of books save a city?
The question sounds naive today, yet the authors of the eight essays in ROME REBORN: The Vatican Library and Renaissance Culture (Library of Congress/Yale University, $55) argue persuasively that the Vatican Library restored the splendor of Rome.
The collection was the torch by which the Renaissance papacy guided itself, and its culture, out of the Dark Ages.
The library allowed popes to "place knowledge systematically at the service of governance." The essayists in "Rome Reborn" present the vast range of the library's holdings -- from astronomy and philosophy to medicine and cartography -- and describe how the collection expanded.
Particularly engaging are an essay on music and the papal choir by Richard Sherr, who teaches music at Smith College, and an essay on the Vatican's Oriental collection by Howard L. Goodman, who teaches East Asian studies at Harvard.
Anthony Grafton, a historian at Princeton who edited "Rome Reborn," contributes a fascinating study, "The Ancient City Restored: Archeology, Ecclesiastical History and Egyptology," detailing how the library influenced the physical transformation of the city.
The volume includes more than 200 color illustrations, including beautiful reproductions from editions of Virgil, Euclid and Aristotle.
Despite some unevenness in the essays, "Rome Reborn" is successful; even when the essays falter, the collection speaks for itself.


After Opening the Vaults, Jets Look for a Quick Return on Investments
This year marks the 25th anniversary of the Jets' first, and only, Super Bowl championship season.
Most of the players on the team this year weren't even in the first grade when the Jets won the Super Bowl in January 1969.
Linebacker Marvin Jones, the Jets' first-round pick this year, wasn't even born.
By the time Jones was born in 1972, the Jets had slipped into the mediocre mode that has characterized the team ever since the Super Bowl victory.
But this year's team is hoping to reverse all that, starting with the today's season opener against Denver at 1 P.M. at Giants Stadium.


Q and A
Getting Married in England
Q.
My fiancee and I are planning a trip to England and we would like to get married there.
Is that possible for two American citizens? -- Scott Albano, New York, N.Y.


Fishing With Presidents
George Bush invited me to go fishing.
It happened because I saw a report on CNN that showed him fly-fishing from a boat on a stream near Kennebunkport.
It seems there are a few sea-run browns in the headwaters of one of the coastal streams there.
I thought Bush threw a pretty good line, so in the middle of 1991, I wrote him and requested an interview about fly-fishing.
The recession was just taking hold.
I was curious, among other things, to see if Bush was going to develop a Hoover problem, casting happily while the economy and his political support went to hell.


Alexandra Black, Benjamin Narasin
Alexandra Sevier Black, the director of public relations for Kathryn Dianos Inc., a designer of women's clothing in New York, was married yesterday to Benjamin H. Narasin, the president and chief executive of the Boston Preparatory Company, a men's sportswear manufacturer in New York.
The Rev.
C.
Blayney Colmore performed the ceremony at St.
James By-the-Sea Episcopal Church in La Jolla, Calif.
Mrs.
Narasin, 25, graduated cum laude from Pine Manor College.
She is the daughter of William F. Black and Electa Sevier Black, both of La Jolla.
Her father is the chief of protocol for the State of California, in La Jolla.


It's Another Comeback For Chang
Michael Chang is his own mantra, own cliche, own inspiration.
He never gives up no matter what the score happens to be, no matter how many times his opponent might have bushwhacked him in the past.
That tactic, while stressful, has brought him a title at the French Open in 1989 and last year took him to the semifinals of this one, his best finish ever at a United States Open.
Last night, on the shadowy Grandstand Court, Chang shook off a familiar physical aberration, leg cramps, and implacably stroked his way out of trouble against a familiar adversary whose bullwhip serve and hatchet forehand had held him at bay and kept him there in all three previous meetings.
While Bernd Karbacher of Germany was busy blinking in the uneven Grandstand spotlights and complaining about the noise from the national anthem on the neighboring Stadium, Chang was busily carving out a 4-6, 6-4, 6-3, 6-4 comeback.


'You Can't Look Away Anymore'
The Aug. 15 cover article "The Anguished Politics of Breast Cancer," by Susan Ferraro, has so far prompted four times the usual response to a major article.
The letters range across a spectrum of views, but most fall into two categories.
About a third are critical, particularly of the cover.
For instance, Margaret Richter of New York City wrote to say: "I do not think women have to have an obnoxious voice or chronically display anger to push for a cure for breast cancer. Nor do I think that it is necessary to use 'shock therapy' on the cover of your magazine."


Pope Starts Lithuania Visit, First to an Ex-Soviet Land
For the first time since the fall of Communism, Pope John Paul II set foot in a republic formerly claimed by the Soviet Union today, kissing the ground of this Baltic country and urging his followers to see "neither winners nor losers" among those emerging from decades of Communist rule.
At the same time, however, he called for the "expiation" of Communist guilt and demanded that governments "not intrude" on church rites as priests return to their pulpits after decades as clandestine political figures.


Alice Cornish and Christopher White
Alice Lynn Cornish, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Albert E. Johnson of Aurora, Ill., was married yesterday to Christopher Minot White, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Harold T. White Jr. of New Canaan, Conn.
The Rev.
Robert H. Naylor performed the ceremony at the First Church of Christ in Simsbury, Conn.
Mrs.
White, who attended Illinois State and DePaul universities, is a co-founder and the managing director of Northington Partners, an institutional research and investment banking firm in Avon, Conn.
Her father retired as an administrator for Berlin Industries, a commercial printer in Carol Stream, Ill.
Her mother, Florence Johnson, retired as an elementary-school teacher in Aurora.


Mike Ditka Plans to Be Nice but Candid; Whaddaya Mean By That?
As he prepares to start his new career as the studio analyst of NBC's "The N.F.L. Live" today, the former Bears head coach Mike Ditka is approaching da job with a kind of fatalism.
"I may be a fair-haired boy or a bum," he said. "Who cares?"


A Square Format That's Well Rounded
THE 35-millime ter format, according to conventional wisdom, is more flexible than the 2 1/4-by-2 1/4-inch, 6-by-7-centimeter or 4-by-5-inch.
The best seller, it has more accessories and generally provides more built-in electronic features at lower cost.
Still, the Hasselblad 2 1/4-by-2 1/4 single lens reflex continues to be a favorite of many advanced amateurs and professionals.
Hasselblad offers 200 accessories to the camera.
And lately the 2 1/4-by-2 1/4-inch user's choices of film for shooting in different lighting and at different speeds have greatly expanded.


INSIDE
Signature of the Chancellor
Ramon C. Cortines, New York City's new Schools Chancellor, has a reputation for hard work.
Supporters praise him for it, but opponents fault him for not delegating tasks.
Page 47.
Art Project Loses Support
The National Endowment for the Arts has withdrawn its backing from a project in which $10 bills are handed out to illegal immigrants.
Page 24.
Cigarettes Sustain Bosnians
For some besieged residents of Sarajevo, the lack of cigarettes is often more serious than insufficient supplies of food and water after 17 months of war in Bosnia.
Page 3.
Pope's Message to Lithuania
Visiting a Baltic state for the first time since the fall of the Soviet Union, Pope John Paul II called for the "expiation" of Communist guilt.
Page 18.


A Paternalistic Employer Bids a Generous Farewell
For someone who has joined the nation's downtrodden mass of unemployed executives, James E. Smith was surprisingly upbeat as he sat in the waiting room of a job training center for workers laid off by the International Business Machines Corporation.
At 57 years old, Mr.
Smith is a consummate "I.B.M.-er." He spent 27 years rising through the company's hierarchy, and, for most of the last decade, he traveled the globe to coordinate software development projects in Australia, India, Singapore and Europe.


Maybe Emmitt Smith Is Getting Frustrated
Running back EMMITT SMITH has told the Dallas Cowboys to trade him to a team that would provide a contract worth $4 million a season, according to a published report yesterday.
Sources told The Dallas Morning News that Smith made the comment within the past two days as his negotiations with the Cowboys appeared to reach an impasse.
However, the owner of the Cowboys, JERRY JONES, flatly ruled out any possible trade of one of the best running backs in the National Football League.


RESULTS PLUS
SOCCER  Rangers Still Struggle  The Glasgow Rangers, the five-time defending champions of the Scottish Premier division, continued their early-season slump yesterday, needing a man advantage to score a late goal and salvage a 1-1 tie at Dundee, which does not have a victory.
The Rangers, the overwhelming favorites to win the title for a 44th time, failed to win for the second consecutive week.
Last Saturday, the team suffered its first home defeat in 17 months, against Kilmarnock.
Yesterday, Mark Hateley knocked in a rebound off his thigh with five minutes remaining to tie the score.
The English Premier League had the weekend off in advance of Wednesday's World Cup qualifier between host England and Poland. (AP)


AUG. 29-Sept. 4; Mega-Mouths: Jay and Dave Head-to-Head
Even if you had the world's fastest thumb on the remote control, you probably would have found it difficult last Monday night to watch both David Letterman and Jay Leno begin their late-night television war (on his opening night on CBS, Mr. Letterman handily won the war's initial skirmish, according to the Nielsen ratings).
Here, through some figurative channel-switching, are the first volleys:
Dave: Thank you very much, welcome to the show, my name is Dave and, I've checked this now with the CBS attorneys, and -- legally I can continue to call myself Dave, so . . .


Eggplant Stars in This Summer Stock
IT may be late summer but eggplant, zucchini, peppers, corn and tomatoes still beckon.
They are the makings of colorful and delicious meals or parts of meals.
Eggplant is one of the most versatile products of this abundant harvest.
The meatiness of eggplant gives it main-dish heft.
And even though the raw flesh soaks up oil like a sponge, slices of plain eggplant can be seared on the grill, then used in a vegetable ragout with only a bit of fat in the dish.


CONNECTICUT GUIDE
MEXICAN INFLUENCE
When Gene Autry crooned "South of the Border, Down Mexico Way" in the 1939 film of the same name, he was illustrating that stereotypes of a backward nation were fading.
Inspired by Old Spanish romanticism and facilitated by the completion of the Pan-American Highway from Laredo to Mexico City in 1936, tourism was dramatically increasing.


How College Athletics Hide Academic Woes
To the Editor:
"Cleaning Up College Football" (editorial, Aug. 29) understates the worst aspect of big-time football's corruption by accepting a generalization.
You cite Principle VII of the Knight Foundation Commission on Intercollegiate Athletics, "that athletes will graduate at the same proportion as nonathletes."


At Lake Baikal, Soviet Breakup Leads to Ecological Breakdown
To the Editor:
"Pollution Debate at Vast Russian Lake" (news article, Aug. 18) points out what is unique about Lake Baikal -- the crystal-clear, mineral-free water, the cleanest of any lake in the world.
Environmentalists are concerned about the 1,800 unique species of plants and animals that have evolved in this chemical-free water.


Back to School, So Into the Mall
After nearly four hours at the Newport Centre Mall, it took Sabrina Williams 20 minutes to convince her two children it was time to leave.
"We bought quite a bit," Ms. Williams said, holding out four large J. C. Penney bags.


SUMMER'S LAST STAND
Like many a last stand, summer's is a rococo barrage, a swollen and smug onslaught with no apparent end.
Farm stands sag under the weight of green beans, lima beans, corn, tomatoes, zucchini, eggplant, mountains of cauliflower and early autumn squash.
The diversity is at first exhilarating and then a little embarrassing.
These are the vulgar days of plenty: plenty of food, plenty of heat and, as summer's lethargic sunsets continue to creep into evening, plenty of time.
The glib salads and quick meals of early summer begin to seem silly and insubstantial.
Summer's end seems to ask for deeper, huskier flavors, the kind that comes from roasting, toasting, slow simmering and baking.
Tiny new potatoes, thumb-size zucchini and slender green beans need be nothing but their youthful selves in June and July.
But come September, when they are heftier and more mature, they are more to contend with.


'You Can't Look Away Anymore'
The Aug. 15 cover article "The Anguished Politics of Breast Cancer," by Susan Ferraro, has so far prompted four times the usual response to a major article.
The letters range across a spectrum of views, but most fall into two categories.
About a third are critical, particularly of the cover.
For instance, Margaret Richter of New York City wrote to say: "I do not think women have to have an obnoxious voice or chronically display anger to push for a cure for breast cancer. Nor do I think that it is necessary to use 'shock therapy' on the cover of your magazine."


'You Can't Look Away Anymore'
The Aug. 15 cover article "The Anguished Politics of Breast Cancer," by Susan Ferraro, has so far prompted four times the usual response to a major article.
The letters range across a spectrum of views, but most fall into two categories.
About a third are critical, particularly of the cover.
For instance, Margaret Richter of New York City wrote to say: "I do not think women have to have an obnoxious voice or chronically display anger to push for a cure for breast cancer. Nor do I think that it is necessary to use 'shock therapy' on the cover of your magazine."


Not Home Alone
"WELCOME to my bathroom," Diane Von Furstenberg said last Saturday night while sitting barefoot on the edge of the tub at her 18th-century country house in northwest Connecticut.
The 46-year-old designer was talking on the telephone, as she often does from this perch, and she reveled in the lack of privacy.
Outside, a New England Satellite Systems truck was parked on the raked, white-pebble driveway that winds through Cloudwalk Farm, her 100-acre Litchfield County estate.
It was broadcasting her conversation live on the QVC home-shopping channel, which at last count had infiltrated 47 million American households.


Medvedev Served Well By New Street Smarts Amid Big-City Whirl
What a difference a couple of days can make.
Only Wednesday, Andrei Medvedev took a look around the United States Open and determined it had all the potential to turn him into a 6-foot-4-inch crybaby.
Too noisy, too crowded, no place to park his gangly frame when he gets tired of smacking tennis balls and feels like falling down.


Corrections
Headlines and a caption on pages 1 and 24 of the Arts and Leisure section today, about the new HBO movie on AIDS, misstate the film's title in some copies.
As noted in the article, it is "And the Band Played On."


POSTINGS: On East 70th Street; Design School Doubles Its Space in a Move
On East 70th Street, scratch one gymnasium and add one design studio.
The New York School of Interior Design has bought, for $3.9 million, a four-story building at 170 East 70th Street that until recently was part of the Birch Wathen Lenox School.
And come December, the design school will move to its new digs from its longtime home on two floors of a six-story office building at 155 East 56th Street.


A Great Collection Goes on the Block
ONE of the world's great collections of United States stamps is to be broken up and sold at an auction late this month at Christie's in New York.
Bring money.
The collection was built over the last 20 years by Ryohei Ishikawa, who owns the Teisan Group of Japan, a conglomerate, and who is also chairman of the Chubu Bank.


Montana, the Chiefs and the Dream: At 37, the Legend Continues
The cultural, exciting City by the Bay.
The zany, fervent fans.
The up-tempo, quick-paced offense.
The wonderful talent.
The Super Bowl rings.


Equal Opportunity Criminal


The Big East Is Still the Big Easy for Miami
The seven other members of the Big East may think their football programs are catching up to that of mighty Miami.
But they need to reconsider after what happened to Boston College today at Alumni Stadium.
The Hurricanes, with 15 new starters in their lineup, dominated the Eagles and thrashed the team regarded as the second strongest in the conference, 23-7, before a capacity crowd of 33,298.
The margin could easily have been wider.


Perhaps This Universe Is Only a Test
THE END OF PHYSICS The Myth of a Unified Theory.
By David Lindley. 275 pp.
New York: Basic Books. $25.


The Corpulent Casts of Botero Are Installed in New York


New-Found Riches In Sharing a Home
FOR breakfast, Rice Estes, who is 86 years old, indulges in cornflakes, a banana and coffee while his housemate, Misao Furuno, 56, prepares a miso soup and brown rice.
As for relaxation, Mr.
Estes cherishes sitting in his living room and listening to a classical piece like Schubert's "Trout" Quintet or enjoying an iced tea in his flower garden.
Mr.
Furuno, on the other hand, finds solace in rising at 5:30 A.M. and meditating, zazen style, in front of a silkscreen painted with the Chinese symbol of yin and yang.
At a time when many older people who live alone are searching desperately for someone compatible to share their home with, Mr.
Estes, who lives in New Haven, says he has found the ideal housemate and friend in Mr.
Furuno, a retired Japanese businessman who came to the United States two years ago to study the language and culture.
Their serendipitous meeting last year, he said, was the end of a long search to find someone to help fill the void in his life after his wife of 56 years, the children's book author Eleanor Estes, died in 1988.


The Internet
WHAT: The Internet.
An unbelievably dense global matrix of 1.7 million computers, woven together by telephone lines, undersea cables, microwave links and gigabit fiber-optic pipes.
Touching down in 137 countries, linking 15 million to 30 million people and growing by a million users each month, it's a super data highway that carries the freight of the information age -- electronic mail, digital video and sound, , computer viruses and more.


Pressures on School Districts Continue
AS the school year begins Long Island districts face the continuing challenge of trying to maintain and improve programs and services with fewer resources and more students.
There were no significant cutbacks in state aid this year, and in some cases, small gains.
But most districts are still feeling the effects from the drastic reductions in 1991.


Tips From Professionals To Handle Pesky Tasks
PROFESSIONALS who build and repair houses gain subtle skills from intensive experience.
Amateurs seldom derive such knowledge.
The following tips may interest both groups.
MEASURING Metal tape measures have a small hook on the end that may seem annoyingly loose.
But do not return the tape to the store or try to tighten the hook.
It is designed to slide back and forth on the tape by an amount exactly equal to the hook's thickness, thereby producing accurate measurements whether the end of the tape is hooked over a board to measure its outside dimensions or placed between the sides of an opening to measure its inner dimensions.


Apres Supertitles, Le Deluge?
"If you want to know what's really behind the Met's new supertitle system," the mysterious voice on the phone said, "meet me at the northwest corner of Richard Tucker Park at midnight."
It was the day after the Metropolitan Opera had announced its planned supertitle system, which would use 2-by-8-inch screens wired into the backs of seats rather than the conventional method of projecting titles on a screen suspended over the stage.


Mark Green for Public Advocate
For a government job with no recognizable role, the post of Public Advocate of New York City has certainly stirred heated competition.
Six candidates are running in the Sept. 14 Democratic primary for the privilege of holding an office so bereft of responsibility that the position -- which used to be called City Council President -- could easily be abolished with no ill effects.
Now that incumbent Andrew Stein is retiring, his would-be successors see a chance to serve in a citywide post roughly equivalent to the Vice Presidency: not much independent power, but next in line to the Mayor.
But the job's ambiguous authority to oversee city agencies can at least provide a platform for publicity and an opportunity to focus attention on government's shortcomings.
Of the six candidates, one -- Mark Green -- is a good match for a post he'll have to make up as he goes along.


William McDonough, Carolyn James
Mr. and Mrs.
John A. James of Darien, Conn., have announced the engagement of their daughter Carolyn Grant James to William Bartley McDonough, a son of William J. McDonough, the president of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, and Joyce Thompson, also of New York.
A July 1993 wedding is planned.
Miss James graduated from Georgetown University.
She is now a candidate for a master's degree in management at Northwestern University, from which her fiance received an M.B.A. in June.
Her father is a management consultant in Rowayton, Conn.
Her mother, Diane James, is a designer and arranger of silk flowers, in Darien.


What Rhymes With the Donald?
Donald Trump has weathered a lot of criticism over the years, but never before has he been made a bad guy in a book of nursery rhymes.
In "We Are All in the Dumps with Jack and Guy," a new book by Maurice Sendak, one of the most arresting images is of five homeless children standing in front of Trump Tower, which is rendered as a particularly cold edifice.
The children, who are dressed in rags and newspapers, have just been cheated at a game of cards.
Three of them exclaim: "Tricked. Trumped. Dumped!"


Marguerite Johnson, Charles Rountree
Marguerite Marie Johnson, the daughter of Norma and Jeh Johnson of Wappingers Falls, N.Y., was married yesterday to Charles Felix Rountree, a son of Marie and Charles Rountree of Denver.
The Rev.
Richard Witt, an Episcopal priest, officiated at the Valeur mansion in Rhinebeck, N.Y.
Ms.
Johnson-Rountree is a program director at the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation in Princeton, N.J.
She graduated from Smith College and received a master's degree in social service from Bryn Mawr College and a master's degree in health policy and management from Harvard University.


LONG ISLAND JOURNAL
Killer Goose
ANOTHER Labor Day, another successful season for Chuckie the guard goose.
Nobody dared rob a house in Atlantique this summer, at least no house within the territorial environs of Chuckie, Fire Island's most effective security system.


What's Become of the Magic?
With a new season just around the corner, it is tempting to look back over the dance of the months just past.
It was not an outstanding time.
The level of imagination was generally low.
Choreographers and dancers know their craft better than ever.
But that craft often seemed to be put in the service of well-made dances that took few risks, meandering along on frequently tortuous routes to nowhere.
And yet there were a reassuring number of compelling works and performances.
Given the country's increasing preoccupation with social issues, there were surprisingly few dance pieces dealing with such subjects as poverty and prejudice in ways more universal than spontaneous personal response.
Dance may have been affected by the general fatigue of the world around it.
Only Jawole Willa Jo Zollar's "Shelter," a piece about homelessness that was presented by the Alvin Ailey American Dance Center, took an important issue and treated it with formal grandeur.
Ms.
Zollar, who created the work for her own Urban Bush Women company, approached homelessness from a distance yet with passion, and it worked.


Manager's Profile; Martin J. Whitman
Fund: Third Avenue Value; $104 million in assets. 5.75 percent sales charge.
Manager since 1990 inception. (Sponsor: M.J. Whitman, L.P., New York City).
Born: Sept. 30, 1924, New York City.


Jennifer Langdon, Scott Ramming
Jennifer Ann Langdon, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Jack L. Langdon of Malletts Bay, Vt., was married yesterday to Scott Anthony Ramming, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
James W. Ramming of Darien, Conn.
The Rev.
John Kirk, a Methodist minister, officiated at the Shelburne (Vt.) United Methodist Church.
The Rev.
Kurt V. Grotheer, the bridegroom's maternal grandfather, who is a Lutheran minister, took part in the ceremony.


A Yellow Wind in the Desert
VARIATIONS ON NIGHT AND DAY By Abdelrahman Munif.
Translated by Peter Theroux. 333 pp.
New York: Pantheon Books. $24.


The Sports of Politics


Paging Physicians From the Future
To the Editor:
In her article "From Dr. Welby to Dr. Giggles, a Steep Slide"  [ Aug. 22 ] , Natalie Angier mentions the Jane Seymour character in the CBS series "Dr. Quinn, Medicine Woman" as being "the most appealing physician on a screen these days."


4 U.S. Teams Reach World Bridge Playoffs
All four American teams began play here this afternoon in the quarterfinal stage of the NEC World Bridge Championships, but one of them was distinctly lucky to be in action.
The United States No. 1 team, which had had a weak start, took the fourth and last qualifying position in Group W of the Bermuda Bowl contest for open teams Friday night.


A 'Forbidden City' Reveals Its Secrets to a Skeptic
In the winter of 1944, near the close of World War II, two Austrian mountaineers escaped from a British prison camp in India and fled on foot over the Himalayas toward Tibet.
After an arduous journey of two years, they reached the "Forbidden City" of Lhasa, the capital of Tibet and the home of its incarnated God-King, the Dalai Lama.
Once there, they stayed on for five remarkable years, first as tolerated refugees, then as trusted officials in the Tibetan Government.
One of the men, Heinrich Harrer -- now 81, with a distinguished career as a photojournalist behind him -- recorded his experiences in the now-classic book "Seven Years in Tibet," first published in 1954.
Part field report, part diary, it is the study not only of an insular culture but of the author's gradual shift in attitude from skepticism at what he took to be the crudities of a foreign land to a profound sense of respect and finally love.
At least as evocative as his words, however, are the hundreds of stunning photographs that Mr.
Harrer took during these years.
Using a Leica camera and film that had serendipitously found its way to wartime Lhasa, he became the first person to visually document a centuries-old culture that is all but extinct today.


Some Like It Hot, Some Like It Hotter
BIG DADDY'S captures the spirit of New Orleans at Mardi Gras time.
And the fun-loving rollicking crowd that flocks to this new Massapequa restaurant keeps the carnival going.
The jukebox filled with jumping rhythm-and-blues favorites adds voltage.
Big Daddy's is not the place for quiet conversation, a romantic tete-a-tete or elegant dining.
Call the decor funky.
It runs to tables covered with plastic tablecloths in a myriad of patterns, paper napkins and Durkee's Redhot sauce.
Yet there are fresh flowers on the tables.


West Can Compete With East in Skilled Labor; De Facto Maximum
To the Editor:
"Conversations: Two Economists Catch Clinton's Eye by Bucking the Common Wisdom" (The Week in Review, Aug. 22) shows how precious is a sense of how markets work, and how hopeless for even the best and brightest to try and outsmart them.


Neighbors Mourn Girl Who 'Never Had a Chance'
On the Harlem street where Ebony Williams lived, the summer stirs in the usual ways.
The youngest children play on the sidewalk or cling to their mothers on the front stoops, and everyone seems to linger outside much of the time, waiting for the heat to snap.
And mostly, everyone watches everyone else.
The neighbors on Ebony's block say that they noticed something "going wrong" with the child.
Time and again, they saw her running in tears from her building or huddling in doorways with men probably twice her age.
She was just a few weeks past her 13th birthday, and the neighbors said that it was not uncommon for her to dash home at nearly any hour of the night, or not to show up at all.


Differing Styles in District Attorney Race
THE Democrat Michael G. Cherkasky seemed so eager last week to officially enter the Westchester District Attorney's race that he was already doing battle with Jeanine Pirro, the Republican's choice for that post.
But with the primary race yet to be decided on Sept. 14, Paul W. Pickelle, the other Democratic contender, sternly injected a note of caution -- advising his opponent "not to count his chickens before they're hatched."
"First things first," said the 54-year-old Mr.
Pickelle.
"Mr. Cherkasky should go for my throat before he goes for hers. Right now I'm his opponent, because he hasn't gotten past the initial hurdle yet. I'll worry about Mrs. Pirro when the time comes."


Amy Leigh Miller, Aron Lee Lowell
Amy Leigh Miller, a daughter of Norma and Howard Miller of Shaker Heights, Ohio, was married last evening to Aron Lee Lowell, the son of Elaine and Lawrence Lowell of Hartsdale, N.Y.
Rabbi Bruce Abrams officiated at the Ritz-Carlton Hotel in Cleveland.
The bride, 25, is a nurse at Mount Sinai Hospital in New York.
She and her husband graduated from the University of Vermont.
She received a master's degree in nursing from Vanderbilt University.


An American Workplace, After the Deluge
This is the city where the General Electric Company was born a century ago.
But its factories this Labor Day invite suspicions that the company might not be here much longer.
Weeds grow in the fissured asphalt of the plants G.E. has closed around town, and most gates to the ones that remain open are chained shut because the gatekeepers have been dismissed.
At G.E.'s main site here, the green stuff bordering the visitors' parking lot is not grass but a low-maintenance plastic coated with grit.
G.E.-Lynn has been reduced to a single business, making engines for small jet aircraft, and the work force here has been halved since the mid-1980's, to 6,200, with more cuts to come soon.


CURRENCY
Last
Prior
Year
Week
Week
Ago
Japanese Yen
104.68
103.75
123.08
per Dollar
German Mark
1.6215
1.6640
1.4017
per Dollar
Canadian Dollar
1.3271
1.3193
1.1988
per U.S. Dollar
British Pound
1.5275
1.5030
1.9960
U.S. Dollar per British Pound
Gold
$364.50
$369.25
$339.75
Republic National Bank
Currency: Friday NY Close


Elizabeth Andersen, Stephen Pomper
Elizabeth Ann Andersen and Stephen Edward Pomper, June graduates of Yale Law School, were married yesterday at the North Muskegon, Mich., home of the bride's parents, Mr. and Mrs.
Roger Andersen.
The Rev.
Kate Latimer of the Church of Christ in Yale University and Cantor Robin Schifrin officiated.
Ms.
Andersen is keeping her name.
She graduated magna cum laude from Williams College, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa, and received a master's degree in public affairs from Princeton University.
Next month she is to begin a clerkship for Judge Kimba M. Wood of Federal District Court in Manhattan.
Her father is the president of the Peninsular Investment Company, a commercial real estate company in Muskegon, Mich.


Television; Hey, let's put on a cable channel! For the networks, the idea is a quick way out of a financial bind.
JUST a month ago, it was easy to find network television executives who would argue that the popularity of cable TV is largely a myth.
Hardly anybody's really watching the Cartoon Network, VH-1, the E! channel, Comedy Central or any of more than a dozen other channels, the executives would say.


California Urbanites' Quest for Seclusion Creates Boom Town
In their latest quest for freedom and natural beauty, California's urban refugees have found the Lost Coast, 50 miles of all but inaccessible shoreline that begins 180 miles north of San Francisco.
That quest has brought a boom to this former fishing village at the northern tip of the secluded and undeveloped area.
Construction crews hammer together dream homes, real estate agents arrive in jets with potential buyers, and delivery trucks haul satellite dishes down the mountain.


Nadia C. Schadlow, Philip M. Murphy
Nadia Catherine Schadlow, the desk officer for Ukraine in the office of the Secretary of the Defense in Washington, was married yesterday to Philip Michael Murphy, an editor at Phillip's Publishing in Potomac, Md.
The Rev.
Paul DeHoff performed a nondenominational Protestant ceremony at the Union Church in Pocantico Hills, N.Y.
Ms.
Schadlow, who is keeping her name, is a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Alan R. Schadlow of Katonah, N.Y.
She graduated from Cornell University and received a master's degree in international affairs from Johns Hopkins University.
Her father is an internist in Yorktown Heights, N.Y.


Marseilles Journal; A Soccer Scandal Engulfs All France
The French summer, habitually dedicated to leisurely pursuits like the beach and boules, has instead focused on a sports scandal in this embittered port city that has set off a spasm of anxiety about the spread of corruption, the role of the judiciary and the outcome of the 1995 presidential election.
As investigators unravel plots and counterplots worthy of a soap opera, an alarming image of France has emerged: a country driven by intrigue, bitterly divided between north and south and so uncertain of its political future that it perceives the machinations surrounding a soccer game as potentially significant in the battle for its leadership.


3 Catches On Drive Turn Tide
The Giants picked a fine time to squash what was becoming a messy habit.
They had bullied the Chicago Bears up and down the field for all but the final two minutes of the first half and had only three measly field goals to show for it.


No Headline
Economists just don't want to admit there is stuff that cannot be measured. -- ZVI GRILICHES, who teachers statistical methods at Harvard.  [ 1:2. ]


Betsy Fry, Steven Sklar
Betsy Fry, a daughter of Beverly and Francis Fry of Evergreen, Colo., was married yesterday to Steven E. Sklar, the son of Shirley and William Sklar of Stamford, Conn.
Rabbi Joshua Hammerman performed the ceremony at the home of the bridegoom's parents.
Mrs.
Sklar, 28, is a manager at Sports Illustrated in New York.
She graduated from Georgetown University and received an M.B.A. from Harvard University.


The Fine Art of Keeping Still, for a Price
In a world overrun by role models and supermodels, life models -- men and women who pose in the nude for artists -- seem curiously archaic, relics of a bygone age when art students labored amid skeletons and anatomical charts, learning to draw the human body as painstakingly as medical students learn to dissect it.
Then, as now, life models were unsung and underpaid. (The going rate today is $8 to $10 an hour.) Leonardo da Vinci may have hired musicians to keep Mona Lisa amused, and thousands may have mourned the death of Kiki of Montparnasse, a favorite model of Man Ray and other Parisian artists of the 1920's, but that is not the way it usually goes for life models. (Kiki, in any case, died broke.)


Plot to Abduct Nixon to Free Blast Suspects
A Government informer and the man charged with leading a foiled plot to bomb New York City targets discussed abducting former President Richard M. Nixon and his former Secretary of State and adviser, Henry A. Kissinger, according to lawyers who have seen transcripts of tape-recorded evidence in the case.
The two American leaders were mentioned on the tape as possible targets in a hostage-taking scheme aimed at winning the release of Muslims being held in Federal custody in connection with the bombing of the World Trade Center last February, the lawyers said.


A Picnic Lunch in Spite of It All


Bridge
After desperately close struggles, one American open team won and one was defeated at the end of quarterfinal action in the NEC World Championships here this afternoon.
The United States No. 1 team, which includes Michael Becker of Tenafly, N.J., trailed by 33 imps against the Netherlands with 16 deals remaining, and then closed the gap largely because a sound Dutch slam contract hit a 5-0 trump split.
But the Dutch struck back, gaining heavily from an impertinent and successful psychic two-club opening by Berry Westra, and they won by 28 imps.


Milburn's First Score Holds Promise of More
Glyn Milburn, the Broncos' rookie running back, promised his mother that he would give her the football from his very first touchdown in the National Football League.
He accomplished the first goal -- scoring on a 25-yard catch-and-run in the third quarter of the Broncos' 26-20 victory over the Jets at Giants Stadium this afternoon -- with no problem.
But in the excitement of the moment, he forgot to keep the ball.


Polish Government Fights Arms Case in Court
A Brooklyn courtroom is the focus of international diplomatic and legal skirmishing as the Polish Government seeks to have arms-smuggling charges dismissed against five of its citizens, four of whom were high-ranking officials of the former Communist Government.
Lawyers for the Polish Government are arguing in Federal District Court that the case must be thrown out because the activities of United States undercover agents who conducted the "sting" operation that led to the defendants' arrests in Germany last year "violated the sovereignty" of Poland and also violated "international law and the treaty obligations of the United States vis-a-vis Poland."


West Indians Adding Clout At Ballot Box
For years West Indians have played a strong but supporting role in New York City politics, helping to elect black American candidates, then relying on those politicians to address their concerns.
But faced with a realization that such issues as immigration law, voting rights for noncitizens and United States policy toward the Caribbean sometimes takes a back seat to other issues facing black Americans, West Indians are trying to determine their own political future by registering to vote and running for local offices.


Hurdle Leaves Mets' System
Clint Hurdle, the former Met who managed the team's Class AAA affiliate the last two seasons, asked out of the organization this weekend.
It is a move that reveals Hurdle's impatience to manage in the major leagues.
According to Mets Vice President Gerry Hunsicker, Hurdle seemed unwilling to wait for Mets Manager Dallas Green to complete his tenure, whenever that may be.
He wants to manage in the big leagues by the time he is 36, and he is 36 now.


Debut of New Giants Becomes Old-Timers' Day
These are not the New Jersey Broncos after all, as the recently departed Pepper Johnson not so affectionately nicknamed the team.
A better name might be the New York Geezers.
There was Phil Simms, 37 years old, getting hit so hard by the Chicago Bears that he needed three stitches to sew up a nasty gash on his chin, but engineering an 80-yard scoring drive in the final minutes.
There was Lawrence Taylor, 34, making big play after big play.


Alan Sonnenklar and Jill Weinstein
Jill Weinstein, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Ephraim Weinstein of Englewood, N.J., was married yesterday to Alan Howard Sonnenklar, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Norman Sonnenklar of East Hills, L.I.
Rabbi Shmuel Goldin officiated at the Tamcrest Country Club in Alpine, N.J.
Mr. and Mrs.
Sonnenklar, both 25, graduated from the University of Pennsylvania, she cum laude.
She received a master's degree in psychology from Boston University and later this month is to attend St.
John's University, where she is seeking a Ph.D. in clinical psychology.
Her father is a periodontist in Teaneck, N.J.


Kelly, Kosar, Testaverde, Torretta and Now Costa
The nation's highest-ranked teams all were victors on college football's opening Saturday with the most revealing triumph that of Miami over Boston College.
The Hurricanes, ranked No. 4 in The Associated Press preseason poll, unveiled another star quarterback in the Miami mold, Frank Costa, in their victory over No. 20 Boston College.
They also instituted an occasional two-back offense with four classy running backs who will add their skills to what had been a one-dimensional attack, and they showed a continued attitude of insolence if not arrogance.


Poor in Nicaragua Are Ignored, Again
To the Editor:
In "The Nicaraguan Tragicomedy" (editorial, Aug. 25), you state that Gen.
Humberto Ortega, the army chief, must not be removed as a result of arm-twisting by Jose Angel Talavera, the recontra leader.
Yet, in effect, Mr.
Talavera is demanding compliance with the results of the 1990 election, in which the Sandinistas and their program were rejected.


Sharyn Korobow, Jonathan Lewis
Sharyn Elizabeth Korobow, a daughter of Naomi and Leon Korobow of Great Neck, L.I., was married yesterday to Jonathan Alexander Lewis, a son of Barbara and Jack Lewis of Reston, Va.
Rabbi Mordechai Waxman officiated at Sans Souci, a restaurant in Sea Cliff, L.I.
Ms.
Korobow Lewis is a law clerk to the United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit, in New York.
She and her husband graduated from Northwestern University.
She received a law degree from Yeshiva University.


'Mind Has Mountains'
To the Editor:
Reporters who tried to find reasons for the suicide of Vincent W. Foster Jr., and to fit those reasons into a Beltway construct, would do better to read the poetry of Gerard Manley Hopkins on the nature of despair:
Oh, the mind, mind has mountains,


U.N. Is Holding Talks on Lifting Its 3-Year Ban on Iraqi Oil Sales
Three years after it imposed a stiff trade embargo against Iraq because of its invasion of Kuwait, the United Nations is seriously considering lifting its ban on Iraqi oil sales and allowing Baghdad to earn billions of dollars by selling unlimited quantities on world markets.
An easing of the embargo, which diplomats say is still many months away, would come about if Iraq provided information about its efforts to build arms and agreed to let the United Nations monitor its military industries to insure it does not reacquire weapons.
Baghdad must also demonstrate that it is willing to cooperate with monitoring, diplomats said.


Montana Turns Chiefs Debut Into a Highlight Film
In his widely anticipated debut today for the Kansas City Chiefs, Joe Montana showed up at his Tampa Stadium locker to find a pair of size 15 shoes, a gesture courtesy of Tampa Bay quarterback Steve DeBerg.
Last year, before a game against San Francisco, DeBerg had his helmet and shoulder pads removed by Montana, his 49ers teammate in 1979 and 1980, Montana's first two pro seasons.
The frivolity continued on the field, but only for Montana, who, despite having played only two quarters over the last two years, looked every bit the quarterback who has won four Super Bowls and three most-valuable-player awards.


Auto Talks Hang on Health Costs But Workers Are Loath to Chip In
Since learning last year that he had multiple sclerosis, Andy Torok has become less and less steady on his feet, and his worries have accumulated along with the hand prints on his apartment's white walls.
But as Mr.
Torok has shuttled among specialists, sampling different steroids and undergoing test after test, he has not had to give a single thought to how much his health care costs.


Young's Bad Luck Continues
An earring hung from Anthony Young's left ear, but his pitches did not hang over the plate.
He brought something back from the minor leagues -- a functional slider -- but, in today's ninth inning, he should have lent it to John Franco.
Young, leading, 1-0, was only three outs away from recording his second victory of the season this afternoon, but his right arm was feeling rubbery, his left thumb was swollen and he did not dare enter a debate with Manager Dallas Green.
So Franco was summoned from the bullpen for the ninth, and he put an end to the game all right, allowing a one-out, two-run homer to Glenallen Hill that lifted the Cubs to a 2-1 victory.


Official Airline Guides Bought for $417 Million
Reed Elsevier P.L.C., a British-Dutch publishing conglomerate, said on Saturday that it had agreed with the joint administrators of the Maxwell Communication Corporation to acquire the assets of Official Airline Guides for $417 million in cash.
"This is an excellent acquisition for Reed Elsevier," said Peter Davis, the London-based company's chief executive, "and one which should have a favorable impact on earnings." Official Airline Guides revenues totaled almost $129.5 million for the year ended March 1993, and pretax profit was $44.8 million.
Adds to Existing Interests
Reed Elsevier already has a substantial interest in travel publishing, including ABC World Airways Guide, which is strong outside the United States.
Both guides, which process millions of individual air fare changes monthly, are widely used by airlines, travel agents and corporate travel managers.


Timothy M. Henry, Alice N. Finn
Alice Nancy Finn, a daughter of Lois and Alvan Finn of Chestnut Hill, Mass., was married yesterday to Timothy Michael Henry, a son of Eunice Johnson and Keith Henry, both of Montreal.
The Rev.
Dr.
Wesley Robb, a United Methodist minister, performed the ceremony at the Beechwood estate in Newport, R.I.
Ms.
Finn, 31, is keeping her name.
She is the program director and an executive producer, in Boston, of "The Learning Curve," an educational television program now in development. .


Arafat's Move: Acting Before He Became Irrelevant
For almost four decades, he has been the consummate haggler and juggler, fashioning oratorical labyrinths in the name of the Palestinian cause but never delivering a square inch of turf to his people.
Yet now, abruptly, Yasir Arafat has cast his lot with Israel, and there is no road back for the leader of the Palestine Liberation Organization.


Beth Heifetz and Glenn A. Fine
Beth Heifetz and Glenn Alan Fine were married in Washington yesterday.
Justice Harry A. Blackmun of the Supreme Court and Rabbi Howard Gorin jointly officiated at the Watergate Hotel.
Ms.
Heifetz, 37, is keeping her name.
The bride, who was a law clerk to Justice Blackmun, is an associate in the Washington office of Jones, Day, Reavis &amp; Pogue, the Cleveland-based law firm.
She graduated from the University of Wisconsin and received a law degree from New York University, where she was an editor of The Law Review.


Black Bankers Seek Broader Market
Citizens Trust Bank, the largest black-owned bank in Atlanta, for the first time in its 72-year history is aiming at white, Korean and Hispanic customers.
Using a new advertising campaign with the slogan "Look to us . . . we listen," Citizens put up 13 billboards in English, Korean and Spanish in minority and predominantly white areas last year.
Citizens said it also planned to open two branches next year in predominantly white areas.


Patents
THOUGH it has important implications for public policy as well as industry, the study of eating habits has always been an imprecise science.
Nutritionists have had to rely on the people being studied to report accurately the type and quantity of food they consume.
When estimating caloric intake, for example, they have been found to be off by as much as 50 percent.
This quandary has led Mary J. Kretsch and her colleagues at the Department of Agriculture's research service division in San Francisco to create a recently patented user-friendly computer system to be used at home.
With a little help from the research subject, the computer will weigh and record all of the food consumed.


N.F.L. Notes
The hottest team in the National Football League?
Try the San Francisco 49ers, who have now won their last nine regular-season games, the longest streak in the N.F.L.
Of course, eight of the victories are from last season. . . .
NEIL SMITH, the Chiefs' designated franchise player and their most valuable player in 1992, ended his contract holdout on Saturday and played yesterday against the Buccaneers.
The defensive end had one tackle and one sack, but the latter was nullified by a penalty for having too many men on the field. . . .
Speaking of defensive lineman, you may be wondering how Green Bay's REGGIE WHITE did yesterday.
Well, the $17 million former Philadephia Eagle spent the afternoon lining up all over the defensive front.
He had two tackles and no sacks.
For what it's worth, he also had a sackless preseason. . . .
JOE MONTANA is 37 years old and STEVE DeBERG, the league's oldest player, is 39.
Yesterday, they squared off against each other in Tampa, Fla.
The last time two quarterbacks the age of 37 or older started in the same game was Oct. 26, 1978.
In that game, 39-year-old FRAN TARKENTON led the Minnesota Vikings to a 21-10 victory over 37-year-old ROGER STAUBACH and the Dallas Cowboys. . . .
Los Angeles Rams quarterback JIM EVERETT completed just 17 of 41 for 175 yards as his team took a shellacking from Green Bay.
Still, the yardage was enough to push him ahead of ROMAN GABRIEL and make him the career passing yardage leader for the Rams. . . .


Byrd Honored at Jets Game
Dennis Byrd returned to Giants Stadium for a Jets game this afternoon for the first time since he broke his neck and suffered partial paralysis during a game against Kansas City last Nov. 29.
Byrd, who was joined by members of his family, including his wife, Angela, and their two daugthers, was honored at halftime.
The Jets' president, Steve Gutman presented Byrd with a trophy, establishing what from this point on will be referred to as the Dennis Byrd Trophy, which will be given each year to the most inspirational Jets player.


In the Mayor's Corner, Cuomo the Heavyweight
IN the family of New York, as he is fond of calling his state, Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo is a patriarch of many stripes.
To some, he is the rich but chintzy relative who delivers lectures on frugality with every dollar he doles out.
To others, he is a parent who coddles needy cities while ignoring their suburban kin.
To almost everyone, he can be the respected but loopy uncle capable of sagacity and volcanic rage in equal -- and equally unpredictable -- parts.


NEWS SUMMARY
International 2-5  CHINA'S GOAL IS MARKET-LENINISM
As China tries to take what it sees as its place in the world, Beijing is trying eject Communism -- but not Communist rule -- and move toward free-market authoritarianism.1


Daniel Gutman, Municipal Judge And Law School Dean, Dies at 92
Daniel Gutman, a legal counsel to Gov.
Averell Harriman of New York, a dean of the New York Law School and the founder of a night court for small claims in New York City's Municipal Court, died yesterday at his home in Carmel in Putnam County, N.Y.
He was 92.
The cause was not immediately clear, but he had suffered a series of small strokes, said Arnold H. Graham, a friend and formerly the law school's vice dean.


West Indian Parade
The West Indian-American Day Parade begins at 11 A.M. at Utica Avenue and Eastern Parkway in Brooklyn and goes along Eastern Parkway to Grand Army Plaza.


Jodi E. Lox, Samuel Mansbach
Jodi Eileen Lox, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Allen Lox of Chatham, N.J., was married yesterday to Samuel Ross Mansbach, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Charles Mansbach of Memphis.
Rabbi William Horn performed the ceremony at Temple B'nai Abraham in Livingston, N.J.


Review/Performance Art; Three Odd Characters in Search of an Afterlife
Mark Dendy's "Bus Ride to Heaven," presented on Friday night at Performance Space 122, tells the stories of three very different characters who die and find themselves filling out official questionnaires before boarding a bus bound for heaven.
The final question is about the meaning of life.
One fears the worst.
But the performance piece remains reassuringly on this side of the angels for most of the evening, confirming Mr.
Dendy's gifts as a writer and actor.
Pawnie, the first character, is a tousled transvestite prostitute and addict.
Mr.
Dendy manages to make something fresh and rich out of all the stereotypes in a performance that is eerily close to the language and rhythms of New York's streets.
Sniffing cocaine, Pawnie tells the devastating story of her life with a saving, bawdy humor, a story that runs from her childhood days as an effeminate white boy who wants to be black to her final moments when she is run over and killed by a Mister Softee truck.


Meredith Williams, Morton Berger
Meredith Mason Williams, a daughter of Marian and Gray Williams Jr. of Chappaqua, N.Y., was married yesterday to Morton David Berger, the son of Sara Ann and Dr.
Leonard H. Berger of Baltimore.
Rabbi J. Rolando Matalon performed the ceremony at James House, a mansion in North Tarrytown, N.Y.
Ms.
Williams, 29, is keeping her name.
She is an operations specialist at J. P. Morgan Securities Inc. in New York.
She graduated cum laude from Yale University.
Her father is a writer in Chappaqua.


INSIDE
Somalis Kill 7 Nigeria Troops
Somali gunmen killed seven Nigerian peacekeepers in Mogadishu, and their commander blamed Italian soldiers for inaction.
Page 2.
New World Record in Mile
Noureddine Morceli of Algeria finished in 3 minutes 44.39 seconds in Rieti, Italy, bettering the mark of 3:46.32 set by Steve Cram of Britain in 1985.
SportsMonday, page 24.


Andrea Kupfer, Rodd Schneider
Andrea Sue Kupfer, a daughter of Drs.
Barbara Burstin and David Kupfer, both of Pittsburgh, was married there yesterday to Rodd Schneider, a son of Arlyne and Norman Schneider of Plainview, L.I.
Rabbi Stephen Steindel officiated at Congregation Beth Shalom.
The bride, 27, graduated from Princeton University.
She and her husband received law degrees from Harvard University.
She is to join the Washington law firm of Arent, Fox, Kintner, Plotkin &amp; Kahn as an associate in November.


Sing Sing Inmates Hail Plan to Offer Kosher Meals
If all goes according to plan, Sing Sing prison will offer kosher meals for Jewish inmates who want them beginning with the Jewish New Year on Sept. 16.
About a dozen Jewish prisoners celebrated the news this week with a prayer service, singing and dancing led by visiting Hasidim, and kosher salami sandwiches brought in for the occasion.


Miss Fleck, Mr. Quackenbush
Lisa Beth Fleck, a daughter of Aaron and Barbara Fleck of Sarasota, Fla., was married yesterday to Bruce Kalloch Quackenbush, a son of Bill and Joan Quackenbush of Orlando, Fla.
The Rev.
Winston B. Charles, an Episcopal priest, and Rabbi Benjamin J. Leinow officiated at the Aspen (Colo.) Community Church.
The bride, a graduate of Tulane University, is a vice president of Bear, Stearns &amp; Company in New York.
Her father is a financial adviser in Sarasota, and her mother is the retired owner of Orco Distributors, a tile manufacturer there.


For Murdoch, New Moves In Britain
Rupert Murdoch is back.
After concentrating for several years on shoring up the faltering finances of his News Corporation and spending most of his time at his Hollywood studio, 20th Century Fox, Mr.
Murdoch burst back onto the British media scene last week, displaying his old touch for shaking things up.


From Signs to Pistols, Cash-Short Cities Sell Past
Souvenir toe tags from the coroner's office.
Espresso bars in libraries.
Used manhole covers for sale as coffee tables.
Inch-thick steel bars from an old jail, priced at $5 each.
And a sheep parade.
As government budgets shrink in hard times, many cities and towns are looking for new ways to raise money, and they are finding them.


Holiday
Today is Labor Day.
Here are holiday schedules.
NEW YORK  PARADE Begins at 11:00 A.M. at 44th Street and Fifth Avenue, goes up Fifth Avenue to 72d Street and across to Third Avenue.
GOVERNMENT OFFICES Closed.


Sarah A. Gillman, David L. Marchiony
Sarah Ann Gillman, the daughter of Mrs.
George J. Halpern of Rye, N.Y., and Dr.
Arthur E. Gillman of Larchmont, N.Y., was married yesterday to David Lawrence Marchiony, a son of Lawrence Marchiony Jr. of Montclair, N.J., and the late Eva B. Marchiony.
Rabbi Robert Rothman officiated on Mount Mansfield in Stowe, Vt.
The bride, who is keeping her name, is a management consultant with the accounting firm of KPMG Peat Marwick, in New York.
She graduated from Yale University and received a master's degree in education and an M.B.A. from Columbia University.


Coping With the Endless Summer; Parents, Teachers and Students Are Left Scrambling
Thursday, the day school was supposed to begin, looks pretty good for the Watson family of Brooklyn: Terry Watson, a 45-year-old music therapist, has to work only three hours that day, so she figures she will take Peter, her 8-year-old son, along with her.
For a few hours, Adam, 11, could fend for himself.
Friday gets trickier: Mrs.
Watson's schedule that day prevents Peter from going with her again, so he might have to go with his father, David, to his job at Dun &amp; Bradstreet, a financial information company.
But Mr.
Watson is uncertain how the bosses would feel about a third grader, whose temporary snake tattoo is flaking off his tanned arm, mingling with men in suits.
So Peter could possibly go to work with Mrs.
Watson's sister, or in a pinch, to the office of Mrs.
Watson's mother.
No one is sure.
Rush for Child Care
Adam, however, would likely stay with a friend, Josh Pomerantz.
Josh's mother is a public school teacher, and in this time of confusion and frustration brought on by the asbestos crisis and the delay of school, she will definitely be at home.
"I don't know," Mrs.
Watson said this weekend at the family's home in Ditmas Park.
"Maybe I'll send them all to Mayor Dinkins's house."


Sunday Services for the Fleet Resume After Last Year's Hurricane


Marty Ross and Eric G. Dolen
Dr.
Mary Martin Ross, the daughter of Patricia Mikelson of Columbia, S.C., and Dr.
Jeffrey Ross of Lebanon Springs, N.Y., was married yesterday to Dr.
Eric Gregg Dolen, the son of Michael Dolen and Dr.
Lenise Dolen of Chappaqua, N.Y.
Rabbi Leonard Goldstein performed the ceremony at the Country Club of Pittsfield in Pittsfield, Mass.
Dr.
Ross-Dolen, 26, is known as Marty.
She and her husband received medical degrees from the Albert Einstein College of Medicine.
They are now in residency programs, she in psychiatry at the Columbia-Presbyterian Medical Center in New York, he in internal medicine at the Greenwich (Conn.) Hospital.
She graduated cum laude from Wellesley College.


With Few Witnesses, Videos Are Crucial in Beating Trial
The trial of two men accused of a series of attacks during last year's riots has become the stage for a macabre legal presentation: videotapes of brutal assaults are being played for the jury, accompanied by a parade of witnesses who can remember almost nothing because they were beaten unconscious.
Although scores of people, many of them neighbors of the defendants, were milling around the intersection of Florence and Normandie Avenues at the time of the violence, the prosecution has almost no witnesses willing to identify the two defendants, Damian M. Williams, 20, and Henry K. Watson, 28.


A Pinch-Hit Here, a Brave's Home Run There, and the Giants' Collars Tighten
Cardinals 7, Giants 6
A pinch-hitter, Tom Pagnozzi, singled off the relief ace Rod Beck with the bases loaded in the ninth inning to snap a tie as the St.
Louis Cardinals beat San Francisco, 7-6, yesterday, cutting the Giants' lead to two and a half games in the National League West.
The Giants' bullpen blew a three-run lead in the loss.


Baptists March in Harlem Against Crime and Poverty
About 500 members of more than 50 Baptist congregations marched through Harlem yesterday in a peaceful protest against violence in black neighborhoods.
The march up Adam Clayton Powell Jr.
Boulevard was a prelude to the 113th annual convention of the National Baptist Convention U.S.A., to be held later this week at Madison Square Garden.


Wilander Comes Back, To Earth
The United States Open comeback that really wasn't is officially over.
And quickly.
Mats Wilander lost in the third round yesterday to the 15th-seeded Cedric Pioline in straight sets, 6-4, 6-4, 6-4.
It took just 2 hours 8 minutes.
"I don't remember feeling as helpless before as you can these days," said Wilander, the 1988 United States Open champion who took a breakfrom tennis.
"Sometimes I walk around and say, 'God, this guy can't play at all,' and then sometimes bang, bang, bang, and he breaks you and then you wonder what happened."


Essay; Forward Together, Again
In his story of "The Purloined Letter," Edgar Allan Poe showed that the best place to hide anything from avid searchers is to leave it in plain view.
In the same way, President Clinton conceals his strategy from probing pundits by laying it out for all to hear on his weekly Saturday radio address.
The entrails-reading class -- preferring to rely on leaks, trial balloons, intimate dinners or the convoluted webs of White House spinmeisters -- scorns the most obvious source of all, and the strategy remains successfully hidden.


RESULTS PLUS
SOCCER  Argentina Humiliated As Colombia Qualifies  Colombia needed only a draw.
It got much more.
With Freddy Rincon and Faustino Asprilla scoring two goals each, Colombia became the sixth nation to join the field for the 1994 World Cup, routing two-time world champion Argentina, 5-0, yesterday in River Plate Stadium in Buenos Aires.
It was one of Argentina's most humiliating defeats at home, but did not eliminate the Argentines from earning a spot in the 24-team field.
They now enter a two-game series with Australia for one last chance to qualify for the World Cup next summer in the United States.
The victory by Colombia, which qualified for the 1962 and 1990 World Cups, set off celebrations back home.
People took to the streets of Bogota and other cities, dancing, honking car horns and waving flags.
Besides the host, the United States, and defending champion Germany, Colombia joined Mexico, Russia and Greece for next summer's championship.
Before 60,000 fans at River Plate Stadium, the Colombians were so overwhelming even the hometown crowd cheered them.
Rincon scored in 41st minute, beating goalkeeper Sergio Goycochea with a low shot from 5 yards.
Asprilla made it 2-0 a minute after halftime.
Rincon added the second in the 73d.
Asprilla got his second two minutes later and then set up Rene Valencia for the finale in the 84th. (AP) Brazil 4, Venezuela 0: At Belo Horizonte, Brazil, Ricardo Gomes, Palhina and Evair scored in a four-minute span of the first half to pace Brazil to a 4-0 victory.
Brazil is 4-1-2 and 10 points, the same as Bolivia atop South American qualifying Group B. The top two teams from the group advance to the World Cup.
Bolivia has two games left and Brazil one. (AP)


Elmo a Boy? Nonsense!
To the Editor:
As "Sesame Street" brings out Zoe, another female monster, in hopes that she becomes as popular as Grover, Oscar and Cookie Monster, my thoughts turn to Elmo, that wild little red-haired monster, who is such a happy nag.
The one sporting big sneakers and little patience.


Chess Adopts Boxing's Anarchy and Attitude
So far the run-up has been more Atlantic City than Savoy Hotel.
There has been all the hype and hoopla of a heavyweight bout: the mandatory pre-match exchange of insults, the hawking of overpriced tickets and the talk of back-stabbing deals for television coverage.


Anita Friedman, Victor Amran Jr.
Anita Evelyn Friedman, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Charles H. Friedman of New York and Putnam Valley, N.Y., was married yesterday to Victor Juan Amram Jr., a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Amram of Miami.
Rabbi Roy A. Rosenberg officiated at the Plumbush Inn in Cold Spring, N.Y.
The Rev.
Joe Lynch, a Roman Catholic priest, took part in the ceremony.
Ms.
Friedman, 32, is keeping her name.
She and her husband work for Partner of the Americas, a nonprofit organization in Washington that promotes understanding between the United States and South America.
She is the director of Peruvian training programs and he is a program associate with the organization.
She graduated from Vassar College and received a master's degree in rural sociology from the University of Wisconsin.


Markets Closed
All financial and commodity markets in the United States will be closed today for the Labor Day holiday.
Government offices, banks and most businesses will also be closed.


Sports of The Times; The Boom Of Authority For Jets
ON the scoreboard the Jets were trailing the Denver Broncos, 26-6, late in the third quarter.
On the sideline Boomer Esiason was glaring.
"It's not over," he kept telling his teammates. "It's not over."


E.P.A. Superfund at 13: a White Knight Tarnished
For more than two decades, the dump in this small town near Detroit accepted the region's household garbage and, as it turned out, the wastes from some of the nation's largest industries, among them the General Motors Corporation, Allied-Signal Inc. and the Sherwin-Williams Company.
In the early 1980's, it was the town's residents who, after seeing barrels of industrial wastes unloaded, prodded first the state and then the Federal Government to clean up the dump.


Jeanette M. Nealon, Jeremy D. Driesen
Jeanette Marie Nealon, the daughter of Richard and Barbara Nealon of Goshen, N.Y., was married yesterday to Jeremy Daniel Driesen, a son of George and Susan Driesen of Chevy Chase, Md.
Rabbi Roy A. Rosenberg and the Rev.
Richard G. Thompson, a Presbyterian minister, officiated at the Chapel at Vassar College in Poughkeepsie, N.Y.
Mrs.
Driesen, 28, graduated from Vassar.
She is the personnel and benefits manager at the New York law firm of Howard, Darby &amp; Levin.
Her father retired as the Superintendent of the Goshen Central School District.
Her mother is an elementary-school teacher in the Newburgh, N.Y., school system.


USA Today Puts Its Corners Up for Sale
USA Today is hoping that when it comes to advertising, small is beautiful -- or at least profitable.
Beginning tomorrow, the national daily newspaper will introduce a small color advertisement for Northwest Airlines in the upper right corner of the front page of its Money section.
And next month, small ads for Wrigley chewing gums will run in the same position on the front of its Life section.


Jennifer Boal and Roland Goff
Jennifer Boal, an assistant United States attorney in Brooklyn, and Roland Goff, a lawyer for Harlem Legal Services in Manhattan, were married yesterday in Stratton Mountain, Vt.
The Rev.
Sally Swearingen performed the United Church of Christ ceremony at the Chapel of the Snows.
The bride, 29, is the daughter of Lyndall Boal of Mount Kisco, N.Y., and the late R. Bradlee Boal.
She graduated from Haverford College and she and her husband received law degrees from Cornell University.


Running for Governor As a Spectator Sport
Governor Jim Florio and his Republican challenger, Christine Todd Whitman, are paying consultants big money, so they probably won't be seeking free advice on how to run their campaigns for governor this year.
But if they did . . .


Hungary Is in Love With Uncle
A low-budget, lighthearted movie set in the 1960's about a salesman who travels around the countryside selling coat hangers and educating his teen-age nephew about life, has become a runaway hit here, prompting a wave of nostalgia among Hungarians for simpler times, even if they were Communist.
Some people have returned again and again to see "We'll Never Die," even sitting on the floor of the small art house theaters where it is showing.
Since its debut at the Budapest Film Festival at the beginning of the year, the movie has outsold most of the big American productions that are the traditional box office hits here.


Weighing In, Clinton Urges Arab Support of the P.L.O.-Israel Pact
President Clinton has sent letters to nine Arab leaders urging them to do whatever they can to promote the proposed peace agreement between Israel and the Palestine Liberation Organization, senior Administration officials said today.
The letters were the first action by Mr.
Clinton regarding the agreement since the breakthrough between the adversaries was made public.
They sent an important message to Arab leaders -- both Israel's neighbors and the wealthy leaders of the Persian Gulf who will have to help underwrite the accord -- that the United States was firmly behind the process.


Marta Nelson, David Jones
Marta Nelson, a daughter of Consuelo Nelson of London, Ohio, and the late Rev.
Leonard Nelson, was married yesterday to David Jones, the son of Nancy H. Jones of Minnetonka, Minn., and Dr.
Frank Jones of Ann Arbor, Mich.
The Rev.
Dr.
Paul Smith officiated at the First Presbyterian Church in Brooklyn.
The Rev.
Harris Riordan, a Unitarian minister, took part in the ceremony.
Ms.
Nelson, 29, is keeping her name.
She is an associate at the law firm of Morrison &amp; Foerster in New York.
She and her husband graduated magna cum laude from Brown University, where they were elected to Phi Beta Kappa.
She received her law degree from the University of Michigan.


No Charges Filed in Actor's Death During Filming
The District Attorney investigating the shooting death March 31 of the actor Brandon Lee here says he has decided against charging a movie production company with negligent homicide.
The announcement comes five months after Mr.
Lee was shot at with a blank cartridge and killed by a bullet lodged in the barrel of the gun during the filming of "The Crow." The movie, in which Mr.
Lee, 28, was starring, is about a rock musician who is killed by a street gang and then comes back to life with supernatural powers to avenge his death.


U.S. OPEN '93: Sports of the Times; Mature Wilander For Commissioner
SPUTTERING right through the middle of a third set yesterday against someone named Barbara Rittner, Martina Navratilova broke out with a couple of her trademark volley winners, and the Stadium Court crowd, naturally, was delighted.
The United States Open clings to Navratilova now, the way it hung onto Jimmy Connors, like a dusty photo album filled with black-and-whites.
"I hit some great shots in my lifetime," Navratilova would say after surviving another day at her 21st Open, winning by 4-6, 6-2, 6-4 to advance to the Round of 16.
"Now I hit a decent shot and I get a standing ovation."


No to a Higher Tax On Capital Gains
To the Editor:
"Raise Capital Gains Tax and Cut Deficit" (letter, Aug. 20), Harold Pepperell's plan to increase the capital gains rate to 40 percent, would have the opposite effect from what he forecasts.
What incentive is there to sell an asset to take advantage of a 28 percent capital gains tax rate when you will have to reinvest your diminished proceeds with the happy prospect of having future capital appreciation, if any, taxed again at 40 percent?
This is a losing game.


CHRONICLE
RICHARD BERENDZEN sent shock waves reverberating through the academic world when without warning he resigned as president of American University in Washington in April 1990, amid charges that he had made obscene phone calls about child abuse to child-care workers.
He did make those calls, and he has written a book that painfully explains how a respected academician almost destroyed himself.


Sarah Van Dyck, Barnaby Noble
Sarah Paxson Van Dyck, a daughter of the Rev.
Dr. and Mrs.
Nicholas B. Van Dyck of Princeton, N.J., was married yesterday to Barnaby Lloyd Noble, a son of John J. Noble and Madeleine G. Noble, both of Geneva.
The bride's father, a Presbyterian minister, officiated at the United Congregational Church in Little Compton, R.I.
The bride, 27, and her husband, 28, graduated magna cum laude from Brown University.
She received an M.B.A. from the INSEAD business institute in Fontainebleau, France.
Her mother, Marcia Van Dyck, is a special-education teacher at the Riverside School in Princeton.
Her father is the president of Religion in American Life, a nonprofit interfaith agency in Princeton.


Health Care -- By-And-By
The autumn leaves won't be blowing across Lafayette Square for a while yet, but Washington is already aflutter with contradictory advice for President Clinton on his legislative agenda.
Some of it is malicious.
The Republicans would like to scuttle health care.
The Perotistas and a peevish lot of Democratic House members would like to humble Mr.
Clinton on the North American Free Trade Agreement.


This Time, Novotna Loses With Less Flair
She didn't blame it on the potholes that several other players have encountered on the United States Open's hinterland courts, but fresh from her stunning stumble in the Wimbledon finale, eighth-seeded Jana Novotna experienced a crash landing in the fourth round yesterday.
Novotna was, in simple parlance, literally run off the court by the cannily angled ground strokes of 18th-ranked Kimiko Date of Japan, who converted three of seven break points and neutralized fully half of Novotna's approaches to the net in a 6-4, 6-4 thumping.
And without control of the net, her favorite vantage point, Novotna was unable to summon the poise to fight her way back into the proceedings against the ambidextrous returner.


Books of The Times; For Jefferson, the Presidency Held Second Place
Thomas Jefferson  A Life By Willard Sterne Randall 708 pages.
Henry Holt &amp; Company. $35.


Economic Watch; Disputed New Role for Polls: Putting a Price Tag on Nature
How much is a Pacific sea otter's life worth -- not someone's pet, but a wild animal that will never be studied by scientists or frolic in front of tourists?
Could the Government find out by asking people in Plattsburgh or Peoria how much they would voluntarily fork over to keep the otter safe from unnatural hazards?
Until recently, such abstract questions have mostly been grist for academic debate.
But now Federal regulators are under orders from Congress and the courts to figure ways to measure losses to people not directly affected by environmental problems like oil spills or haze in national parks.
The first set of guidelines, from the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, is due later this month and is widely expected to support the use of survey-based techniques.


Asbestos Contractor Suspended
One of the five contractors hired for the crash program to remove asbestos from New York City schools has been suspended from additional cleanup work pending an investigation of the company's failure to disclose scores of environmental violations and fines on previous asbestos jobs.
The contractor, the Advanced Asbestos Removal Corporation, of Brooklyn, was told by the School Construction Authority over the weekend that it could complete presently assigned tasks but would be given no new work in the cleanup until it explained why it had not disclosed a history of 49 violations and $149,500 in fines when it was given a $2 million contract last month.


Turnback the Alarm Takes a Forward Step
If 1993 is the year of the prize fillies in horse racing, then Turnback the Alarm took some giant strides toward capturing the honors of the year yesterday when she outran November Snow and two other rivals and won the $200,000 Go for Wand Stakes at Belmont Park.
It was the third straight victory in a Grade I stakes for the 4-year-old gray filly, who looked like a champion last year until she fractured a hind leg while training and missed 10 months of racing.


NO CHEMICAL ARMS ABOARD CHINA SHIP
A Chinese freighter that had been suspected by American intelligence of carrying poison gas ingredients to Iran is carrying no such cargo and will be allowed to go on its way, United States, Chinese and Saudi officials say.
After an inspection at the Saudi port of Damman, certification that the ship was not carrying any chemical weapons cargo was signed Saturday by representatives of all three governments, including an American technical adviser to the Saudis who was not identified.


Lesson for Parcells: They're the Patriots, Remember?
Bill Parcells returned to pro football today. He also returned to reality.
For much of this game on the opening day of the National Football League season, his young and uncertain New England Patriots hung in there against the mighty Buffalo Bills.
Midway through the third quarter, the Patriots closed to within 17-14.
Then, in the first six and a half minutes of the last quarter, they made three big mistakes and the Bills pounced on them for three touchdowns and a 38-14 victory.


Israel and Syria Reported Ready To Negotiate About Golan Heights
Israel was reported today to be ready to recognize Syrian sovereignty over the Golan Heights soon in return for a statement by Syria spelling out what it means by an offer of "full peace."
Israeli Government officials said the reports, in two leading newspapers, were "premature."


Rebecca Richards, James L. Mahan
Rebecca Dawn Richards, a daughter of Drs.
Arlene and Arnold Richards of New York, was married yesterday to James Leo Mahan, the son of James and Joan Mahan of East Falmouth, Mass.
Walter Lawton, a leader of the New Jersey Ethical Culture Society, officiated at the Hudson River Club in New York.
The bride, a graduate of the Boston University School of Nursing, is a labor and delivery nurse at Kaiser Hospital in San Francisco.
Her parents are psychoanalysts in Manhattan.


Chamorro and Foes Settling Disputes, Smoothing Way for Talks With Sandinistas
In negotiations to resolve the political crisis consuming Nicaragua, the Government and its conservative opponents are reaching agreements on issues that have divided them for months.
The talks, which began last week, turned today to some of the most serious differences between the Government of President Violeta Barrios de Chamorro and the center-right coalition that supported her election in 1990, then broke with her last year.


Whitney Apology For Use Of Images
The Whitney Museum of American Art has acknowledged that copyrighted images by the photojournalist Donna Ferrato were used without permission in an artwork that was included in "The Subject of Rape," a recent exhibition.
In a statement released on Friday, the museum said that an untitled work on canvas by Eva Rivera Castro used one picture from a book of photographs by Ms.
Ferrato called "Living With the Enemy," about domestic violence, and that "other images" were "derived directly" from photographs in the book.


CHRONICLE
If it's Labor Day, it's time to start thinking about Miss America, past and future.
And LEANZA CORNETT, who finishes her reign as Miss America on Sept. 18 in Atlantic City, is thinking seriously about her future.
She's moving to Los Angeles and negotiating a contract with the syndicated television show "Entertainment Tonight," The Associated Press reported.
She also plans to continue her studies at U.C.L.A., where she is a communications major.


Carolyn Mark and William C. Stone
Carolyn Mark, a daughter of Arthur and Cecile D. Mark of Tannersville, Pa., was married yesterday to William C. Stone, the son of Howard Stone of Hoboken, N.J., and the late Dora S. Stone.
The bride's parents performed the ceremony at their home, as permitted by Pennsylvania law.
The bride, 27, was until recently an economic development consultant at Jobs for the Future Inc., a research organization involved in economic and work-force development issues, in Cambridge, Mass.
She graduated magna cum laude from Pennsylvania State University, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa, and received a master's degree in city planning from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology.


Why We Need 12 Aircraft Carriers
To the Editor:
In "Too Many Costly Aircraft Carriers" (editorial, Aug. 21), you have once again fired a shot at the Navy's aircraft carrier fleet, and once again you have fallen short.
You argue that our nation can live with a smaller carrier fleet, that the Navy's view of the need for forward presence in the troubled regions of the world is outdated and that forward presence is no longer necessary.


Sabatini Struggles, But Graf Breezes
The pretenders got nowhere with the incumbents last night at the United States Open.
Top-seeded Steffi Graf, stunned into a rare smile by her racquet's refusal to strike any shot that didn't smack of perfection, decimated 13th-seed Mary Pierce, 6-1, 6-0, to reach her ninth consecutive Open quarterfinal.
But Graf's less-laureled contemporary, fifth-seeded Gabriela Sabatini, barely survived a prolonged scare from 17-year-old Lindsay Davenport and rallied for a 6-7 (1-7), 6-4, 6-4 victory that landed her in her seventh quarterfinal here at the tournament where she collected the sole Grand Slam title of her career in 1990.


Deal Seen For Renault And Volvo
Renault of France and Volvo of Sweden are expected to announce on Monday that they will merge, seeking to forge a combined operation strong enough to weather a deep downturn in the European automobile industry and intensifying worldwide competition.
Industry executives said that the two sides continued to meet today and that the long-rumored deal had yet to be completed.
But the companies scheduled a news conference for Monday afternoon at Renault's headquarters outside Paris.
Fourth Biggest in Europe
News reports from Stockholm and Paris said Renault, the much larger company, would have a 65 percent stake in the merged venture, to be known as Renault-Volvo Automotive.
Renault's chairman, Louis Schweitzer, would hold the title of executive chairman and wield primary control over the new company.
Volvo's chairman, Pehr G. Gyllenhammar, would become chairman of the supervisory board.


Laurel Appel, Michael Weir
Dr.
Laurel Frances Appel, the daughter of Kenneth and Carole Appel of Dover, N.H., was married yesterday to Dr.
Michael Peter Weir, a son of Dr.
Donald M. Weir of Edinburgh, Scotland, and Dr.
Sylvia E. Weir of Cambridge, Mass.
Rabbi Helaine Ettinger officiated at Clay Hill Farm, a restaurant in Ogunquit, Me.
The bride, who is keeping her name, graduated from Oberlin College and received a doctorate in genetics from the University of California at Berkeley.
Her father is chairman of the department of mathematics at the University of New Hampshire, in Durham.
Her mother recently retired as a senior editor and journals manager of the University of Illinois, in Urbana.


Rene Ray Dies at 81; Actress and a Writer
Rene Ray, an English actress and author who appeared on Broadway and in films, died on Tuesday on the British island of Jersey, where she lived, The Times of London reported last week.
She was 81.
Miss Ray became the Countess of Midleton in 1975, when she married the Earl of Midleton.
He died in 1979.


Chevy Chase's Many Rivals: Jay, Dave and the Local News
Is there any late-night audience left over for Chevy Chase?
Apparently so.
Even with the powerful first week's showing for David Letterman on CBS, the expectations for Mr.
Chase's premiere tomorrow night as a late-night comedy-talk host on the Fox network are rather high.


In the Council's Court
New York's City Council will begin earnest consideration tomorrow of a proposal to expand the present National Tennis Center in Flushing Meadows-Corona Park in Queens.
The U.S.
Open belongs in New York City and every effort should be made to keep it here.
That said, this is a huge and complicated transaction.
The actual lease has been available for study for only a few days.
The Council must therefore approach the deal in a genuinely agnostic spirit.
The two main questions are these: Does the deal represent a wise use of valuable public land?
And is it free of political logrolling?


Cynthia Lee, James Dow
Cynthia Lee, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Henry C. Lee of Manchester, Vt., was married there yesterday to James Patrick Dow, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
David S. Dow of Waco, Tex.
The Rev.
Richard Ringenwald performed the ceremony at the First Congregational Church.
Mr. and Mrs.
Dow, both 24, graduated from Cornell University.
She is a law student at Columbia University.
Her father is a private investor in Manchester.
Her mother, Phyllis Lee, is an artist.


Hostetler Stars in His Opening Act
Raiders 24, Vikings 7
Jeff Hostetler was terrific in his first game with the Los Angeles Raiders, leading them to a 24-7 victory yesterday, while Jim McMahon was terrible in his debut with the Minnesota Vikings.
Playing in the Coliseum in Los Angeles, Hostetler completed 14 of 15 passes for 150 yards and one touchdown in the first half to help the Raiders take a 21-0 lead.
Hostetler, who signed as a free agent with the Raiders during the off season after playing with the Giants for nine years, finished with 23 completions in 27 attempts for 225 yards while throwing just one interception.
Hostetler completed 15 straight passes at one stage.
He also ran for 34 yards on 8 carries to lead all rushers in the game.


Correction
A headline yesterday on the Political Notes column, on a dispute over a New Jersey campaign advertisement about gun control, misstated the sponsorship of the ad.
It was sponsored first by the Democratic Party and later by State Senator Walter Rand; Gov.
Jim Florio's campaign did not sponsor it.


Editorial Notebook; The View From Hoffa's Shoulders
"Wanna join the writers' union?" The scene was a writers' conference this spring in Amherst.
The questioner leaned in expectantly, enrollment forms at the ready.
But a "writers' union" seemed an oxymoron to me.
Writers are mavericks of an inner frontier; they work in solitude, sweating blood onto paper.
A union suggests squads of people, all laboring at the same task.
This image, I thought, had nothing to do with writing.


Aaron Wildavsky, A Budgeting Expert And Researcher, 63
Aaron Wildavsky, a political scientist who was an expert on the analysis of public policy and government budgeting, died Saturday at his home in Oakland, Calif.
He was 63.
The cause was lung cancer, said his son Adam.


Dead Heat: Yankees and Blue Jays Again Tied for First
Buck Showalter knows that there are times when a manager should give a little boost to a young player, an extra opportunity, a small show of confidence.
Those times do not come in a pennant race.


The Growing Lure and Profits of Fly-Fishing
As the morning mist nested in nearby trees, fly fishermen stood thigh-deep in the sun-warmed waters of the Beaverkill River here and cast their lines like gossamer lariats in search of the last trout of summer.
Near summer's end, most rivers -- including this one -- are low and fish are few.
But over the last year, the art of catching fish with willowy rods and artificial insects fashioned from feathers and thread has captured thousands of new anglers and converts, producing record sales for equipment manufacturers, retailers and organizers of fly-fishing schools and trips.
A Movie's Popularity
Many in the industry attribute their good fortune to the popularity of "A River Runs Through It," Robert Redford's recent film version of Norman Maclean's resonant memoir about family and fly-fishing in Montana.
Other industry experts point to the impact of advertisers who in recent years have used images of fly-fishing to sell products like cars, beer and boxer shorts.
Still others believe that a generation uneasy about hunting has seized on fly-fishing as a way to get back to nature while indulging a primordial urge.


Elisabeth Allen, Peter B. Holland
Elisabeth Martin Allen, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Nathan R. Allen Jr. of Greenwich, Conn., was married yesterday to Peter Bernard Holland, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Bernard J. Holland of Chevy Chase, Md.
The Rev.
Terrance Elsberry performed the ceremony at St.
Paul's Episcopal Church in Nantucket, Mass.
Mrs.
Holland, 27, is an account supervisor at J. Walter Thompson Direct, the direct marketing division of the advertising agency, in New York.
She graduated from Colgate University.
Her father is president of the Dellconn Oil Corporation in Greenwich.


BUSINESS DIGEST
MONDAY, SEPTEMBER 6, 1993  The Economy
The Administration's top economic advisers are considering the same types of measures to stimulate the economy that the Bush Administration used during the election campaign last year.
Stuck with a tight budget and uncertain economic prospects, the White House may speed up work on military contracts or ease regulations on Government lending, among other steps.
The White House hopes to provide small, concentrated doses of job stimulus for selected industries, groups of workers and regions -- California, in particular -- in the event that the economy stalls or job growth fails to pick up as expected.  [ Page 1. ]
As the Big Three negotiate a national labor contract with auto workers, the companies insist that workers chip in for health care benefits.
If there is a strike this year, union and company officials say health care is the issue that will provoke it.  [ 1. ]


Diana Athas and James Aspromonti
Diana Athas, a daughter of James Athas of Commack, L.I., and the late Julia Athas, was married there yesterday to James Aspromonti, a son of Robert and Patricia Aspromonti, also of Commack.
The Rev.
Sabbas Rodrigues performed the ceremony at Christ the King Roman Catholic Church.
Mrs.
Aspromonti is an accountant marketing specialist at Automatic Data Processing in Melville, L.I.
She graduated from the C. W. Post Campus of Long Island University.
Her father is on the newsroom staff at The New York Times.
Her mother was a beautician in Commack.


China Sees 'Market-Leninism' as Way to Future
Ever since the Opium War erupted 150 years ago, China has been groping for a way to regain the edge over the West that it enjoyed for most of recorded history.
Now, in the 1990's, China's leaders seem to think that they have found the Way.


Carla Freeman, Robert Goddard
Dr.
Carla Freeman, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Leo C. Freeman of West Chester, Pa., was married there yesterday to Robert Goddard, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Roger Goddard of Barbados, the West Indies.
Rabbi Patrice Heller performed the ceremony at the home of the bride's parents.
The bride, 32, is an instructor of anthropology at the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill.
She graduated from Bryn Mawr College and received a Ph.D. in anthropology from Temple University.


A New Season, a New Quarterback but Same Old Jets
For the first half of the season opener against Denver, it looked like, "Uh oh! Here we go again," for the Jets.
Everything that plagued them in their 4-12 season was back to haunt them again: turnovers, mistakes, falling behind quickly.
Today, the Jets had two turnovers on their first two possessions of the game, which resulted in 6 quick points for the Broncos.
Then, to close the half, the Jets' defense allowed Denver quarterback John Elway to run one of his patented one-minute touchdown drives to give the Broncos a 13-6 lead.
And it got worse in the third quarter, as the Jets fell behind, 26-6.


Mourning Music During Wartime


Lisa Montgomery, Paul Lazarow
Lisa Anne Elizabeth Montgomery, a daughter of Dr.
Edwin and Mary Jo Montgomery of Mequon, Wis., was married yesterday to Dr.
Paul Bernard Lazarow, a son of Jane L. Statten of Chevy Chase, Md., and the late Prof.
Arnold Lazarow.
Rabbi Charles Lippman and the Rev.
Louis Gioia, a Roman Catholic priest, jointly officiated at Prix Fixe, a restaurant in New York.
Mrs.
Lazarow is the assistant director of college counseling at the Trinity School in New York.
She and her husband graduated from the University of Chicago.


Carlton Wessel, Sarah Morgenthau
Sarah Elinor Morgenthau, an associate in the New York law firm of Curtis, Mallet-Prevost, Colt &amp; Mosle, was married yesterday to Carlton Edward Wessel, an assistant United States attorney in Newark.
Cantor Dan Rouss officiated at the home of the bride's parents, Mr. and Mrs.
Henry Morgenthau 3d, in Saunderstown, R.I.
The Rev.
Patrick O'Donovan, a Roman Catholic priest, took part in the ceremony.
Mr.
Wessel is a son of Patricia J. Wessel of Newton, N.J., and the late Dr.
Edward J. Wessel Jr.


Cynthia Miller, Michael Weiner
Cynthia Holly Miller, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Marvin Miller of Cleveland, was married there yesterday to Dr.
Michael Weiner, a son of Marjorie Kapelsohn DeStefano of Lawrenceville, N.J., and Mervyn Weiner of New York.
Cantor Rebecca Carmi, a sister of the bride, officiated at the Marriott Society Center Hotel.
Mrs.
Weiner, 28, is a circulation manager at Hanover Direct Inc., a mail-order company in Weehawken, N.J., and Hanover, Pa.
She and her husband graduated magna cum laude from Brown University.
She received a master's degree from the American Graduate School of International Management.


METRO DIGEST
ASBESTOS CLEANUP COMPANY SUSPENDED One of the five contractors hired for the crash program to remove asbestos from New York City schools has been suspended from additional cleanup work pending an investigation of the company's failure to disclose scores of environmental violations and fines on previous asbestos jobs.
The contractor, the Advanced Asbestos Removal Corporation, of Brooklyn, was told by the School Construction Authority that it would be given no new work until it explained why it had not disclosed a history of 49 violations and $149,500 in fines when it was given a $2 million contract last month.
Page 18.
BAPTISTS MARCH IN HARLEM In a prelude to the 113th annual convention of the National Baptist Convention U.S.A., to be held this week at Madison Square Garden, members of more than 50 Baptist congregations marched through Harlem in a protest against violence in black neighborhoods.
Page 18.


Miss McCallion, Mr. Ayoub
Michele McCallion, an associate in the private client services group at Goldman, Sachs &amp; Company, and Robert Mark Ayoub, a vice president in the firm's municipal bond department, both in New York, were married yesterday.
Msgr.
Hector Doueihi performed the Maronite Christian rite at Our Lady of Lebanon Cathedral in Brooklyn.
Mrs.
Ayoub, 29, is a daughter of Gerard A. McCallion of New York and Dolores McCallion of Howard Beach, Queens.
She graduated from Boston College and received a master's degree in management from Northwestern University.


Dinkins Drops by Queens On the Endorsement Trail
Mayor David N. Dinkins took his campaign to the far northeastern corner of Queens yesterday to pick up an endorsement and to try to sell himself to a somewhat skeptical crowd.
Mr.
Dinkins received the enthusiastic endorsement of Borough President Claire Shulman, speaking to a white, largely Jewish audience at the Deepdale Gardens Community Center Pool in Little Neck.
Ms.
Shulman said Mr.
Dinkins "has integrity, he has decency, he has honesty and he really cares about the people of this city."


Lisa Rae Fishbone, Neil A. Wallack
Lisa Rae Fishbone, the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Gerald Fishbone of New Haven, was married yesterday to Neil A. Wallack, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
Milton B. Wallack of Branford, Conn.
Rabbi Herbert A. Brockman performed the ceremony at Congregation Mishkan Israel in Hamden, Conn.
Mrs.
Fishbone Wallack plans to join the Boston law firm of Choate, Hall &amp; Stewart as an associate in October.
She graduated from the University of Pennsylvania and received her law degree from Yeshiva University.
Her father, a radiologist in New Haven, is a clinical associate professor of radiology at Yale University.
Her mother, Marilyn Fishbone, is a campaign assistant for the Jewish Federation of Greater New Haven.


S. L. Kaufman, 81; Lawyer Specialized In Shareholder Suits
Stanley L. Kaufman, a lawyer who specialized in bringing suits on behalf of corporations' disgruntled stockholders, died on Saturday at his home on the Upper East Side of Manhattan.
He was 81.
The cause was cancer of the liver, his family said.


2 Actresses to Read Russian Poets' Work
The Russian actress Alla Demidova and the American actress Marian Seldes will recite poetry by 20th-century Russian writers on Wednesday at 6 P.M. at Hudson River Park Pavilion in Battery Park City.
The free program will feature the poems of Anna Akhmatova, Boris Pasternak, Osip Mandelstam and Marina Tsvetayeva.
Miss Demidova, one of Russia's foremost stage and film actresses, presented a similar program in February with Claire Bloom at Symphony Space.
She will recite in Russian, and Ms.
Seldes will read in English.


Property Owners Can Challenge Sidewalk Violation Notices
To the Editor:
In response to "The Brooklyn Brownstone Bluestone Blues" (Op-Ed, Aug. 14), New York City property owners should know they have rights when faced with a sidewalk violation.
As a result of numerous horror stories in which property owners were forced to pay thousands of dollars for unnecessary sidewalk repairs that left their walkways in worse condition, I won enactment of reform legislation in August 1992.


Philip Cohen, Rebecca Kramnick
Rebecca Kramnick and Philip Cohen, associates at the New York law firm of Chadbourne &amp; Parke, were married yesterday in Ithaca, N.Y.
Rabbi Larry Edwards performed the ceremony at the Anabel Taylor Chapel on the campus of Cornell University.
Ms.
Kramnick, 28, is keeping her name.
She graduated magna cum laude from Harvard University and received a law degree from Cornell.
She is a daughter of Isaac Kramnick and Miriam Brody of Ithaca.
Her father is a professor of government at Cornell.
Her mother is a professor of writing at Ithaca College.


Somalis Work to Rebuild Their Country
To The Editor:
Michael Maren's "Good Will and Its Limits in Somalia" (Op-Ed, Aug. 27) is not an accurate reflection of the work being undertaken by CARE, the Cooperative for American Relief Everywhere, and other humanitarian agencies in Somalia.
It also does a disservice to the Somalis who are struggling to rebuild their country.


No Poison Gas on Chinese Ship
After an inspection certified that a Chinese freighter was not carrying chemical weapons ingredients, the vessel was allowed to go on.
Page 4.


World Economies


'Sorry We're Not Here, We're Out Celebrating'
Jim Abbott needs a new answering-machine tape. Donations are welcome.
After a quiet evening with his wife, Dana, at an Upper East Side restaurant, Abbott returned home Saturday night to discover that most of his friends -- and a few strangers -- had called to congratulate him on his first no-hitter.


Enjoying Labor Day Weekend to the Fullest . . . by Not Moving a Muscle


Heroes and Villains, Jones and Johnson, Cowboys and Skins
The Dallas Cowboys owner, Jerry Jones, and Coach Jimmy Johnson have made one of sports' most remarkable leaps from villains to heroes.
In 1989, when the two men took charge, both were severely criticized for the unceremonial dismissal of the Dallas coaching legend, Tom Landry.
After a 1-15 record in the first season, critics had a hearty laugh.
And the ridicule continued as the Cowboys wheeled and dealed in trades for draft picks and built a smaller, quicker team than the big, bruising types that inhabited the National Football Conference East.


CLINTON'S ADVISERS STUDY NEW MOVES TO SPUR ECONOMY
Stuck with a tight budget and uncertain economic prospects, top economic advisers in the Clinton Administration are eyeing the same types of measures to stimulate the economy that the Bush Administration used during the Presidential election campaign last year.
The measures on the drafting table, which, by and large, would not require Congressional approval, are being discussed by Labor Secretary Robert B. Reich; Laura D'Andrea Tyson, the head of the Council of Economic Advisers, and other high-level aides.
The plans include speeding work on military contracts or easing regulations on Government lending.


Textile Talks With China Stall Amid U.S. Warning
Two days of talks here have failed to make any progress toward a textile agreement that could cut an estimated $2 billion in Chinese exports to the United States.
On Saturday, Jennifer Hillman, chief textile negotiator for the Office of the United States Trade Representative, warned that without a trade agreement to replace the one that expires at the end of the year, the United States could unilaterally and substantially reduce quotas for Chinese textiles.


Zvereva Keeps Busy Around the Courts
Keeping up with Natalya Zvereva on the courts is tougher than tracking Tom Cruise or Alec Baldwin in the stands.
Zvereva advanced to the quarterfinals after beating Maria Jose Gaidano, 6-0, 6-2, yesterday morning on the Grandstand Court.
Then she raced over to Court 7 about two hours later to play in the mixed doubles quarterfinals with Mark Kratzmann.


Bitter Lessons in Bosnia's Makeshift Schools
At 10 o'clock sharp this morning, in a schoolroom set up in the kitchen of a shell-battered farmhouse within sight of Serbian sniper positions and artillery batteries, Adnan Ceric took on the sixth grade.
"I'm not afraid anymore," 12-year-old Adnan said as a nearby shell explosion ripped the air in Kobilja Glava, a front-line Sarajevo suburb that is one of the few areas of the city that still comes under daily artillery and heavy-machine-gun fire.
"I've gotten used to the shelling by now."


The End of Summer Is the Beginning of the Fall Campaign Season


Government Survey Finds Decline In a Building Block of Acid Rain
IN what is considered a significant payoff of the Federal Clean Air Act, researchers have found a "sharp signal" that pollution linked to acid rain is declining.
Concentrations of sulfates, key building blocks of acid rain, declined significantly in rainwater collected at 26 of 33 sites monitored from 1980 to 1991 by the United States Geological Survey.
Although data were collected in 18 states, most of the monitoring sites were in the eastern half of the country.


'National Dialogue' in Nicaragua Hits Obstacles
Plans for internationally supervised negotiations to end Nicaragua's political crisis foundered today as conservative leaders refused to join talks with the Government and the leftist Sandinista Front.
The planned "national dialogue" was to have begun this afternoon, and senior envoys from other Central American nations and the Secretary General of the Organization of American States, Joao Baena Soares, all arrived in Managua today to oversee it.


Books of The Times; Violence Among Privileged Youths
Smoked  A True Story About the Kids Next Door  By Leon Bing  289 pages.
HarperCollins. $22.
"Do or Die" (1991), the last book by the freelance journalist Leon Bing, gave readers a chilling portrait of the world inhabited by gang members in South-Central Los Angeles, a world in which an average of two youths a day wind up in the city morgue, a world in which 11-year-olds are experts at wielding guns, a world in which "payback killings" and "drive-by shootings" are part of everyday life.


Head of Biggest Gay Group in U.S. Quits 6 Months After Taking Job
Only six months after taking office, Torie Osborn announced over the weekend that she was resigning as head of the National Gay and Lesbian Task Force.
Ms.
Osborn, 43, who early in her tenure succeeded in brokering a meeting of various gay and lesbian groups with President Clinton, called the administrative demands of the job of leading the 32,000-member group unexpectedly burdensome.


Pollsters Enlist Psychologists In Quest for Unbiased Results
SHOULD laws be passed to eliminate all possibilities of special interests giving huge sums of money to candidates?
Or do groups have a right to contribute to the candidate they support?
The first question comes from a survey by Ross Perot last March; the second is part of a more neutral rephrasing of that question as asked by an independent polling concern.
When Mr.
Perot put the question his way, 99 percent of those responding answered "yes." But in the alternative form, 40 percent favored limits on contributions.


Thousands Flee Kenya Ethnic Strife
Renewed ethnic fighting in Kenya's richest farm region has caused thousands to flee their homes and has led to the arrest of opposition members, casting further doubt on the future of multi-party democracy as well as the resumption of suspended Western aid to this African nation, Western diplomats and human rights officials say.
In the worst ethnic violence since independence from Britain in 1963, more than 1,000 people have been killed and an estimated 150,000 to 200,000 made homeless in the last year and a half as violence has torn through the Rift Valley region, which includes 40 percent of Kenya's territory.
After a lull of several months, the fighting has flared again, causing a new flood of refugees into the area around Molo.
Charges Against Government
Opposition figures and the Roman Catholic Church, which has provided relief to the displaced, have accused President Daniel arap Moi's Government of promoting the fighting for political gain.
But Mr.
Moi and his ministers, who have long maintained that a multi-party system would lead to tribal clashes, have lashed back, accusing the United States of collusion with the opposition to destabilize Kenya.


Johnson &amp; Johnson Moves Assignment
Johnson &amp; Johnson has moved another assignment out of Young &amp; Rubicam New York, transferring the responsibilities for print media buying to Advanswers in St.
Louis, effective in January.
Advanswers has handled assignments for Johnson &amp; Johnson since 1974.
The shift was "made as an outgrowth" of an ongoing agency realignment, Johnson &amp; Johnson said last week in a statement.
The changes have resulted in Y.&amp; R. New York losing its creative assignments on company brands like Band-Aid and Shower to Shower.


A Big Struggle Over a Small Fry
The fierce bidding war for the El Paso Electric Company at first glance might seem like a big play for a relatively meager prize.
The small utility is operating under Federal bankruptcy protection, it continues to lose money and serves only 258,000 customers in El Paso; Las Cruces, N.M., and small farming communities along the Rio Grande.
But across the river lies a vast market for American utilities wanting to export electricity.
If the North American Free Trade Agreement takes effect, American utility companies will be able to build and operate independent power plants in Mexico, form joint ventures with Mexican businesses and sell even more wholesale electricity to a country hungry for power.


Accounts
*
Sunselect, the PC business unit of Sun Microsystems Inc., Chelmsford, Mass., to HHCC Direct, Boston, to handle its account, previously at PH Advertising, Concord, Mass.
Billings were estimated at $2.5 million. *
Murata Electronics North America Inc., Smyrna, Ga., to Donino &amp; Partners, Atlanta, to handle its account, previously at KSA Associates, Atlanta.
Billings were estimated at $2.5 million.


Corrections
A picture caption in Business Day yesterday about customers shopping for fishing equipment at Orvis Sporting Goods in Manhattan misidentified the store manager helping them.
He is Paul Dixon.


To a company that sells mutual funds, a return on its image is the goal of a new campaign.
A COMPANY that sells billions of dollars of mutual funds is about to begin advertising something it values even more highly: its name.
T.
Rowe Price Associates, the fourth-largest direct marketer of mutual funds in the country, is introducing its first corporate campaign intended to burnish its image rather than sell financial products.
The broadcast and print campaign, by McCaffrey &amp; McCall in New York, carries the company's long-running theme, "Invest with confidence."


New Sears Campaign Looks at 'Softer Side'
The big fall advertising blitz for Sears, Roebuck &amp; Company, with the daunting mission of improving the drab image of its clothing lines, will carry the theme, "Come see the softer side of Sears."
The broadcast and print campaign is being created by Young &amp; Rubicam New York.


Why Going Back to School Is Like Jet Lag; Faulty Comparison
To the Editor:
Your article on the lagging of American teacher salaries behind those elsewhere (Education page, Aug. 18) is deceptive.
All of the salaries have been blindly converted to a dollar standard, using current foreign exchange rates, without even mentioning how far these salaries might go in costs of living and tax burdens.


Marching to the Beat of a Different Drummer . . . West Indian


Housecleaning Time
Rewind the tape to Inauguration Day.
The nation's new chief executive seemed as impatient as his fellow citizens to begin to reclaim the nation's political system from the grip of rich special interests.
"Let us give this capital back to the people to whom it belongs," President Clinton thundered.
Fast forward now to last week.
There was David Gergen on national television rationalizing why Mr.
Clinton may not press House Democrats to pass a campaign-finance reform bill -- the essential centerpiece of any serious political overhaul.
There's a lot of resistance, Mr.
Gergen explained; Mr.
Clinton's fall legislative agenda is crowded.


Sour Old St. Nicholas Fed Up With Schourek
Mets jobs are being lost, not won.
Pete Schourek, for instance, has no friend in Manager Dallas Green, who could stomach only one inning from the pitcher today and then told reporters, "I'll give him to you for Christmas if you want."
But Schourek was only half of the problem today.
The matinee starting pitcher was Sid Fernandez, who was so afraid of stolen bases that he injured himself speeding up his delivery.
He left a one-run game after five innings because his throwing shoulder was tingling, which was the only reason Schourek even stood up in the bullpen.
Two Schourek walks and a Luis Gonzalez double later, the Mets were well on their way to a 7-2 defeat to the Astros.


Smiling and Relaxed, Giuliani Puts Polished Image Forward
In his 1989 campaign for Mayor, Rudolph W. Giuliani was a political rookie who struck many New Yorkers as both stiff and unpredictable, an unnerving mix for a man who wanted to lead the city.
Now a veteran, he is more relaxed and less defensive, dancing the two-step at a hoedown in SoHo, grinning without end through countless parades, and even, disarmingly, poking fun at himself.
As Mayor David N. Dinkins reeled in recent weeks from one crisis to another, Mr.
Giuliani offered a bit of advice that he could have used himself in his last bid for City Hall: "You know," he said, stopping just short of condescension, "the Mayor should really take some time out, cool out and relax a little bit." Learned the Hard Way
Is this mellow politician the same man whom hard-edged veterans of city politics dismissed in 1989 as not ready for prime time, a candidate visibly stunned in the klieg lights of his first campaign who screamed "shut up" at supporters as they booed the newly elected Mayor while Mr.
Giuliani was conceding defeat.


More Diversity Than Harmony at Religious Assembly
In a world where violent conflicts in dozens of nations are stoked by religious differences, it is easy to make the case for greater understanding among religious groups.
But the road to such harmony, as the organizers of a Parliament of the World's Religions discovered last week, is filled with pitfalls.
Even the word "God" can raise objections.
The parliament, which closed Saturday with an open-air address by the Dalai Lama, drew hundreds of religious dignitaries and more than 7,000 enthusiastic participants from around the world.
Most appeared to leave stimulated by the dizzying array of spiritual wares displayed in hundreds of lectures, meditation sessions and performances of ritual dance and music.


Death in South Africa Mustn't Kill Hope
To the Editor:
The brutal killing of Amy Biehl, the 26-year-old Fulbright scholar, in Guguletu Township, South Africa, on Aug. 25 can only be described as an immense tragedy for those who knew her and whose lives were touched by her.
I did not know Ms.
Biehl, but I grieve her loss because I imagine her brimming hopefulness for a new South Africa, transforming itself from a nation of brutal oppression and racism into a nation embracing the principles of democracy.


Two Down for 49ers
San Francisco's season-opening victory at Pittsburgh cost the 49ers two starters.
Fullback TOM RATHMAN has a separated right shoulder and defensive end KEVIN FAGAN has strained ligaments in his right knee and right shoulder.


Dividend Meetings
Following is a partial list of dividend meetings this week: TUESDAY  Cincinnati Bell Inc  CRI Liquidating Reit Inc  Crimi Mae Inc  Pope &amp; Talbot  Premier Indl Corp  Tri Contl Corp


The Assad Factor in the Mideast Talks
While the peace accord between Israel and the Palestinians appears to be moving ahead, American officials are worried that progress on this track cannot be sustained for long unless there is a breakthrough soon on the Syrian-Israeli track as well.
American officials say Syria is now their main preoccupation as they try to promote the breakthrough for peace in the Middle East.


No Headline
It's not an easy time to be an immigrant in this country, and it's not an easy time to be an Iraqi.
But these refugees were victims over there, and now they've become victims here. -- ELIZABETH UNDERHILL, executive director of the Dallas branch of the International Rescue Committee.  [ D10:2. ]


Bridge
The surviving American open team, U.S.A.
No. 2, began shakily in the semifinal of the Bermuda Bowl contest here this afternoon at the NEC World Championships.
They had the worst of a series of wild hands, and twice lost 17 imps in the first 10 deals.
After 26 deals of a scheduled 96 they trailed the Netherlands by 14 imps.
The team includes David Berkowitz, Larry Cohen, Sam Lev and Marty Bergen, all from the New York area, Cliff Russell of Miami and Eric Rodwell of Naperville, Ill.
In the other semifinal Norway led Brazil by 26.
In the Venice Cup contest for women's teams, the surviving American team led Argentina by 35 after 26 deals.
The players are Kerri Shuman Sanborn and Sue Picus, both of Manhattan, Karen McCallum of Boston, Sharon Osberg of San Francisco and Kay Schulle and Jill Meyers, both of Santa Monica, Calif.
In the other semifinal Sweden led Germany by 12.


In a Palestinian Center, A State Is Taking Shape
Who will police the new Palestine?
How will the garbage be collected, the potholes fixed, the electric power generated?
The mundane but critical details of a Palestinian future are being planned on a quiet East Jerusalem side street in a graceful old stone mansion, until recently closed and shuttered, that is fast taking on the trappings of a national capitol.


Experts Advise a Healthy Skepticism About Polls
THOSE who conduct opinion surveys say that too many people have become overly trusting of polls and that a guarded caution is warranted in interpreting them, especially as more groups with vested interests use their polling results to argue for their points of view.
"People should question the methods and meanings of polls," said Dr.
Kathleen Frankovic, a political scientist and director of surveys at CBS News.
"People should always, for example, find out who conducted the survey and who's publicizing it. You'd read results of a poll on gun control differently if it was conducted by the National Rifle Association or by a truly independent organization."


Review/Television; Digest's Lift Offered to Viewer, Too
The arrival of "Reader's Digest: On Television" may seem like carrying refried beans to El Paso, but so what?
Throughout its long and prosperous career, Reader's Digest has easily survived the scorn of a few for the heapings of human interest, health hints, instant inspiration and all-purpose advice that held the affections of so many.
Television, of course, has displaced magazines in hearts and minds around the world and given critics an even bigger target for their disdain.
So this evocation of the earlier mass merchandiser is a sort of pop hommage.
Tonight's sampling of Great Hits From America's Great Magazine is true to the Digest spirit.
Hal Linden is down-home avuncular and Robin Young is up-and-at-'em earnest as they introduce adaptations of popular pieces past with tested magazine blurbs.
Here's the table of contents:


Backed by Key Arab Nations, Arafat Seeks to Conclude Pact
All but assured that no Arab Government will stand in the way of his peace accord with Israel, Yasir Arafat, chairman of the P.L.O., arrived in Cairo today to wrestle with remaining differences on a draft agreement for limited Palestinian self-rule in the occupied territories.
In the last 24 hours, the six wealthy Arab oil governments of the Persian Gulf publicly endorsed the deal between Israel and the Palestine Liberation Organization, while President Hafez el-Assad of Syria grudgingly gave a green light to Mr.
Arafat to proceed with his initiative at his own risk.
Steps to Mutual Recognition
During a meeting lasting several hours in Damascus on Sunday, Mr.
Arafat failed to persuade Mr.
Assad to openly endorse the agreement, which already has the public backing of Jordan and Egypt.
Neither did the Syrian President oppose the deal, saying only that the Palestinians should decide for themselves what best suited them.


A Storefront Agency Aims at Smaller Jobs
Paul Cappelli, a former top executive at AC&amp; R Advertising and McCann-Erickson New York, is opening an agency that specializes in small to mid-sized accounts with annual budgets of up to $5 million.
Mr.
Cappelli is the chairman of the Ad Store, which will open on Oct. 1.
Bill Atherton, formerly at Earle Palmer Brown in Bethesda, Md., is the creative director, and Christine Poynter, formerly at AC&amp; R, is the office manager.


Corrections
An obituary on July 27 about Gen.
Matthew B. Ridgway incorrectly described two pistols that were a trademark of Gen.
George S. Patton. (The obituary compared General Patton's pistols to a hand grenade and a first-aid kit that General Ridgway habitually attached to his battle jacket.) General Patton's pistols had handles made of ivory, not pearl, and because they had different makers, they were not "twin." This correction was delayed by an editorial lapse.


For $8, a Trip to a Warehouse of Bargain Shopping
Few New Yorkers like to admit how often they flip through the Ikea catalogue each season, speculating, for instance, how great those inexpensive little lamps would look on their night stands.
But in a city where fewer people drive than recycle, the Hudson River and a lack of public transportation have long separated many New Yorkers from the huge warehouse of unassembled Swedish furniture and nonsensical papier-mache knickknacks.
So Vincent and Adrienne Hobant were jubilant when they read a newspaper advertisement last week that said Ikea would begin offering round-trip bus service, for $8, from three points in Manhattan to the Elizabeth, N.J., store on weekends.
Now they, too, could own an Aztec-patterned pull-out couch or a black halogen floor lamp.


Equity Issues This Week
The following equity and convertible debt offerings are expected this week:
Beverly Hills Gun Club Inc., Los Angeles, an initial public offering of 1 million units, each representing one share and one redeemable warrant.
American National Securities.


Editorial Notebook; Here Come the Westerners
Even the most seasoned travelers have trouble finding the true pulse of Eastern Europe these days.
Little wonder; it's ticking away under a rapidly growing layer of Western influences.
Kmarts, McDonald's and Benettons are all over the lot; there are five McDonald's in Prague alone.
For New Yorkers who hate to leave home, there's Young &amp; Rubicam, and a whole passel of White and Case lawyers.
In Budapest, the Manhattan restaurant owner George Lang runs Gundel, an eatery that Queen Elizabeth uses when she's in town.
And a group headed by Ronald Lauder, who ran for mayor of New York City in 1989, plans to start the first commercial TV channel in the Czech Republic early next year.


Microsoft Faces an Inquiry in Europe
The inquiry into the Microsoft Corporation's business practices has been extended to Europe.
Microsoft, the largest creator of software for personal computers, said yesterday that Novell Inc. had filed a complaint with the European Commission claiming unfair trading practices.


METRO DIGEST
ADVANCES FOR THE MENTALLY HANDICAPPED
Advocates for the retarded say that advances in technology, including switches that respond to eye or head movements, or even a smile or a breath, have the potential to revolutionize the care and education of the mentally handicapped, giving them a new independence and easing their transition into the community.
A1.
NEW YORK CITY


RESULTS PLUS
GOLF  Rookie Beats Mochrie  Helen Dobson, a 22-year-old Tour rookie from England, defeated Dottie Mochrie on the fifth playoff hole yesterday to win the L.P.G.A.
State Farm Rail Golf Classic in Springfield, Ill.
Both finished 54 holes at 13-under-par 203.
On the fifth playoff hole, Dobson won with a 20-foot birdie putt. (AP) QUARTER-HORSE RACING  A Classic Dash Dashes


Midsize I.B.M. Line Upgraded
I.B.M. will introduce more powerful minicomputers today in the company's latest effort to defend its profitable midsize computer business against increasing competition.
The three new models of the I.B.M.
AS-400 minicomputer will be up to 80 percent more powerful than the current machines.
The International Business Machines Corporation will also introduce new software and disk storage features to make the AS-400 better able to operate as a "server" -- a central machine feeding and collecting data to and from many work stations linked by a computer network.


Israelis Kill Arab Youth in Gaza Protest Over Peace Plan


Napoleon Invades Big Southern City
When Napoleon wanted to do something, he wanted to do it big.
In his swift rise to power at the end of the 18th century, the soldier turned emperor dazzled Europe with his taste for the ornate and monumental.
Short of stature but long on confidence, he dressed up traditional themes to suit himself, then declared them part of his legend.


Market Place; Municipal bond insurers bask in the glow of falling interest rates.
FALLING interest rates have created a warm feeling through the bond market that has spilled over to companies that specialize in insuring municipal bonds.
Shares of MBIA Inc. and Ambac Inc., the largest and third-largest companies respectively in the municipal bond insurance business, rose sharply Friday to close at their highest prices in a year.


Transactions
Baseball  American League
BOSTON RED SOX -- Recalled Greg Blosser and Jeff McNeely, outfielders, and John Flaherty, catcher, from Pawtucket of the International League.
Purchased the contract of Steve Lyons, infielder, from Pawtucket.
Activated Luis Rivera, infielder, from the 15-day disabled list.
DETROIT TIGERS -- Recalled Mike Gardiner, pitcher, from Toledo of the International League.


Supercomputers Update Leonardo, Redesigning the Parachute
FIVE HUNDRED years after Leonardo da Vinci sketched out a parachute and elucidated its principles, scientists are harnessing the most powerful computers on earth to probe the secrets of these air brakes so advanced versions can be made for tough new jobs in the 21st century.
The lowly parachute, it turns out, is a surprisingly complex object from the standpoint of aerodynamics.


Body of Marcos Is Flown Home to the Philippines
Four years after he died in exile in Hawaii, the body of former President Ferdinand E. Marcos arrived here this morning on board a chartered plane from Guam.
A mournful Imelda Marcos held back tears as a woman plaintively sang a traditional mourning song, "Our Signs and Cries are Endless." Several thousand of Mr.
Marcos's loyal friends and supporters cheered and sang "I Am a Filipino" as the plane landed.


Amid X's and O's, Birden Prefers to Be a Z
J.J. Birden is often the H receiver.
Sometimes he is the X.
He would simply love to play more Z.


INVESTMENT SOARS IN MUTUAL FUNDS, CAUSING CONCERNS
As millions of Americans pour money into mutual funds at a record rate -- nearly $1 billion a day -- concerns are growing that the funds are bringing new risk to the savings of many people and instability to the markets in which they invest.
A whole generation of savers, seeking alternatives to the 2 and 3 percent returns available at banks, is now being transformed into investors.
Since the start of the current bull market in stocks, at the end of 1990, more than $450 billion has poured into mutual funds -- which include stock, bond and money-market funds -- bringing their total assets to nearly $1.8 trillion.
First-Time Investors
But as the money mounts, so do the concerns.
In large part, people putting their money into mutual funds are middle-income and often first-time investors -- betting a larger part of their savings on increasingly uncertain and unstable markets.
One in every four American households invests in mutual funds and nearly half of all fund owners earn less than $50,000 a year.


Newest Chapter of Robin Hood: Sherwood Forest Was Dying
Sherwood Forest was dying around the time of Robin Hood, an analysis of growth rings in old timbers has shown.
Dr.
Robert Laxton, a scientist at the University of Nottingham who studies clues to past events in trees' growth rings, said poor conservation by medieval English kings was to blame, not just bandits stealing from the rich to give to the poor.


Admiral Louis Gillies, Militia Commander, 90
Louis Archibald Gillies, a retired rear admiral who commanded the New York Naval Militia until he retired in 1962 after 42 years of service, died on Aug. 31 in Warwick, R.I.
He was 90 years old.
He had suffered a brief illness, his family said.


Released Muslim Prisoners Report Abuses at Bosnian Croat Camps
Muslim prisoners released last week from Bosnian Croat prison camps have told United Nations investigators that they suffered random shootings and beatings and were forced to live for extended periods with little water and food, a United Nations official said here tonight.
The United Nations official, Ray Wilkinson, gave excerpts from the official report of a United Nations investigator, Kirsten Young, who interviewed released prisoners in the Muslim-controlled town of Jablanica over the last week.
Mr.
Wilkinson is spokesman in Sarajevo for the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees.


S. L. Kaufman Dies; Lawyer, 81 Focused on Stockholder Suits
Stanley L. Kaufman, a lawyer who specialized in bringing suits on behalf of corporations' disgruntled stockholders, died on Saturday at his home on the Upper East Side of Manhattan.
He was 81.
The cause was cancer of the liver, his family said.


Reports of Summer's End May Be Greatly Exaggerated


INSIDE
Nigerian Strike Ends
Oil employees returned to work 10 days after bringing the country to a halt, but with their major demand unsatisfied.
Page A3.
Evolutionary Explosion
All the major animal groups still on earth arose in an astonishingly short time from the primordial seas, scientists say.
Science Times, page C1.
Mining at the Landfill
While most cities are struggling to recycle trash, Lancaster, Pa., has decided to mine its garbage and burn it to create electricity.
Page A14.
Lessons of War
Tension on the first day of school is universal, but Sarajevo pupils headed for makeshift classrooms accompanied by the sound of shells.
Page A8.
Baptists Meet in New York
The nation's largest black religious group gathers in New York City this week with a message of self-empowerment for black America.
Page B1.


Medicare Ruling Favors New York Over New Jersey
Instead of the usual highly publicized competition between New York and New Jersey to lure sports teams and corporate headquarters, this summer's border war was played out stealthily and in Washington.
New Jersey lost.


'Abortionist' Carries A Charged Meaning
To the Editor:
The use of the word "abortionist" in the headline of your Aug. 21 report on the return to work of Dr.
George Tiller, who was shot and wounded outside his clinic two days earlier, was highly offensive to many physicians such as myself who provide abortion services.


Ultimatum? Not Me
BARRY FOSTER 's agent has denied a CBS-TV report that the running back won't play Sunday against the Los Angeles Rams if he doesn't get a contract extension by Friday.
"Barry wants a contract done by Friday," the agent, JORDAN WOY , told the Pittsburgh Post-Gazette.
"But we never said he won't play."


African Official Seeks Help on Drug Detection
Africa and other developing regions are becoming fertile grounds for doping because of a lack of commitment and resources, South Africa's top Olympic official said yesterday.
"The approach to the fight against drugs in developing countries is a relatively lackadaisical one," SAM RAMSAMY said in London at the Permanent World Conference on Anti-Doping in Sport.
Ramsamy, head of the South African national Olympic committee, said Africa lacks a single internationally recognized drug-testing laboratory and that anti-doping educational programs are virtually nonexistent.


Big Funds Giving China A First Look
The rainmakers are coming to China, and Philip A. Schaefer is one of them.
"That's what I do," he said.
"I make rain."
So he has no apologies for his breathlessness in announcing to a reporter over the phone: "We're coming to town with $500 billion in municipal and corporate pension funds, and I am just so excited. This is the first public pension fund conference ever in China."


Suburban Farmers Find A Bit of Room to Grow
CLIFF SOERGEL and Andy Binder shook their heads as they gazed upon the neglected garden plot under the weeping willow tree.
For years it had been lovingly tended by an old hand in the Huntington Organic Gardens, Luella Horn, a magician at making things grow in the shade.
But now the plot, one of 350 individually cultivated flower and vegetable patches in the sprawling community garden on Dunlop Road, was overrun by chin-high weeds.
Mrs.
Horn had died last year, they explained, and no one had taken her place in the garden.
And as far as the two were concerned, no one ever could.


Alan Hevesi for Comptroller
The Democratic primary contest for Comptroller of New York City pits two challengers against the one-term incumbent, Elizabeth Holtzman.
Herman Badillo, who also has the Liberal and Republican designations, decided to try for Comptroller after his mayoral race flagged.
State Assemblyman Alan Hevesi is running again after seeking the job four years ago and losing to Ms.
Holtzman.
We endorsed Mr.
Hevesi then, and endorse him again this year, as the best Democratic choice to go on to a general election that will include Mr.
Badillo and the Conservative Howard Lim Jr.


Why Going Back to School Is Like Jet Lag; Teacher Salaries
To the Editor:
"Teachers in U.S. Trail Those Elsewhere in Pay" (Education page, Aug. 18) compares teachers with other white-collar professionals as if they all put in the same number of working days a year.


Settling Syria's Share
The United States and Israel are trying to entice Syria to join the peace bandwagon without promising too much.
News analysis, page A12.


Biology's 'Big Bang' Took A Mere Blink of the Eye
A LITTLE more than 500 million years ago, the primordial seas played host to a spectacular event that shaped the rest of the history of life on earth.
There in the ancient waters of the Cambrian period, evolution had what biologists call its big bang: an explosive radiation of life forms in which nearly all the major animal groups now on earth and others long since extinct first appeared.
Believed to have occurred over 20 million to 30 million years, a blink of an eye in paleontological terms, this evolutionary explosion and its diversity of life forms were considered a biological marvel, an example of a time when evolution more than excelled in the rapid production of vastly different creatures.
And now, in a report published in the current issue of Science, scientists say this momentous event probably lasted no more than five million years and may even have taken as few as one million years, in either case a breathtakingly short period.


By Design; Grannymania
The granny dress was surely the success story of the summer.
And there is more to come for fall.
The next logical step is the return of granny boots.
The foot-hugging, laced-front boots worn by women in the early 20th century and revived in the 1970's are having yet another revival.
But they're meant to be worn with more than just granny dresses.
Check the fall catalogues from stores like Bloomingdale's and Neiman-Marcus and you'll see the boots worn with long skirts, wide-legged pants and leggings.


On Baltic Tour, Pope Reaches Out to the Eastern Orthodox Church
After nine centuries of division between Moscow and Rome, Pope John Paul II has struck conciliatory tones toward the Eastern Orthodox Church, pursuing a long desire to visit Moscow and crown his cold war crusade against Communism.
The Pope's visit to Lithuania, Latvia and Estonia this week is the first he has made to a former Soviet domain since Communism's collapse.
His utterances, depicting societies and people barely able to recover from decades of what he called "iron dictatorship," reflect his vision of a profound malaise stretching across Moscow's former empire.


Churches Increasingly Join the Concert World
Last year, the conductor Jens Nygaard disbanded his Jupiter Symphony concerts because the cost of presenting them far exceeded the money he could raise for them.
But a few months ago, Mr.
Nygaard's series was revived with help from Christ and St.
Stephen's Church, near Lincoln Center, which let him use its sanctuary as his concert hall for a fraction of the cost of Alice Tully Hall, the orchestra's former home.
When the first concerts sold out, the church let Mr.
Nygaard add a second series.
Across town, at the Church of St.
Ignatius Loyola on the Upper East Side, and in Greenwich Village at the Church of the Ascension, new series of choral concerts have sprung up because the churches' music directors wanted to show off their choirs to the public.
And at Corpus Christi Church in Morningside Heights, at St.
Paul's Chapel near Wall Street and at the Church of St.
Mary the Virgin near Times Square, ensembles of international stature are regularly presented.


Technology Revolution Reaches the Retarded
Eric W., a severely retarded 9-year-old, moved his head slightly to touch the blue rubber switch attached to his wheelchair.
By tapping it lightly, he was able to move the jumping frog on the computer screen in front of him -- and enter a world that had been closed to him until a few months ago.
Before he began working with computer equipment at Ferncliff Manor, a school and residence here for retarded children, Eric was not able to communicate even his most basic desires; his only consistent voluntary movement is shaking his head.
But now, aided by technology specifically designed to help people with mental retardation, Eric has learned to use that movement to tell staff members, who asked that his full name not be used, that he would like to go outside, get a drink of water or listen to music.


New Season: Redskins Rip Cowboys
If there is to be a new order in the Eastern Division of the National Conference this season, look no further than tonight's grudge match here at Robert F. Kennedy Stadium, where the Washington Redskins got the last hit on the Dallas Cowboys and the most decisive ones all night long.
Washington dumped Dallas, 35-16, before 56,345 fans and a national television audience and did it with authority.
Dallas made a bushel of mistakes: dropped punts, costly penalties, and too many mental errors that helped Richie Petitbon win his head coaching debut.


Washington at Work; For a Bruising Battle, Clinton Enlists a Daley
If the Clinton Administration ever needed to call on the deep magic of the Democratic Party, it needs to now, as it teeters on the brink of an internecine struggle over the North American Free Trade Agreement.
"New Democrats" are all well and good when it comes to policy making, but when it comes to negotiating the minefields of internal Democratic politics -- the angry Lane Kirklands who say the treaty will cost American jobs, the clamoring environmentalists, the jittery House members -- the accumulated knowledge of the "old Democrats" has its place.
And so the Administration has brought in a Daley from Chicago and handed him one of the messiest chores of this or any political season.


Leonard Bocour, 80, Paint Manufacturer
Leonard Bocour, an artist and paint manufacturer involved in the vogue of acrylic painting that swept modern art in the 1960's, died yesterday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 80.
The cause was heart failure after a lengthy illness, his family said.


Defending the Nonprofit Motive; Tenants Decry Sale of Troubled Buildings to Private Owners
Maria Fernandez wants control.
The open door to her building at 2312 Loring Place North in the Bronx constantly reminds her how out-of-kilter things have become: drug users slip up to the roof at night, leaving behind trashed mailboxes and strewing garbage and human waste under stairwells.
Inside her apartment, brown spots dot the living-room ceiling from a steam leak last winter, cheaply made doors are falling apart and leaks plague the bathroom.


The Brave New World Of Games
THE spreadsheet calculates last month's expense account in two blinks of an eye.
The modem zips a report halfway around the world at 9,600 bits a second and sends faxes without requiring a printout.
The graphics program creates a presentation in the morning before a noon meeting.
These uses are on the leading edge of computer technology, right?
Wrong.
Games are on the leading edge, and as a category they outsell all other computer applications.


Low-Income New Yorkers to Have Day Care
To the Editor:
"Capital for Human Services" Op-Ed, Aug. 23) by Senator Carol Moseley-Braun provides recognition of the role public-private partnerships play in providing nonprofit child care to low-income families, primarily in the Midwest. New Yorkers should know that similar alliances among community leaders, government and the private sector are flourishing to the benefit of this city's children.


Flipped Out Is Acceptable. At Wigstock, Any Style Is.


Markets Closed
All financial and commodity markets in the United States were closed yesterday for the Labor Day holiday, as were government offices, banks and most businesses.
An article about foreign trading appears on page D4.


Champion Paralyzed
The world motorcycle champion, WAYNE RAINEY of the United States, is paralyzed from the waist down as a result of a crash during the Italian Grand Prix Sunday, a doctor said yesterday.
Rainey, 32, of Los Angeles, sustained spinal and abdominal trauma in the crash, Dr.
DORIANO ZAPPI said from the northern Italian city of Cesena.
Zappi could not say whether the paralysis would be permanent.  (AP)


Why Going Back to School Is Like Jet Lag
To the Editor:
In the next weeks a major segment of our population will be suffering from an indisposition that most resembles the jet lag in a trip from New York to Berlin.
These people will be getting insufficient sleep at night.
They will be grouchy and inattentive during the day.
Performance will suffer, and family interpersonal conflicts will develop.


The War on Arab Intellectuals
Alongside justifiable outrage against the Iranian death sentence pronounced on the writer Salman Rushdie, there has been a deafening silence in response to the dirty new war on Arab intellectuals.
It is a more serious threat to hopes for a liberal, peaceable world than the bombing in New York, and there have already been more people killed.
Mr.
Rushdie has been made the symbol of the right to free expression of writers everywhere.


CHRONICLE
The war in the former Yugoslavia is drawing further offers of help for its victims.
VANESSA REDGRAVE, the British actress, arrived in Macedonia yesterday, Reuters reported, and met with leading actors and musicians to organize a series of concerts for suffering children.


CHRONICLE
SHEILA RAUCH KENNEDY has brought new attention to a sensitive subject for the Roman Catholic Church by saying she will fight an annulment petition by her divorced husband, Representative JOSEPH P. KENNEDY 2d, Democrat of Massachusetts, according to The Associated Press.
Without an annulment, Catholics cannot remarry and remain in good standing in the church.


Asbestos and Schools: In Crisis, Opportunity
Amid crisis, there is opportunity.
And the school system's crash program of asbestos inspection and removal, which has delayed the start of school, is no different.
Never mind the boost to the economy of the $40 million or so the city will pay laboratories, asbestos inspectors and work crews to clean up the mess.


Bergen Wary Of Shopping On Sundays
If voters decide to repeal Bergen County's 34-year-old ban on Sunday shopping, there's no trick to predicting the most obvious result: highways will be awash in cars for seven days instead of six as shopping centers and strip malls fill with customers.
But the future of Sundays on Main Street in dozens of the county's 70 towns is much harder to foresee.
Will these downtown merchants -- many began business in a mall-less America, when Sunday was for Sabbath observance only -- remain steadfast and stay closed on Sundays?
Or will they bow to pressure from the shopping centers and from merchants in neighboring towns by opening up a seventh day?


Owners Circle Bases Without Ever Scoring
Everything apparently is not as it seems off the field in baseball. Or is it?
*The major leagues have not had a commissioner for precisely a year -- Fay Vincent resigned a year ago today -- and none appears in sight, but the owners say they're getting closer to naming one.


Finding Gold, of a Sort, in Landfills
While most cities are still struggling to recycle today's trash, officials here have taken a novel approach to the waste problem -- they are mining yesterday's garbage.
At a municipal landfill nestled in rolling farmland along the Susquehanna River about 10 miles west of here, the detritus that is dug up helps feed a nearby incinerator that supplies electricity for more than 15,000 homes.


Schossberg Joins Race for Top Colt
If the king of the 3-year-old colts is going to make a dramatic arrival in the second half of the racing season, he had better hurry because new pretenders are staking claims in almost every major race.
And a sleek new pretender appeared yesterday at Belmont Park when the Canadian star Schossberg won the 124th running of the Jerome Handicap by the length of his head over Williamstown.
And they were not alone at the finish.
Williamstown's stablemate Mi Cielo finished half a length back, and the favorite, Allen Jerkens's Virginia Rapids, was another half a length back.
So, four horses were bunched within one length or so in a photo finish that kept everybody's chances alive for the final three months of the search for a king of the 3-year-olds.


In Wheelchairs and on Crutches, Some Disabled Protest a Telethon
As an actor, Henry Holden plays clowns, hustlers, seedy desk clerks.
He is proud to note that the roles have nothing to do with the fact that he walks on crutches as a result of polio.
But when Jerry Lewis's Labor Day telethon rolls around, Mr.
Holden said, it is like a return to the Dark Ages for him.
Mr.
Holden said he was certain that he gets looked at differently, piteously, in the days after the telethon.
"How are you going to employ somebody if you have just cried about them?" said Mr.
Holden, 45, supporting himself on hot-pink crutches.
"It depresses and enrages me."


With the Jets, the Hurry-Up Will Just Have to Wait
Jets quarterback Boomer Esiason eases into the two-minute offense as comfortably as he slips into a favorite pair of old sneakers.
He seems to flourish in its hectic pace, which has the same feel as the no-huddle offense that he ran for years as the quarterback of the Cincinnati Bengals.
Operating from the two-minute offense for the last 16 minutes 34 seconds of the Jets' 26-20 loss to Denver on Sunday, Esiason completed 22 of 27 passes for 231 yards and two touchdowns and brought the Jets back from a 26-6 deficit.
But there were two other fourth-quarter drives that stumbled inside the Denver 20 or else he might have been able to complete the comeback.


Q&amp;A
Ear Pressure
Q.
Why do my ears seem to hurt more on a plane when it is landing than when it is taking off?


For the Settlers in Gaza, 'Total Shock'
Roberta Bienenfeld remembers a pang of stunned disbelief at hearing that Israel had agreed to withdraw from areas north of this settlement and turn them over to Palestinian self-rule.
"It was a total shock," she said.
"In our worst nightmares we didn't think the Government would do such a thing, and that the Arabs would accept it."


Navratilova Ambushed Anew by an Old Rival
The nemesis was a mountain that defied lobbing, with a return of serve so low it struck her foe's sneakers like a punch.
She was the perpetrator of several of the most disappointing moments in a tennis lifetime that has spanned the decades and still shows no signs of fading away.
Helena Sukova, however familiar, was a nemesis Martina Navratilova thoroughly failed to handle yesterday in their fourth-round match at the United States Open.
Sukova, seeded 12th and unintimidated by her 4-25 record against the third-seeded Navratilova, coolly eliminated the Open's four-time champion and sentimental favorite in straight sets, 7-5, 6-4.


PRESIDENT TAKES PLANS TO VOTERS
His Administration under strain and his leadership questioned over his efforts to advance several sweeping and disparate initiatives simultaneously this fall, President Clinton opened a public relations campaign today to portray the diverse aims as interlocking parts of one grand plan.
"In the next few weeks, you're going to see the Congress deal with an enormous number of issues, but they all have one thing in common," the President said here in a brief speech that was styled and delivered like a campaign address.
"We've got to deal with them to pull our country together and move our country forward."


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
Concerns are growing that mutual funds are bringing new risk to the savings of many people and instability to the markets in which they invest.
Millions of Americans are pouring money into the funds at a record rate -- nearly $1 billion a day.
On Wall Street, worry is building that mutual funds have become the gorilla of the stock market.  [ Page A1. ]
Lancaster, Pa., has taken a novel approach to the waste problem -- mining yesterday's garbage as fuel for an incinerator that supplies electricity for more than 15,000 homes.
Landfill space once crammed with garbage is now available for trash that cannot be recycled or burned.  [ A14. ]


Sports of The Times; 'Lucky Loser' Leaves Open With a Smile
WHAT with all the players griping about the United States Open, I was wondering if maybe there was just one happy player among the assorted racquet-bearing monomaniacs and misanthropes and sociopaths at Flushing Meadows.
I had had quite enough of players moaning about "poison" spaghetti the way Andrei Medvedev did, or saying they can only stand one week in New York the way Jana Novotna did.
I just wanted to find somebody who was happy to be there.
I found her.


Observer; The Big Sizing Down
If your ambition is to be fired, this is a great time to be an American.
Most of the big companies -- Eastman Kodak, I.B.M., Procter &amp; Gamble and lots more -- are firing as though unemployment is going to be the biggest thing since Madman Muntz brought television to the American parlor.


On My Mind; Crime of the Hasidim
My my, how exquisitely tender and protective some New Yorkers are becoming about the majesty and dignity of mayoral office -- and how suddenly and selectively.
Two of the city's four newspapers, The News and The Times, editorially slap around the lawyer for Crown Heights Hasidim who are bringing a civil rights suit.
The editorialists are annoyed with the lawyer, and by implication his clients, for probing with such pesky persistence into the actions, inactions and mindset of Mayor David Dinkins during those riots.


New Catalogue Company Banks on House of Windsor
As a prospective brand name, the House of Windsor might seem a bit tarnished, what with the late unpleasantness about Charles and Di, Andy and Fergie, the Queen's taxes and so forth.
But a new British-American company is convinced that at least to consumers in the United States, the royal family is still synonymous with class and quality.
Later this month the company will introduce the House of Windsor Collection, a catalogue to be distributed in the United States through which it will offer British glassware, picture frames, jewelry, knick-knacks and the like, at prices ranging from $50 to several thousand dollars.
All the merchandise will be made by holders of the Royal Warrant, a designation indicating that members of the royal family consider the manufacturers to be the best in their field in Britain.


Brett Sets a Date
GEORGE BRETT , who turned 40 this season, said yesterday he would decide by Sept. 24 -- the day the Royals begin their last homestand -- whether he will return next season.


Let's Follow Europe On Highway Signs
To the Editor:
The inability to find Interstate 95 was the root of the carjacking nightmare of Jenny and Gonzalo Cordero, the assaulted Connecticut couple about whom you report Aug. 24.
The lack of adequate road signs everywhere in this country is indeed a nightmare.
The agencies responsible for our roads are habitually guilty of inadequate planning for sign design, placement and maintenance.


Black Baptists Gather to Rally the Faithful Against Social Ills
The nation's largest black religious organization will gather in New York City this week, filling the halls of Madison Square Garden with song and sermon and proclaiming a message of self-empowerment that its leaders hope will filter throughout black America.
Up to 50,000 members of the National Baptist Convention, USA Inc., are expected to attend the 113th annual gathering, which starting tomorrow will bring together ministers, ushers and others among the faithful for five days of communion and celebration.
National Baptist officials expect the meeting to be one of the biggest in the group's history.
By comparison, the Democratic National Convention last year drew 20,000 participants.


William A. Raidy; Theater Critic, 70
William A. Raidy, a Broadway and Off-Broadway theater critic for the Newhouse News Service and The Star-Ledger, died on Saturday at New York University Medical Center.
He was 70 and lived in Manhattan.
The cause was congestive heart failure, said Fred Koven, a friend.


Nigerian Union Of Oil Workers Suspends Strike
Leaders of the Nigerian oil workers' union today suspended their 10-day-old strike, which has paralyzed factories and businesses across Africa's most populous nation.
But the Government did not give in to the main worker demand, which was to publish the results of last June's presidential elections, which were annulled by the former military leader, Gen.
Ibrahim Babangida.


It's as Plain as the Screen in Front of Your Nose
FOR all the talk about RAM's and ROM's and CPU's and MHz's and other computer-related TLA's (three-letter acronyms), the VDT -- video display terminal -- is one component that cannot be overlooked.
The VDT, commonly called the monitor or the display, is in the user's face all day.
There is no way to know what is going on inside the computer without looking at a monitor.
An inferior or malfunctioning monitor can make the computing experience unpleasant, and in some cases create health problems.


Patterns
Grunge: What Happened?
Winning an MTV award in the hard-rock category last week, Pearl Jam took the opportunity to poke at a catchall music classification that has become a cliche: grunge.
The same fatigue with the term has occurred as it applies to fashion.
One runs the risk of sounding like a bad pop song, but the vilification of grunge fashion leaves one question unanswered: How could something that seemed so right have gone so wrong?
It's a question the garment industry needs to answer, to avoid letting it happen again.
Finally, something in the American market garnered attention internationally.
And it was deemed dead almost as quickly as it was co-opted.


China Riddle: Life Improves Though Repression Persists
What is intellectually irksome about China, for anyone who values human rights, is that a Communist Party that is often brutally repressive should be so stunningly successful in raising living standards.
The party torments many of the nation's bravest and boldest thinkers, sometimes locking them up in insane asylums or imprisoning them with criminals suffering from infectious diseases.
Yet at the same time, the party is presiding over one of the greatest increases in living standards in the history of the world.


Opportunity Knocks, but Yankees Don't Answer
It could have been a night to remember.
It could have been the night that the Yankees finally crept into first place.
Alone.
No more ties.
It could have been the night for the Yankees to make the Blue Jays stare up at them for at least one day.
Scott Kamieniecki knew the circumstances before he strolled to the mound tonight, but the Rangers did, too, and they have a pennant chase in the West that is slipping away from them.
Once the game started, the Yankees hardly had an hour to dream about being in first because the Rangers pounded Kamieniecki for 6 runs in three innings and went on to grab an 8-5 victory at Arlington Stadium.


CHRONICLE
Some down-to-earth prizes were awarded yesterday for the best in science fiction writing, and the top honors were shared by a mathematician and a veteran novelist.
The 1993 Hugo Awards, for Achievement in Science Fiction and Fantasy, went to "A Fire Upon the Deep" by VERNON VINGE and "Doomsday Book" by CONNIE WILLIS.


John Malkovich, Chameleon Actor, Changes Again
John Malkovich rarely goes to see his film performances, with the exception of "In the Line of Fire."
"I get so sick of my films being ruined," Mr.
Malkovich said.
"I've been doing plays for 20 years or so and I never needed any editing help. I never needed help getting a laugh and scaring people."


Congress Facing Heavy Schedule Of Tough Issues
Congress will return from vacation on Tuesday to confront the heaviest variety of complex legislative issues it has faced in many years, while hoping to improve its standing with the public by seeking solutions to the nation's toughest problems.
None of this fall's issues may prove to be as challenging as the budget bill, which barely passed in both houses last month.
But the vote on the North American Free Trade Agreement may be as close, and the health care overhaul may be even more complicated, even though both may well attract a level of bipartisan cooperation all but unseen in the 103d Congress.
Heavy Fall Schedule
The scope of the agenda awes many lawmakers.
Even without health and trade, Congress will have a heavy fall schedule with commitments to act on these issues:


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-13 ARAFAT IS GAINING SUPPORT
With six Persian Gulf nations supporting the Israeli-P.L.O. plan, Yasir Arafat went to Cairo to work out remaining differences on a draft accord for limited Palestinian self-rule in the occupied territories.
A1


Human Nose May Hold An Additional Organ For a Real Sixth Sense
IT appears that humans, like most animals, may exude a copious cloud of odorless chemicals called pheromones that send meaningful signals to other humans.
If research now under way pans out, it signifies the discovery of a cryptic sensory system that exists without conscious awareness yet may influence fundamental human behaviors involving sexual reproduction and the ability to discriminate between individuals.
Unfortunately, release of the research is complicated by commercial concerns.
Dr.
David Berliner, a medical doctor and anatomist who now runs a private biotechnology company, contends that he has isolated pheromones from human skin cells.
But to the frustration of scientists who want to get their hands on the pheromones for basic research, he is keeping their identity and structure secret until patents are granted for their use in scents and pharmaceuticals, which he expects to happen early next year.
He has announced plans to market a perfume containing them as a secret ingredient.


Car Driven by Hasid Hurts Black Woman In Crown Hts. Crash
A car driven by a Hasidic man struck and injured a black woman pedestrian last night in Crown Heights, Brooklyn, where disturbances erupted two years ago after a fatal auto accident.
Police officers quickly filled the street to calm an angry crowd, the police and witnesses said last night.
Bottles were thrown at the driver and police officers, but no other violence was reported, the police said.
The only reported injury was to the pedestrian, whom the police identified as Antoine Chemene, 53 years old.
She was taken to Kings County Medical Center and treated for a broken leg.
She was expected to be released today.


Hey, Guys, It's Time To Share The Loss
If you've been watching Yankees games on WPIX-TV, you've seen the nostalgic promotions extolling the 43-year link between the team and Channel 11.
A more apt promo would be: "We'll Do 44 if We're Guaranteed a Profit."
The MSG Network's $486 million Yankees cable deal lets it control all games.
Since 1991, MSG has spent $5 million a year to buy time on WPIX to televise 50 games while keeping 100 on cable.
Under the deal, MSG sells the advertising for its own games and those of WPIX.


Climate Clues From Antarctic Ice
RUSSIAN scientists drilling deep into the Antarctic ice sheet have reached a depth of 8,694 feet, sampling ice formed from snow that fell near the South Pole 270,000 to 280,000 years ago.
More than a half mile of ice and samples of snow, dust and atmosphere more than 500,000 years old remain before they reach bedrock.
The Antarctic samples are being compared with those from two similar holes drilled to bedrock from the crest of the Greenland ice sheet by American and European teams.
The deepest ice there is thought to be 250,000 years old.


Iraqi Rebels Seek Refuge in U.S. And Find Themselves in Crossfire
Taha A. deserted the Iraqi Army during the invasion of Kuwait and was sentenced to death for helping Kuwaiti families go into hiding, according to the execution warrant he keeps as a macabre memento.
He escaped into Saudi Arabia, where he spent two and a half years in what he calls the "desert hell" of a refugee camp.
So when the 30-year-old ex-soldier stepped off an airplane here this summer and started work as a check-out clerk at a 7-Eleven convenience store, things seemed to be looking up.
At least until one recent day, when he noticed two customers gesturing toward him and heard one of them grumbling about the "stinking enemy."  Furor Over Benefits
As he resettles here at the American Government's expense and under terms of a 1975 refugee-protection law, Taha is just one of hundreds of former Iraqi soldiers who find themselves in the crossfire of an increasingly bitter debate over whether they should have been allowed in this country at all.
Taha A. and the other Iraqis interviewed asked that they not be fully identified because they fear that Iraqi agents may come after them in their new homes and they are worried about the safety of their family still in Iraq.


Lace Up: Ice Is for More Than Highballs Now
Hockey fans are sick of it, just fed up with all of it: The bench-clearing brawls; the gratuitous violence that mars the game; the endless strife between labor and management; the bitter haggling among team owners over control of the business, and the continuing confusion over television policy.
Thank goodness the baseball season is almost over, hockey fans say, and they can return to the relative peace and stability of their winter game.
While the pennant races conclude and football begins its regular autumn season, hockey sneaks quietly in the back door this week, with players reporting to training camps to prepare for a regular season that starts in early October and is followed by a playoff tournament that ends in mid-June.
No season in any sport goes so long, not even baseball.


Dinkins Renews Ties With Black Leaders
Playing to his base and cheered on by an exuberant crowd, Mayor David N. Dinkins yesterday stepped away from a spate of recent political troubles and was swamped by black supporters on the streets of Crown Heights.
Grinning and grasping the hands of men, women and children as they strained toward him over police barricades and the heads of friends and strangers, the Mayor appeared relaxed and at ease in what marked a high point in a difficult bid for re-election.


Boa Vista Journal; Gold Miners and Indians: Brazil's Frontier War
The center of a white backlash against Indians is found in this Amazon frontier town's central square, a horseshoe-shaped plaza dominated by a statue of a miner in a broad-brimmed hat, panning for gold.
"Pseudomassacre," said the Governor of Roraima State in the modern government palace here, long before anthropologists reduced the toll of Yanomami Indians slain by miners in mid-August from 73 to 16 and said the killings took place in Venezuela, not Brazil.


Protecting Simms Giants' Big Need
The image of Phil Simms being tossed around by the Chicago Bears like a rag doll is the only memory the Giants would like to erase from their impressive 26-20 victory over the Bears on Sunday.
Simms has proved he is one of the toughest quarterbacks ever, but the Giants would like to leave the guts and glory stuff to John Wayne.
Simms took some incredible shots from the Bears' linemen and linebackers, and as Coach Dan Reeves pointed out, some were the result of offensive linemen simply getting beaten.
That resulted in Simms taking a beating.
The quarterback, known as the Franchise, at the ripe age of 37, won't be able to take much more of that.
If he goes down, the Giants could go with him.


Corrections
The byline with a front-page article on Sunday about the history of secret talks between Israel and the Palestine Liberation Organization omitted a correspondent's name.
The article was by Clyde Haberman with Craig R. Whitney.


Suspect Said to Reject Nixon Plot
A suspect in a plot to bomb New York City targets discussed the possibility of kidnapping former President Richard M. Nixon and former Secretary of State Henry A. Kissinger, but then said such a plan would not work because holding hostages would be too difficult, according to Government transcripts of secretly recorded conversations.
"I don't think this is a good idea," the suspect, Siddig Ibrahim Siddig Ali, told a Government informer, Emad Salem, during a meeting in May, according to a portion of the transcript reported last night by CNN.
"Even if we kidnap him, what are we going to do with him? And if we released him after a while, so what? We can't keep him forever or dispose of him easily. We are not in Egypt." 'Cockamamie Scheme'
William M. Kunstler, a lawyer for Mr.
Siddig Ali, confirmed the accuracy of the CNN report.
"There was no real plot at all," he said.
"At most, it's Siddig trying to impress Salem with his sagacity. It's a cockamamie scheme."


Review/Fashion; For a Resort Look, Mix Well
"Options" is the word that turns up most frequently in conversations with designers and retailers when the subject is resort collections.
These are the styles that are introduced in August to be shipped to stores November through January.
Some will find their way into spring collections and thus continue their shelf lives well into next year.
While they are introduced with minimum fanfare, resort clothes have a longer selling season than those for fall or spring.
Like most other fashion concepts at the moment, the idea of choices is not new.
It has frequently been invoked in the past to mean choosing skirts or pants.
Now, it also means very short or very long skirts, very narrow or very full pants.
Designers not only want to avoid the role of dictator, but are also unsure themselves which way the wind will blow.


Treasury Set To Sell Bills
The Treasury's schedule of financings this week is confined to today's auction of three- and six-month bills.
The weekly auction, usually held on Mondays, was delayed a day by the Labor Day holiday.
According to traders, by the close of the New York cash market on Friday, the rate on the outstanding three-month bill was 2.93 percent, and the rate on a six-month bill was 3.02 percent.


Risk in Riding Bonds' Bandwagon
Millions of Americans are betting more and more of their money on longer-term interest rates.
For many investors, that is becoming the only option as they search for higher returns at a time when rates are at their lowest in recent history.
But to portfolio managers who have been making the same bets recently, the strategy is getting riskier.


Economic Calendar
Listed below are the scheduled release dates for major economic indicators this week.
Tuesday  None Wednesday  Consumer Credit July Thursday Weekly Jobless Claims Productivity 2d Qtr Friday Producer Prices August


Renault-Volvo Marriage Is On
After two years of partnership and several months of complex negotiations that were concluded only on Friday, Renault of France and Volvo of Sweden announced today that they will merge on Jan. 1 to form the world's sixth-largest automotive group.
The merger, which had long been rumored and became widely anticipated over the weekend, is aimed at allowing the two companies to weather the severe recession buffeting the European automobile industry.
It will also strengthen them as they prepare for the tougher competition that will come when all restrictions on Japanese auto sales in the European Community are lifted in January 1999.


Energy Service's Biggest Acquisition
Dresser Industries agreed yesterday to buy the Baroid Corporation for about $1.1 billion, marking the energy service industry's largest acquisition yet but a humble exit for Harold Simmons.
Baroid, whose divisions include the nation's biggest maker of drilling fluids, was among the creations of Mr.
Simmons, the Dallas investor.
With the sale of his remaining stake in Baroid, Mr.
Simmons will have earned only $73 million, less than 11 percent, in six years on his $683 million purchase of Baroid's former parent company, NL Industries.
Stock market averages have, meanwhile, almost doubled, returning even more with dividends.


Six to Eight Are on List For New Commissioner
On the first anniversary of Fay Vincent's forced resignation as baseball commissioner, the chairman of the committee still seeking Vincent's successor said today that six to eight people remain on the list of candidates.
The committee chairman, William Bartholomay of the Atlanta Braves, declined to identify the remaining candidates but said: "We all hope Bud Selig would reconsider, but he maintains his position. He has extraordinary support from all aspects of ownership. The committee wouldn't be continuing if he was willing to go on."


Investigators Ask: Did Lockheed Clean House?
In 1986, Datacom Systems Corporation faced a possible death sentence.
It had been at the core of the corruption scandals that rocked the Koch administration and now a hangman's noose was being dangled by the company's parent, the Lockheed Corporation.
Because Datacom, a data processor, also held a small contract with the Federal Government, Lockheed had to prove that it had cleaned house in its rogue subsidiary or it would lose its lifeline to the Pentagon, which accounted for 85 percent of its $10 billion-a-year income.


Tumor Treatment Showing Promise
A radical treatment for brain tumors unlike any therapy used before has proved promising in early clinical trials, researchers report.
But they are emphasizing that the trial is small, that the results are preliminary and that much work remains to be done before the new approach can claim genuine clinical value.
The treatment is an elaborate type of gene therapy in which foreign genes are delivered into a patient's tumor cells to make the malignant mass highly susceptible to a drug called ganciclovir.
In eight patients treated so far, five responded markedly to the therapy, their brain tumors either shrinking or showing signs that tumor cells were dying.
The patients had previously failed to respond to conventional therapies like surgery, radiation or chemotherapy.


ISRAELI-P.L.O. PACT TESTED ON STREET
In the first test of strength of the Israeli right, tens of thousands of protesters surrounded the offices of Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin on Tuesday night, accusing him of treason and of creating a future Palestinian state through his tentative peace agreement with the P.L.O.
A few demonstrators tried to break through police lines and storm Mr.
Rabin's office, which had been empty for hours.
But they were easily pushed back by a double cordon of police officers with riot sticks who ringed the Government building.


CHRONICLE
Never did the coterie of young expatriate writers and editors on the Left Bank in Paris in 1953 imagine that the publication they were invited to join or write for would survive 40 years.
TOM GUINZBERG, one of the founding editors of The Paris Review recalled the other day: "Some people doubted that it would last a year. So we sold lifetime subscriptions -- to our families -- for $100. We also sold positions on the masthead. For $10 you became an assistant editor, for $25 an advisory editor."


Sales Are Shaping Up for Special-Order Clothes
The Illusion dress, a wisp of chiffon floating over a stretchy tube of fabric, bombed in Nicole Miller's showroom.
The critics sniped.
Models snickered.
The company's own sales force adamantly declared it impossible to sell.
But the customer?
She loved it.
More than 50 women asked to try on the sample over the first weekend that the new Nicole Miller boutique was open in SoHo, and several ordered it up.


FEDERAL CUTBACKS PROPOSED BY GORE IN 5-YEAR PROGRAM
Vice President Al Gore today unveiled a set of more than 800 recommendations that he said would streamline "old-fashioned, outdated government," save $108 billion over five years and cut 252,000 Federal jobs by 1998.
The report recommends eliminating thousands of field offices for the Departments of Agriculture and Housing and Urban Development and combining the enforcement and regulatory functions of various agencies.
For example, the Drug Enforcement Administration would be absorbed by the Federal Bureau of Investigation.


Corrections
The Pulse chart in The Metro Section on Monday, about the average weekly hours worked in manufacturing in New York City and New York State, misattributed the information.
It came from the Bureau of Labor Statistics, not the Mortgage Bankers Association of America.


Review/Television; The Case for Student Choice of Schools
Conservative voices, already established on PBS in the persons of William F. Buckley Jr., John McLaughlin and Tony Brown, have been finding their way into documentaries, long a bastion of the left.
The latest entry, "Liberating America's Schools," paid for largely by right-wing foundations, advances the case for "school choice," shorthand for efforts around the country to promote alternatives to standard or substandard schools.
Its opponents call the movement a threat to the public-school ideal, but its champions, who dominate tonight's program, see it as a way of breaking through bureaucracies that are failing many tests.
The evening's guide, Clarence E. Page, a Chicago Tribune columnist, visits Milwaukee, where some low-income families are using state vouchers to send their children to private inner-city schools; the much celebrated District 4 in East Harlem, whose junior-high students can choose to attend specialized schools anywhere in the district; cities in Minnesota that are trying out free-market incentives to make public schools more appealing, and experiments elsewhere.
What they have in common is their claim to give parents and teachers more power over decisions that have traditionally been left to school administrators.


Honda Dealer Group Chooses an Agency
The Philadelphia office of Earle Palmer Brown, which has handled advertising for the Tri-State Honda dealers association of southern New Jersey, Pennsylvania and Delaware, has been awarded the assignment for an expanded association that absorbs the defunct dealer group in New York, Connecticut and northern New Jersey.
Combined billings of the new Five-State Honda Automobile Dealers Association were estimated at $14 million.
The assignment follows the dissolving this spring of the metropolitan New York dealers group, known as the Tri-Honda Dealers, which fell apart amid internal squabbling.
The American Honda Motor Company, which franchises local dealers around the country, had been unhappy that its dealers in such a large market were disorganized.


Clinton Health Proposal Includes New Program for Long-Term Care
President Clinton's health plan will call for a new Government program to help finance long-term care for people with severe disabilities, regardless of their age or income, Administration officials said today.
The program would help pay for medical and social services that disabled people receive in their own homes, in adult day-care programs and at other sites outside nursing homes.
The program would not cover services in a nursing home or an institution for the mentally retarded.


Nordiques' Coach Is Rewarded
PIERRE PAGE, the coach and general manager who helped the Quebec Nordiques became competitive again, was rewarded with a four-year contract extension.
Details were not revealed.


Cuomo's Still Worried
Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo reiterated his concern yesterday that George Steinbrenner will move the Yankees out of the Bronx.
"I believe the Yankees intend to move," Cuomo told reporters in Albany.
"I am doing everything I can to persuade them to stay. I am afraid Mr. Steinbrenner means it when he says he's leaving. That's why I floated the possibility of other locations in New York."


For Children Who Have Children
The debate over Joycelyn Elders's nomination as Surgeon General stirred an important discussion on the national epidemic of teen-age pregnancies.
But the focus on sex education, condom distribution and abortion rights has left out one critical area: the steady rise in teen-age motherhood.
Whatever the Government attempts to prevent teen pregnancy, it must stop sending the signal that unwed teen mothers can, with a few dollars from government, both raise their children and seek a decent future for themselves.
It seems no great surprise that the number of unmarried women having children has increased.
From a time not too long ago when a pregnancy without marriage was almost unthinkable and kept hush-hush, we have moved unwed motherhood to prime time and celebrate it on the covers of glossy magazines.


Steinbrenner Plays the Good Guy
In the box next to the Yankee dugout, George Steinbrenner was steaming.
In the seventh inning of tonight's game with the Rangers, center fielder Bernie Williams had moved in two steps, then quickly retreated as the ball hit by Julio Franco sailed over his head.
As two runs scored, Franco hurried into third with a triple off Bob Wickman and the Yankees suddenly were trailing, 4-3.
They would lose, 5-4.


Maxwell to Sell Collier Unit To 2 European Publishers
The Maxwell Communication Corporation said yesterday that it had agreed to sell its P. F. Collier Inc. encyclopedia business for about $43 million to two international publishing companies, Instituto Geografico De Agostini of Italy and Planeta S. A. of Spain.
Maxwell filed for bankruptcy in December 1991.
It has gradually been selling assets.
Earlier this week the company said it had agreed to sell its Official Airline Guides Inc. to Reed Elsevier for $417 million.
It has also said it will sell its half interest in Macmillan/McGraw-Hill School Publishing Company for $337.5 million to McGraw-Hill Inc., which owns the other half of the joint venture.


For City Council From Manhattan
There's a dismaying dearth of choices in this year's Democratic primary election for the New York City Council.
The Council, which expanded and gained new powers in 1991, badly needs talented, independent lawmakers to supplement the few it has.
It won't get many this year because most incumbents have no strong challengers.
Many with poor records will sail back into office without so much as answering a question.
A few seats are hotly contested, however.
Here are The Times's endorsements in some of the contested races in Manhattan and part of the Bronx.


Personal Health
LAST July, the Food and Drug Administration approved for marketing the first drug ever proved to change the natural course of multiple sclerosis for the better.
Though not a cure, the drug, Betaseron, decreases the frequency of attacks by 30 percent and diminishes the severity of those attacks in 25 percent of patients with the relapsing/remitting form of M.S.
Yet to the great disappointment of the National Multiple Sclerosis Society, in the weeks since the drug was approved and made available by lottery, the society has received many more inquiries about bee venom than about Betaseron.


Stocks Hit By a Surge In Selling
Retreating from its record-setting summer rally, the stock market fell farther and faster than it had in more than a month yesterday, pulled down by concerns about the economy and a feeling by some analysts that the market is overheated and overpriced.
The Dow Jones industrial average sank 26.83 points to close at 3,607.10, after bouncing off the 3,600 level in late afternoon trading.
The Dow's retreat was its largest since July 30, when it fell 27.95 points.
Broader market indicators also fell yesterday.


Iran Warns Armenians Over Azerbaijan Issue
Iran called for an immediate withdrawal of ethnic Armenian forces from Azerbaijan today, amid reports that Teheran had sent troops to Azerbaijan.
In a statement, the Iranian Foreign Minister warned of "heightened tensions in the region," stressing that Teheran "would not remain silent vis-a-vis growing unrest across Iranian borders."


Data Kiosks Are Proposed By Candidate
In a bid to push New York City government further into the age of electronic information, Mark Green, a candidate for public advocate, proposed yesterday that computers be provided in shopping malls and libraries for the public to use to get a compendium of government information.
Mr.
Green, a former Commissioner of Consumer Affairs under Mayor David N. Dinkins, said the public access computers, which he called "information kiosks," would be available to call up information on topics like property taxes, restaurant violations, consumer complaints and water rates, and would reduce red tape.


Japan Offers to Back Loans To Help Trim Trade Surplus
Worried by anger over Japan's huge trade surpluses and eager to use its capital to earn some good will overseas, the Government has decided to offer a new kind of loan guarantee to persuade reluctant Japanese financial institutions to make large new loans and investments overseas.
Officials said the Government-owned Export-Import Bank of Japan planned to announce on Wednesday that it would guarantee a 12-year loan of 8 billion yen, the current equivalent of about $77 million, by Japanese life insurance companies to Greece's state-owned railway.


Senate Confirms Judge Levine
The New York State Senate unanimously confirmed Howard A. Levine today to the Court of Appeals, the state's highest court.
Judge Levine, an appellate division judge from Schenectady, fills a vacancy created by the elevation of Judith S. Kaye to Chief Judge earlier this year.
Judge Kaye replaced Sol Wachtler, who resigned last year after being arrested on extortion charges.


Agriculture Dept. Is Putting More Emphasis on Nutrition
NUTRITION at the United States Department of Agriculture is about to assume a more prominent place, equal to farm concerns.
Mike Espy, the Secretary of Agriculture, announced yesterday that the department would give the same status to the person heading its nutrition segment, which receives 53 percent of the department's budget, as it gives to each of two people who direct its agriculture segment.


Jump-Rope Rhymes That Last a Lifetime; Curtsy to the Queen
To the Editor:
Re your Aug. 25 Education page article on jump-rope rhymes:


Kasparov Wins First Game As Short Runs Out of Time
Although Gary Kasparov had pressed his challenger, Nigel Short, throughout the four hours of play in Game 1 of their version of the world championship yesterday in London, he was credited with a victory only after the Englishman failed to complete 40 moves in the required 2 hours.
A harried Short had at last reached the safety of a drawn position when the flag on his clock fell, indicating he had run out of time.
It takes 12 1/2 points to win the 24-game match and take the larger share of the $2.55 million purse offered by the sponsors, Rupert Murdoch's Times of London and Teleworld of Rotterdam, the Netherlands.
In case of a draw, the Russian keeps his title.


Japanese Apples Owe Their Gloss to Dyes
To the Editor:
I laughed out loud as I read "Why Japan Is Fussy About Imported Fruit" by Erika Shimahara (letters, Aug. 22), which offers that old defense of Japan's protectionist policies -- Japanese apples taste better.


Review/Film; Reflections and Envy in Good Twin, Bad Twin
In the moody, stylized films of Alan Rudolph, the world is an urban lonely-hearts club whose members drift through the city numb with longing.
Even when fate delivers them to their ideal lovers, the odds are strong that the connection will be missed and that happily ever after will end up lonely ever after.
So it goes in Mr.
Rudolph's new film, "Equinox," which opens today at the Village East and has many of his directorial hallmarks.
Set in Empire, a decaying city that suggests a surreal version of New York (it was actually shot in Minneapolis and St. Paul), the film is strewn with lonely men and women wandering through an environment aglow with portents.
Lotto signs loom mysteriously through the smog on streets churning with the homeless.
And even though the film is set in the present, the camera gives its major characters the shimmer of old-time Hollywood icons.


Henry T. Mortimer; Stockbroker, 77
Henry T. Mortimer, a former New York stockbroker who had been living in retirement in Palm Beach, Fla., died on Monday at his son's home in Southampton, L.I.
He was 77.
The cause of death was emphysema, said John Jay Mortimer, a brother.


P.L.O. Chiefs Try to Resolve Charter Dispute With Israel
Negotiators from the Palestine Liberation Organization searched today for treaty language that would assure Israel that the P.L.O. has clearly rejected its 29-year-old charter calling for armed rebellion against the Jewish state, even though they say they cannot yet revoke or change a single word of the document.
While trying to cobble together a formulation that will break a stalemate in talks over mutual recognition, Yasir Arafat, the P.L.O. chairman, and his Egyptian advisers insist that the charter, orginally written in 1964, is irrelevant.
But they say they cannot revoke or amend it without first convening the organization's 600-member parliament in exile, a process that that would take weeks, provoke angry debate and bring the aborning peace process to a crashing halt.


Chavez Hurdle: Taylor Came Close, but Whitaker Aims Higher
Meldrick Taylor carries around his defeat like a victory, feeding off it, bragging on it, still savoring it.
But in the end, Taylor is just one of the 87 opponents beaten by Julio Cesar Chavez, the undefeated warrior who fights for Pernell Whitaker's welterweight crown here Friday night.
And even today, still talking comeback after suffering two subsequent knockouts, Taylor proclaimed, "I'm the only guy in the world who can beat Chavez."


Partisan Back-and-Forth Escalates Over Bond Sales
Mayor Bret Schundler has taken offense at being compared with Gov.
Jim Florio when it comes to recommending underwriters for municipal bond issues.
His remarks, in a letter to Republican leaders of the New Jersey Assembly, kept the partisan balls bouncing over bond work in the state.


Ukraine Questions the Price Tag of Independence
Ihor Volokhov is both a successful and a deeply disappointed man.
He has a private shop with his wife that sells imported tea, coffee, lingerie, clothes and even wallpaper.
He says he's working hard but living decently.
But as for an independent Ukraine, he says, "I think it was a mistake."


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY  ASBESTOS REVIEWS ARE REJECTED
The emergency inspection of New York City's schools for asbestos hazards suffered another setback when an independent investigator threw out 33 inspections because the contractor who did them is not licensed in New York State, officials said.
Those inspections must now be redone.
B3.
IN CROWN HEIGHTS, BIG DIFFERENCES
The differences between the events early Monday evening in Crown Heights and the events in August 1991 that included the death of 7-year-old Gavin Cato and set off four days of racial unrest were as striking as the similarities.
B8.
Rudolph W. Giuliani talks about Crown Heights at a campaign stop. B8.


Hawks Sign Lang to Six-Year Contract
The Atlanta Hawks signed free-agent center ANDREW LANG of the Philadelphia 76ers to a six-year contract yesterday.
Terms were not disclosed.


A Trial Date for Kasparaitis
A trial date of Nov. 8 was set yesterday in the case of DARIUS KASPARAITIS, the Islander defenseman who has been charged with driving while intoxicated and leading police on a high-speed chase on Long Island earlier this summer.
Both charges are misdemeanors punishable by a maximum of one year in prison, according to DREW BIONDO, a spokesman for the Suffolk County District Attorney.
The case is in First District Court in Central Islip.


With a Gala, Barneys Opens Madison Ave. Store
Here's a tale the Pressman family, owners of Barneys New York, will be telling for a while.
In September 1993, in the midst of an economic recession, Barneys opened a new store in New York, amid the toughest competition in town.
And they had to fight to keep people away.


Coleman Contract: Time and Money
Negotiations between the Nets and Derrick Coleman have intensified as the two sides try to work out a long-term deal before the season begins.
Harold MacDonald, Coleman's lawyer, sent a letter to the Nets' office last week that outlined the kind of deal it would take to sign Coleman, who can become a restricted free agent after this season.
The numbers are huge.
The star power forward is seeking a six-year deal that would start at around $5.3 million, then increase by 30 percent of that in each successive year.
MacDonald also wants a clause that would guarantee that Coleman remains one of the National Basketball Association's five highest-paid players for the duration of the contract.


Metropolitan Diary
DEAR DIARY:
On a recent Saturday in a vacation town not far from Manhattan, I pay a supermarket cashier by check.
She hands it back saying, "It's the 29th, not the 28th." On my watch, which has rarely failed me, I again verify the date, the 28th.
The line is long and she says with polite impatience, "Just cross out 28 and write 29," which I do.
Back at the car, I look for the date on the newspaper I had just bought.
Lo! my watch is right after all.
To save her embarrassment from other check-writers to come, I return to the cashier with the newspaper and point out the date.
As I turn to leave, feeling a glow that comes from spreading enlightenment, she says with a smile, "It's probably yesterday's paper."


Alberta Moore Meeker; Church Executive, 70
Alberta Moore Meeker, a retired executive of the National Council of Churches who lived in Sarasota, Fla., died on Sept. 3 in Sarasota Memorial Hospital.
She was 70.
Mrs. Meeker died of breast cancer, said her sister, Virginia Moore of Sarasota.


NEW NAME EMERGES FOR RIGHTS OFFICE
John Payton, a lawyer who argued one of the most significant civil rights cases of the last decade before the Supreme Court, has emerged as a leading candidate to head the civil rights division in the Justice Department, Clinton Administration officials said today.
Mr.
Payton, who is currently the corporation counsel for the District of Columbia, represented the City of Richmond in its unsuccessful effort to defend a program that set aside 30 percent of its business for minority contractors.
A divided Supreme Court struck down the program in 1989, ruling that it violated the Constitution's equal-protection guarantee by discriminating against white contractors.


Pope Praises Lithuania's Quest for Freedom


GERMANY CLOSING MIGRANTS' HOSTELS
With the number of asylum-seekers entering Germany falling rapidly as a result of a new law that took effect on July 1, hostels that had been used to house them are closing, and plans to build new ones are being canceled.
According to official figures made public this week, 14,521 foreigners applied for asylum in Germany last month.
In June the total was 31,123.


Senate Confirms Elders as Surgeon General, After Months of Debate
Shrugging off objections by conservative opponents and the doubts of some moderate supporters, the Senate tonight confirmed as Surgeon General Dr.
Joycelyn Elders, a mince-no-words proponent of family planning, sex education, abortion rights -- and, she has added, youthful abstinence from sex.
The 65-to-34 vote ended months of political turmoil over Dr.
Elders's finances, and more prominently, her battles with conservative critics of her views on sexual behavior.


The Latest Reinvention
One potentially big difference between the new plan to streamline the Federal Government and its failed antecedents is that President Clinton and Vice President Gore have pledged their continuing personal involvement.
This is no guarantee that "reinventing government" will ever come to pass, but accountability can't hurt.
Even so, the public has good reason to be cynical about the 11th major study of government reorganization since Theodore Roosevelt.
In 1984, for example, a private-sector panel headed by J. Peter Grace, a New York industrialist, made 2,478 recommendations to cut waste, fraud and abuse and save the taxpayers $424 billion.
Most of those ideas are now covered with a decade's worth of dust.


Review/Pop; World of World Music, U.S. Division
Since Peter Gabriel founded World of Music, Arts and Dance in 1980, Womad has presented festivals of international music in places from England to Denmark to Japan.
This year, the festival moves into new territory: the United States, for a two-week tour that began here on Monday at the Saratoga Performing Arts Center.
Mr.
Gabriel headlined a nine-hour marathon with musicians from every continent but South America and Antarctica.
Yet the exotic culture explored in greatest depth came from some modest Atlantic islands: Britain.
Although Womad goes back more than a decade, the United States tour is modeled on the Lollapalooza Festival.
There are two stages, a large one (with seating) for mainstream rock and a secondary one, in an open field, for lesser-known performers.
Stalls sell international food, clothing and jewelry; there's a computer exhibit.


Suburban Renewal
State legislators and voters are starting to grapple with the results of four decades of misguided policies that have favored suburban development over inner cities, fragmenting urban areas by race and class.
Several communities are trying innovative styles of government to bridge the economic gap between cities and suburbs and address their shared problems.
These efforts are long overdue.
For example, last November in Oregon, Portland-area voters approved a home-rule charter to give new powers to the region's "metro" government, a sort of umbrella governing body.
The metro government's priority, the new charter states, will be less to provide regional services than to manage the region's growth, which has been exploding.
Goals include an affordable housing plan, in which each of the 24 cities and towns in the three-county jurisdiction must accept a proportionate share of low- and moderate-income housing.


A Talkative Murray Wonders Out Loud
Eddie Murray's voice can be as loud as his bat.
In his first group interview since the Mets' record was 0-0, the 37-year-old first baseman said today that he thought he would have been traded long ago, the news media stalled the progress of his teammate Bobby Bonilla, he had no clue where he will play next season and that he would like to manage some day.
But after tonight's game, he wouldn't want to manage the Mets.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; At the age of 1, New York 1 News keeps trying new sales ideas.
SOMETIMES in advertising, success can be measured in cockroaches.
Seeking to overcome the Clorox Company's reluctance to buy commercial time for its Combat line of insecticides, the advertising sales executives at New York 1 News, the 24-hour local news cable television channel, produced a sales package tailored to the giant marketer's particular needs.


Jury in Florida Convicts 2 Whites Of Burning Black Brooklyn Man
Two white drifters accused of abducting a black Brooklyn man on vacation in Florida and setting him on fire were found guilty here today of attempted murder, kidnapping and armed robbery.
The verdict brought a quick and decisive end to a case that had been plagued by a series of judicial mishaps and disagreements.
Mark Kohut and Charles Rourk, a pair of day laborers who were roommates in a trailer park in the central Florida town of Lakeland, now face the possibility of life in prison because of their attack on Christopher Wilson.
On New Year's Day, Mr.
Wilson, a 32-year-old stockbrokerage clerk, was visiting friends in Tampa when the two men decided to rob him. 'Agony and Frustration'
In a statement read by prosecutors after the verdict was announced, Mr.
Wilson said he was "happy to know that justice was served." But in the same statement, Mr.
Wilson's mother, Enid Plummer, added, "As a black mother, never would I wish for anyone, black or white, to have to undergo the pain, agony and frustration we have been going through and are still going through."


Norman Withdraws From Tournament
GREG NORMAN, troubled by a shoulder injury, withdrew from the defense of his Canadian Open title yesterday and put his immediate schedule on hold.
Norman said he had pain in his left shoulder, near the neck, during the last two rounds of the World Series of Golf two weeks ago, his last start.


Graf Puts Sabatini Away in 3
Veering from indomitable to incapable and back again, top-seeded Steffi Graf fought off an intermittent challenge from fifth-seeded Gabriela Sabatini between yesterday's showers and reached the semifinals of the United States Open with a 6-2, 5-7, 6-1 victory.
Facing the most breakable serve in her profession's upper echelon, Graf did the obvious, at least for a while: She dutifully dissected Sabatini's unimposing weapon and took a commanding 6-2, 5-3 lead.


Sex Education and Diversity Supported in Poll
A majority of New York City residents surveyed favor sex education, the distribution of condoms in the schools and multicultural education, three issues that helped bring about the replacement of Joseph A. Fernandez as Schools Chancellor, the Bank Street College of Education said yesterday.
For the most part, the survey of 500 registered voters, supported the public perception that the city's public schools are in crisis and are being victimized by a bureaucracy marked by incompetence, political agendas and corruption.


No Headline
"There was a time when there might have been a feeling of embarrassment that this was not what a botanical garden would do, that this was something you'd thumb your nose at. But the fact is, we are in New York City and people need beauty in their lives. If somebody comes to the spring show and says, 'God, that's gorgeous,' it's just as important as education." -- RICHARD SCHNALL, vice president of horticulture, New York Botanical Garden.  [ B7:1. ]


Corrections
A picture caption on Aug. 31 about a sculpture of David Letterman outside the Ed Sullivan Theater in Manhattan misstated the work's origin in some copies.
It came from the Minnesota State Fair in Falcon Heights, not from Minneapolis.


Books of The Times; 2 Maiden Ladies and Their Century
Having Our Say  The Delany Sisters' First 100 Years  By Sarah and A. Elizabeth Delany with Amy Hill Hearth  Illustrated. 210 pages.
Kodansha. $20.
Sometimes they sound like the oldest living Confederate widows, and sometimes they sound like turn-of-the-century Negro blue bloods.
They refer to the Civil War as "the Surrender" and those we would call bigots they call "those rebby boys." They are not "old maids," they are "maiden ladies," and at 103 and 101, they avoid all hospitals.
"One time, some doctor asked Sadie to do a senility test. Of course, she passed. A year later, he asked her to do it again, and she said, 'Don't waste your time, doctor.' And she answered all the questions from the year before, before he could ask them. And then she said to me, 'Come on, Bess, let's get on out of here.' "


2 Similar Auto Accidents, 2 Very Different Results
It looked, superficially at least, like the kind of spark that once before had set off an explosion of anger and violence in Brooklyn.
A car driven by a Hasidic man struck and injured a black Brooklyn resident on the streets on the edge of Crown Heights.
But the differences between the events early Monday evening as the West Indian Day Festival was winding down, and the events in August 1991 that killed 7-year-old Gavin Cato and set off four days of racial unrest were as striking as the similarities.


Modern Cowboys Head 'em Up and Move 'em Out on the Old Chisholm Trail


Corrections
An article yesterday about the actor John Malkovich misstated one of his film credits.
He appeared in "Of Mice and Men," not "The Grapes of Wrath."


Of Marching and Labor And a Few Onlookers
ON Labor Day 1993, New York City celebrated cross dressing and Caribbean ethnicity with much more gusto than it showed for working men and women or union solidarity.
At a time when wages are stagnant or falling and when practically every politician recognizes the big issue to be jobs, jobs, jobs, what does the perfunctory marching mean?
Is class struggle truly over?
Has the working class been diverted from a vanguard role by what Marxist-Leninists used to call false consciousness?
Or is it simply a case that drag queens and West Indians throw much better parties?


Lemaire Almost a Rookie Among Rookies as Devils Start Camp
Jacques Lemaire worked on the ice for the first time as the coach of the Devils today, barking orders to rookies and free agents.
He interrupted drills frequently and demonstrated what he wanted the players to do.
"A few drills were a little complicated for the first day and the kids were a little too tight, not sharp enough, but they loosened up about half an hour into practice," Lemaire said in his first post-practice interview at the Devils' training center.


In the Inner City, a Hungry Scramble for a Few Choice Classroom Seats
There is a powerful hunger among parents in America's big cities for a quality public school.
Last spring, Wayne State University announced it would be starting a new middle school, open to any Detroit child in sixth to eighth grade.
More than 6,000 applications were submitted in two months -- for 330 spots.
At the selection lottery, Gov.
John Engler noted that one child, Calvin Walker Jr., had applied 100 times.


EASTERN COLLEGE REPORT
Rutgers
Because the opening game, a 68-6 rout of Colgate, was an obvious mismatch, Coach Doug Graber said he still has no idea "what kind of a team we are." Graber will find out more on Saturday night when the Scarlet Knights play Duke in Giants Stadium.
The Blue Devils were routed by Florida State, 45-7, in their opener, but they trounced Rutgers, 42-22, two years ago when Dave Brown, now a backup quarterback with the Giants, passed for four touchdowns.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  American League
CALIFORNIA ANGELS -- Waived Kelly Gruber, third baseman.
Recalled John Farrell and Scott Lewis, pitchers, and Jim Edmonds, outfielder, from Vancouver of the Pacific Coast League.
Purchased the contract of Brian Anderson, pitcher, from Vancouver.


Bridge
The final of the Bermuda Bowl contest at the NEC World Championships here will be a battle between the Netherlands and Norway, each of which snatched a last-ditch victory today by 3 imps.
The final begins Wednesday and is scheduled to end Friday.
In semifinal play today, the Dutch began with a lead of 28 imps against the United States and held on to win.
Norway led Brazil by 10 at the start of the day and also held on to win by that slim margin.


HEINZ (H.J.) CO. (N)
Despite sluggish sales growth and volume declines in several brands, including Starkist tuna, H. J. Heinz Company's fiscal first-quarter operating earnings improved 5.8 percent.
Anthony J. F. O'Reilly, the company's chairman, president and chief executive, said he was pleased with the first-quarter results, "given the current economic environment in the United States and overseas."


2 Sarajevo Women Build a House in Air
This summer, a 30-year-old translator named Aida and her best friend, Anja, a 29-year-old doctor, began paging through a coffee-table book of model houses and fantasizing about the future.
"We fantasized about what kind of house we'd build and live in together with our future husbands and children," said Aida, a divorced Muslim whose mother and 3-year-old son, who is half Serbian, escaped the Sarajevo siege last December.
"We picked out a duplex, a pair of A-frames connected by garages."


Hornets, Already Crowded, Sign Burrell
The Charlotte Hornets announced the signing of SCOTT BURRELL, the 20th overall selection in the 1993 National Basketball Association draft, to a multiyear contract yesterday.
The Hartford Courant said the deal was reportedly worth $5 million over five years.


Recchi and Flyers Reach New Deal
Right wing MARK RECCHI, who finished 10th in the National Hockey League in scoring, signed a new six-year contract with the Philadelphia Flyers yesterday.
Terms were not released.


Study Says Misunderstanding Exists Between Clergy and the News Media
A new study has concluded that a "chasm of misunderstanding" exists between news organizations and religious leaders in the United States, resulting in reporting that is often inadequate.
But the study said that those shortcomings were due more to ignorance and lack of resources than, as frequently maintained, to anti-religious bias among journalists.


Missouri Suspends Senior Starter
A starting forward, JEVON CRUDUP, has been suspended from the Missouri basketball team this semester after being arrested early yesterday near Columbia, Mo., on a charge of driving while intoxicated. (AP)


LIGHTING UP A FEW WITH: Marvin Shanken; To Some Minds, A Cigar Is Never Just a Cigar
IT is barely past 10 A.M. and Marvin R. Shanken, magazine publisher and avowed national cigar-master, has already chuffed more than an hour's worth of rich and fragrant smoke into the air from a Hoyo de Monterrey Double Corona.
He begins each day by lighting up one of these 7 5/8-inch cigars, a product of Cuba's Vuelta Abajo region (importing them into the United States is prohibited, making them a possession of uncertain legality).
This is the first of maybe five or six cigars Mr.
Shanken will smoke today, almost all from the several hundred boxes he keeps at his Park Avenue South office in a private walk-in humidor, its contents worth many tens of thousands of dollars.


Abbey Offers Total Care $197 Million
Abbey Healthcare Group said yesterday that it would buy Total Pharmaceutical Care for $197 million in cash and stock.
Analysts said the deal was a logical match for two companies that have carved out complementary niches in a business that provides nursing care, equipment, drugs, therapy and intravenous nutrition to patients at home, where such services are usually less costly than in a hospital.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
Vice President Gore unveiled more than 800 recommendations that he said would streamline "old-fashioned, outdated Government," save $108 billion over five years and cut 252,000 Federal jobs by 1998.  [ Page A1. ]  The Administration's efforts to "reinvent" Government face the same inherent tensions that thwarted its predecessors.  [ A1 ]  Similar efforts in the private sector have produced decidedly mixed results.  [ B10. ]
President Clinton's health plan will call for a new Government program to help finance long-term care for people with severe disabilities, regardless of their age or income.  [ A1. ]  The White House appeared to back away from limiting tax deductions that employers may take for the cost of employee health benefits.  [ B11. ] Markets
The stock market retreated from its record-setting summer rally, pulled down by concerns about the economy.  [ D1. ]


60-Minute Gourmet
THE summer corn crop is in its full glory, having been delayed in some areas by a dry and exceptionally hot summer.
A reader asked me recently how to tell whether the corn in the market is fresh.
This is a good question, as the coveted sweet corn of late summer is extremely perishable and must be chosen with care.
The moment corn is picked from the field it begins to convert its sugar -- contained in the sweet, milky liquid inside the kernels -- to mushy starch.
The best way to retard this breakdown is by storing corn at a temperature close to 32 degrees.
So ideally, corn should be stored in the cooler, for at room temperature (and roadside-stand temperature, for that matter) the ears lose much of their sugar content almost immediately.


Marion Hoagland; Magazine Editor, 60
Marion Magid Hoagland, managing editor of Commentary magazine, died on Sept. 3 at Columbia-Presbyterian Medical Center.
She was 60 and lived in Manhattan.
Mrs. Hoagland died of cancer, said her daughter, Molly Hoagland.


Gay Woman Loses Custody Of Her Son to Her Mother
In an unusual custody battle, a circuit court here tonight upheld a lower court's decision to take a 2-year-old boy away from his mother, a lesbian, and give him to her mother for rearing.
"The mother's conduct is illegal and immoral and renders her an unfit parent," Judge Duford M. Parsons Jr. of Henrico County Circuit Court said in endorsing the earlier decision of the county's juvenile court.


An Insidious Poison Lurks in Some Fish
IT seems terribly unfair when people are careful to select health-promoting foods and then get sick from eating them.
That was the fate of a Massachusetts couple, Dr. and Mrs.
Richard Berlin of Pittsfield, who became mysteriously ill after dining on red snapper while vacationing in South Florida.
It took six months and numerous visits to the doctor before the true cause of their strange symptoms was uncovered through persistent sleuthing by the ill physician.


Japanese Apples Owe Their Gloss to Dyes; Gift Melons
To the Editor:
Re Erika Shimahara's Aug. 22 letter: Imported fruit, a considerable amount of which is already being purchased by discriminating Japanese housewives, will not in any way restrict the ability of Japanese department stores to select the best quality fruit for gift packages.
It might, however, affect their ability to charge more than $100 for a pair of melons, which is what the real fuss is about.
HAROLD SOLOMON  Tokyo, Sept. 3, 1993 The writer is a Japan-based American scientist.


At U.N., Bosnian Presses His Plea for More Land
President Alija Izetbegovic of Bosnia brought his campaign for better peace terms here today, calling for more land for the Muslims, the reversal of "ethnic cleansing" and an end to the siege of Sarajevo.
On Wednesday, Mr.
Izetbegovic takes the campaign to Washington, where he is expected to appeal directly, in meetings with President Clinton and Secretary of State Warren Christopher, for Administration support for his refusal to accept the peace plan drafted by Lord Owen and Thorvald Stoltenberg, the international mediators, in its present form.


Taste Test: From 'Awesome' To 'Yucky'
WHEN it comes to chocolate milk, sweetness is the issue on which children and adults part company.
That was evident after an eager group of seven New York children tasted an assortment of chocolate milks and milk drinks last week.
They sipped samples from numbered, coded cups.
No peeking.
Totally serious, complete with tasting notes -- like a test.
In alphabetical order the tasters were Jesse Calagna, Alexandra Friedman, Jeremiah Friedman (no relation to Alexandra), Justine Kahn, Danny Morales, Matt Nayor and Josh Vlasto.
All are 11 and entering sixth grade except Justine, who is 10 and going into fifth grade.


Jump-Rope Rhymes That Last a Lifetime
To the Editor:
I have just passed my 80th birthday, and "Pupils Find Jump-Rope Rhymes Leapfrog Ocean" (Education page, Aug. 25) brought back pleasant memories.
My own rope-jumping days took place between 1919 and 1927 on the streets of Manhattan -- 117th Street, between Park and Madison Avenues, and in Mount Morris Park (now Marcus Garvey Park).
In 1927, my family moved to the Bronx, I entered high school and abandoned the joys of rhythmic jumping on the sidewalk.


A Daily Race With Death


Greenspan's View on Rates
The Federal Reserve Board's chairman, Alan Greenspan, said in written remarks released today that short-term interest rates, adjusted for inflation, were "lower than necessary" to help the economy over the long run and would eventually have to rise.
But Mr.
Greenspan was quick to caution, in answers to written questions from the Senate Banking Committee, that changes in such so-called real interest rates do not necessarily mean that nominal interest rates must rise.


Giuliani Takes a Strong Stand On Crown Heights and Arrests
Speaking to a crowd of about 250 Jewish voters on the Upper West Side, Rudolph W. Giuliani last night made his most pointed remarks yet in the mayoral campaign on the 1991 racial disturbances in Crown Heights, saying he would have had the first person who threw a rock arrested.
His law-and-order comments, which also touched on the street disturbances in Washington Heights last year and the Korean grocery-store boycott in Brooklyn in 1990, was met with bursts of applause by audience members who openly expressed doubts at the evening's outset but seemed to be broadly swayed by the Republican-Liberal candidate's words.


Moore Is Off and Running as the Jets' Receiver Starts in Fine Style
In the first half of Sunday's season opener against Denver, the Jets receiver Rob Moore was still in a receiving drought that had consumed most of his preseason.
He had caught only two passes in preseason in limited appearances and he had missed the final preseason game with a bruised knee.
"It was kind of frustrating," Moore said.
"I just wanted to get my hands on the ball and get an opportunity to do something."


Victory to Redskins, But Credit to Petitbon
"We want Dallas! We want Dallas! We want Dallas!"
That chant rolled through R.F.K.
Memorial Stadium moments before the kickoff as Washington Redskins fans stood and screamed and clapped and stomped their feet and seemed to sense that something special -- for their guys or for the old, dreaded enemy -- was about to happen.
It certainly did.


Coup Weary, Venezuelans Await a Vote
Plaster and white paint have touched up bullet holes in the Presidential Palace, and democracy seems to be back on track in Venezuela, for now.
Carlos Andres Perez, facing trial on a corruption charge, packed his bags and boxes and moved out of the presidential residence on Wednesday, ending his rocky four-and-a-half-year stay.
On May 21 Congress had suspended his presidential powers, a move that it made permanent on Aug. 31.


Review/Film: The Joy Luck Club; Intimate Generational Lessons, Available to All
Amy Tan's readers luxuriated in the wealth of stories she coaxed forth from the Joy Luck Club, a group of dedicated Chinese-American mah-jongg players whose present-day serenity belied their tumultuous early years.
Each of these women had searing, highly dramatic memories of her Chinese girlhood; each encountered a different sort of trouble in trying to bring up her own offspring on American soil.
Each recalled the events of her life in lavish and exotic detail, and those events had a way of teaching lessons.
The parallels that linked the novel's parents and children provided it with a source of foolproof wisdom.
Ms.
Tan found such a heady blend of melodrama and psychodrama in her novel's many mother-daughter conflicts that her "Joy Luck Club," with all its tearful showdowns and gratifying symmetries, had a stereotypically feminine outlook.
But now, handsomely brought to the screen with a cast of dozens of actresses and no men of any consequence, "The Joy Luck Club" is anything but a traditional women's picture.


Claim of P.O.W. Cover-Up Rends Senate Decorum
In the Senate, where formal courtesies among members are ritual, a largely unnoticed New Hampshire Republican is drawing unusual criticism from colleagues for publicly accusing 10 senior, but even more obscure, Federal officials of perjury and other crimes.
The Senator, Robert C. Smith, contends that the 10 were trying to cover up evidence about Americans missing and perhaps captured in Vietnam.
The issue has been the overriding interest of his nine years in Congress.


Head Start on Data Superhighway
As the boundaries blur among the telephone business, cable television and wireless communications, no company may be better prepared to navigate the new landscape than the Comcast Corporation, the nation's third-largest cable provider and fifth-largest independent cellular phone company.
For years, the smart money bet that only the conventional local telephone companies would have the money and expertise to build the information superhighway that would bring phone calls, data communications and video-on-demand to American households.
But now cable television companies plan to deliver the same services at lower cost.
And soon, the cable companies may outrun the phone companies by linking wireless communications services to their lower-cost cable networks.


From Men's Wear to Fiber Optics
Without a mirror but with gusto, Ralph J. Roberts demonstates for an inquisitive visitor how to tie a bow tie.
"Simple," he says, a blur of fingers flashing over the navy silk with blue polka dots, followed by triumphantly upturned hands.
"Like that."


Masur Surprises Himself and Others
Down by 5-0 in the fifth set on the Grandstand Court last night, Wally Masur was thinking about what he was going to do when he got home to his native Australia.
Instead, he is getting ready for the United States Open quarterfinals tomorrow.
Masur, at 30 the oldest player left in men's singles, staged what is believed to be an unprecedented comeback, rallying from from two sets down, staving off a match point and finally winning 18 of the match's final 19 points as he scored a 3-6, 4-6, 6-3, 6-4, 7-5 victory over his countryman Jamie Morgan. 'It Was Just Ridiculous'
"I cannot believe that I won that match," Masur said.
"I mean it was just ridiculous. It was incredible."


With Schools Late Again, Chicago Parents Sigh and Then Adapt
For years, the wait for word about whether school would start on time here has been a nerve-racking part of summer vacation.
While parents in other cities bought back packs and crayons for their children in anticipation of school, Chicago parents often did not know when school would start, and the scheduled opening day seemed more a vague target than reality.


Teaching Teachers to Put Arts Back in Classroom
Frances Cooke, a fourth-grade teacher from Mount Vernon, recited nursery rhymes with all the feeling that she could muster.
And Norma Johnson, an English teacher at the Peekskill Middle School, created a dance to the rhythm of her name.
Along with 200 other teachers and school administrators, they were attending three days of workshops at Manhattanville College here to learn how the arts could be used to teach history, science and math.


Jean Eckart Is Dead; Theatrical Designer And a Teacher, 72
Jean Eckart, who designed sets with her husband, William, for many Broadway shows, including "Fiorello!" and "Damn Yankees," died on Monday at her home in Dallas.
She was 72.
The cause was lung cancer, her husband said.


Don't Throw Out the Baby in Parking Scandal; More Privatization
To the Editor:
Privatization has been much in the news lately in connection with the New York City Parking Violations Bureau affair.
I am writing to call attention to situations in which the private sector has taken it upon itself to privatize public property.
First, I have in mind the numerous instances where the managements of apartment buildings and restaurants have painted the sidewalks in front of their establishments to indicate they are "no parking" zones.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.13
2.94
3.13
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
2.95
2.93
2.91
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.03
3.02
2.95
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
4.85
4.87
5.74
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
5.90
5.94
7.21
TELEPHONE BONDS
6.82
6.88
8.38
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
5.47
5.53
6.23
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


COMPANY NEWS
AKZO N.V., Arnhem, the Netherlands, has reached an agreement with Saga Food Ingredients A.S. of Denmark to purchase a majority stake in the Icelandic Salt Co.
Terms were not disclosed.
DETREX CORP., Southfield, Mich., said it planned to sell a chemical unit to the Novamax Technologies Corp. for at least $10 million.


Thousands of Israelis Protest Peace Proposal


Gold's Downhill Ride Shifts to Higher Gear
Gold prices, which have been sliding steadily for about a month, took a tumble yesterday, helping push down long-term interest rates and lower the dollar against other major currencies.
The drop of nearly 15 percent in gold prices from as high as $411 an ounce on Aug. 2 to as low as $350 an ounce yesterday has analysts wondering if the run-up of the spring and summer was an aberration.


Price Club Is Planning Store on S.I.
The Price Club is coming to New York City.
Mayor David N. Dinkins announced yesterday that the owners of the popular warehouse retail chain had been chosen to develop a 1.2 million-square-foot shopping center in Charleston, S.I.


Upset Wave Claims No. 1 Courier, No. 4 Becker
At the United States Open, the world's most maligned Grand Slam tournament, the upsets continued to get grander by the day.
When the Stadium Court transformed itself into a graveyard for champions again yesterday, the latest victims were none other than the best player in the world, top-seeded Jim Courier, and Boris Becker, seeded fourth.
And Courier fell hard.


Another Setback for Asbestos Inspections in Schools
The emergency inspection of New York City's schools for asbestos hazards suffered another setback when an independent investigator threw out 33 inspections because the contractor who did them is not licensed in New York State, officials said yesterday.
Those inspections must now be redone.
The action, coming after a series of other setbacks, has raised new questions about whether schools could open even by Sept. 20, the tentative date set by the city's Board of Education less than a week ago when it voted to postpone the first day of school from Sept. 9.


Serving History, In a Cup Or a Cone
WHEN Washington was President and living in Manhattan in the summer of 1789, he ordered more than $200 worth of ice cream from a confectioner.
Nowadays, of course, you don't have to be President to indulge, although heaven forbid you should be a powerful person and eat anything fattening.
The story of how ice cream wended its way from the dining rooms of the elite to the kitchens of hoi polloi is illustrated in "Ice Cream for All: The Democratization of an Elite Food," an exhibition running through Sunday at the Museums at Stony Brook, L.I.


Don't Throw Out the Baby in Parking Scandal; Like Tennis Lobbying
To the Editor:
Phillip R. Michael, New York City Budget Director, received no money from Lockheed Information Management Services, nor did he commit any criminal activity regarding a contract to collect parking ticket fines.
Yet he was forced to resign his position because of special treatment he afforded Lockheed.


Apparent Retreat on Employer Deductions
Officials of the Clinton Administration appeared to back away today from the idea of limiting the tax deductions that employers may take for the cost of their employees' health benefits.
The officials said that under his proposals to overhaul the health care system, President Clinton would go ahead with a plan to require employees to pay taxes on benefits they receive that are above those guaranteed all Americans under the Government's program by the year 2000.


N.A.A.C.P. Takes Two Leaves From the Corporate Playbook
To the Editor:
Your Aug. 31 Business Day article on the pressures the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People is putting on corporate America to hire more African-Americans illustrates how the battle for racial equity has changed since the Rev.
Dr.
Martin Luther King Jr. spoke on the steps of the Lincoln Memorial three decades ago.


Book Notes
Diary? Not Jack's
If it were real, it would solve one of the most nettlesome mysteries of the last 100 years and probably put a lot of amateur speculators out of business.
But the document presented as the diary of Jack the Ripper has now been declared a forgery by an American expert, and Warner Books, which had planned to publish 200,000 copies this fall, said yesterday that it was scrapping the project altogether.
Just two weeks ago, another publisher, William Morrow, canceled publication of the supposed memoirs of Abraham Lincoln's laundress because of doubts about their authenticity.


CHRONICLE
As Rabbi MARC SCHNEIER sees it, he is bringing observance of the Jewish High Holy Days "to new heights" this year.
"We are putting the 'high' in the High Holy Days," he said yesterday.
Having established his talent for catchy phrases, Rabbi Schneier went on to explain that he had found a new way to summon worshipers to the services he will conduct on Rosh ha-Shanah and Yom Kippur: by trailing a banner from a plane.
Rabbi Schneier is the founder of the Westhampton (L.I.) Synagogue, an Orthodox congregation, but since groundbreaking was just last month, the services will be in the tent this year.


Still Stuck: Yanks Miss Another Chance to Pass the Blue Jays
Bernie Williams cried.
Paul Assenmacher sighed.
The Yankees died.
It was a new script but the same annoying result as the Yankees failed again to grab first place.
This setback was painful.


Remaking Government; Few Disagree With Clinton's Overall Goal, But History Shows the Obstacles Ahead
"The Government is broken, and we intend to fix it," President Clinton said today.
No one who has tried to fill out a Medicare claim form, get the Internal Revenue Service or the Social Security Administration on the telephone, apply for a Government contract -- no one, in short, who has ever been hogtied by Federal red tape -- can disagree with Mr.
Clinton's description.
The bureaucracy is bloated, wasteful and inefficient.


On This Farm, Grazing Is for Books
Amid the rolling hills of this New Haven suburb, cows still graze and farms dot the landscape.
But books have long since replaced livestock in the two barns at Whitlock Farm, Connecticut's oldest and largest seller of rare and used books.
Bins along the outside of the barns hold more than 1,000 old paperbacks.
Inside, people listen to classical music while browsing among more than 50,000 books and thousands of other items, including rare maps, postcards, letters, pamphlets and collectibles.


Food Notes
Della Femina and Friends
Just before summer's end, Jerry Della Femina managed to open his latest project in East Hampton, L.I.: Jerry &amp; David's Red Horse Market.
It's a big, airy food market named for Mr.
Della Femina and his partner, David Silver, who is in the home-furnishing-manufacturing business in Manhattan.
"Red Horse" refers to a statue that was once on the site.
The consultant was Joel Dean, of the Dean &amp; DeLuca empire, who said this market was "a totally different experience." He said produce and groceries were priced on a par with King Kullen supermarkets.
Indeed, with fresh ears of corn at $2 a dozen, tomatoes at 95 cents a pound, arugula at $1.80 a bunch and local peaches at $1.20 a pound, prices were lower than at some nearby farm stands.


Corrections
Articles on Friday and Sunday about the emergency reinspection of New York City schools for asbestos, and a correction in this space on Saturday, rendered the name of the Special Commissioner of Investigation for the New York City School District incorrectly.
He is Edward F. Stancik.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-15  SHARING POWER IN SOUTH AFRICA  South Africa has agreed to share broad powers with a multiparty transition committee before its first universal election, placing the police, the army, the budget and civil service under a predominantly black interim council.
A1  HOPE AND ANGER FOR ARABS  Arab-Americans are optimistic about the proposed Israeli-Palestinian peace agreement, but many say that Yasir Arafat, the P.L.O. leader, has settled for too little.
A1


New Curbs Urged for Municipals
The chief regulators of the municipal bond industry recommended yesterday that sharp restrictions be placed on political contributions from underwriters and others to help clear the clouds now over the industry.
They also urged more mandatory disclosure of financial information on bonds trading in the secondary market.


Wine Talk
ALEXANDRE DE LUR-SALUCES looked down on the rich green vines marching away from Chateau d'Yquem in perfectly straight rows.
"I stood here last year with Itzhak Perlman," he said matter-of-factly, "and I told him, 'This is my Stradivarius.' "
The Count was not smiling.
He would never make light of Yquem or of his stewardship.
Yquem (pronounced ee-KEM) is his whole life.
He has been in charge since the death of his uncle, the Marquis Bertrand de Lur-Saluces.
The Lur-Saluces family has owned the chateau here, which is 35 miles south of the city of Bordeaux, since 1785, when it was already a venerable wine estate.
In fact, 1993 is Yquem's 400th anniversary.


Maradona to Return to Argentine Soccer
DIEGO MARADONA will sign a contract before the end of the week to return to professional soccer with an Argentine team, his agent said yesterday.
The agent, MARCOS FRANCHI, in several broadcast interviews in Buenos Aires, said the Argentine first division teams Argentinos Juniors and Newell's Old Boys are "firm candidates" to obtain the 33-year-old.


Holtzman Ads For Primary Cite Honesty
With a week to go before the Democratic primary, the race for New York City comptroller appeared to be tightening yesterday, while advertisements by the incumbent, Elizabeth Holtzman, stressed her honesty and one of her rivals launched a sharp new attack on her integrity.
A new poll mirrored the views of independent political strategists that Ms.
Holtzman was losing some ground to her two challengers, Herman Badillo and Alan G. Hevesi.
The results suggested that if the primary were today Ms.
Holtzman, still trying to recover from the political bruises of her failed bid for the Senate last year, would come in first, but not by enough to avoid a runoff election against Mr.
Badillo, who is running on a slate with the Republican-Liberal candidate for mayor, Rudolph W. Giuliani.


MOTHER RECOUNTS CHALLENGER BLAST
Christa McAuliffe, the high school teacher who died in the explosion of the space shuttle Challenger in 1986, told her family the day before the launching that NASA had decided to push ahead the next day no matter what, her mother writes.
That account, in a new book by Mrs.
McAuliffe's mother, Grace George Corrigan, lends weight to arguments that NASA pressed ahead with the high-profile flight to win mention of it in President Reagan's State of the Union Message.
The address was scheduled for that day, Jan. 28, but then postponed after the spacecraft exploded, killing the seven crew members.


CANADIAN TO CALL GENERAL ELECTION
After a summer of image building that raised her standing in the polls, Prime Minister Kim Campbell is to call a general election for Oct. 25 on Wednesday, officials in her office said today.
The first woman ever to lead Canada -- she succeeded Brian Mulroney after being chosen at a Progressive Conservative Party convention in June -- Ms.
Campbell is hoping for a voter mandate that will give the Tories a third five-year term at the helm in Ottawa.


No Purge Yet in Guatemala, but a Battle Royal
President Ramiro de Leon Carpio's attempt to purge corrupt members of Congress has thrown the legislature into chaos.
Fights have broken out in the chamber, garbage has flown from the gallery, and today, while two rival leaders fought for control of the Congress, scores of peasant protesters stormed the building and occupied the 116 legislators' seats.
So far, however, no one has been purged.


How Do Those Cows Do That?
MILK is often called "the perfect food," but was a plain glass of milk ever a treat?
Add some chocolate, the food of the Aztec gods, and magic is made.
Most children do not have to be coaxed to drink chocolate milk.
Even parents might find themselves indulging in a nip, instead of waiting for the ice cream to soften at midnight.
And there will be plenty of chocolate milk in school lunch rooms -- whenever school may start.
Chocolate milk has been made convenient and portable.
There are even some shelf-stable varieties, which need no refrigeration until they are opened.


Accord a Bittersweet Occasion for Arabs in U.S.
On his first trip to the West Bank two years ago to visit relatives, Ray Hanania, a Palestinian-American writer and political consultant from Chicago, said he had been strip-searched by the Israeli Army before he could even enter the area, then stopped twice more by the Israeli police as he walked through the streets where his father had grown up.
A gun was pressed into the small of his back.
He flashed his passport and was allowed to leave.
Just routine, the police said.


First Israel Fund
Investors in stocks with Israeli interests are among those breaking out the Champagne over the peace talks between Israel and the Palestine Liberation Organization.
First Israel Fund, a closed-end fund that invests in Israeli stocks, languished for most of the year before jumping, running up 18 percent since its Aug. 27 close.


Market Place; Cadbury seeks a U.S. company, perhaps Dr Pepper or A &amp; W.
IN recent years, Cadbury Schweppes P.L.C. has often been rumored to be a takeover target.
Now, the British soft drink and candy company has turned the tables.
Last month, it raised its stake in the Dr Pepper/Seven-Up Companies of Dallas to 25.9 percent from 5.7 percent and said it would not rule out an eventual bid for the entire company.
That prompted Dr Pepper to raise its anti-takeover defenses.


Accounts
*
Celestial Seasonings Inc., Boulder, Colo., to Tatham Euro RSCG, Chicago, for its estimated $6 million herbal tea account, previously at Ally &amp; Gargano, New York, for almost two years.
Tatham was awarded the account after a five-week review that included Ally and six other agencies.


Joan R. Sovern Dies; Abstract Sculptor, 57
Joan R. Sovern, a sculptor, died yesterday at her home in Manhattan. She was 57.
She died of cancer, said her husband, Michael, who stepped down in June as president of Columbia University.


Don't Throw Out the Baby in Parking Scandal; Fines Raise Revenue
To the Editor:
Perhaps scandals are so recurrent in New York City's Parking Violations Bureau because the city and the bureau have perverted the purpose of parking fines.
These fines were once imposed as a means of traffic control.
Over the years this has been changed to raising massive sums to fill gaps in the city's budget.
Parking violation is now merely a revenue raising device.


An Italian Orchestra Plays Against Type
At the concert's close here on Thursday night, the audience cheered and cheered, and the operative word was "bravi," not "bravo." This was no insult to the conductor, Riccardo Muti, whose smiles indicated real pleasure at the enthusiastic response.
The plural "bravi" was a tribute to the orchestra, La Scala Philharmonic, or, as Mr.
Muti insists on calling it, even on his internationally released records, L'Orchestra Filarmonica della Scala.
This was, in truth, a good concert, part of a short tour of Spain and Italy that the orchestra has undertaken before it buckles down to rehearse its fall symphonic season in Milan.
With Brahms's Serenade No. 1, excerpts from Busoni's "Turandot" and Ravel's "Bolero" and an encore of Verdi's "Vespri Siciliani" Overture, the program avoided heavyweight German scores but otherwise revealed an ensemble of skill and style.


The Lebanese Still Seeking War Missing
Lebanon is trying to rebuild from the ruins of 16 years of civil war.
But to Samira Zakariya, a Lebanese Christian mother, "all these efforts will remain meaningless until my son Iskandar is returned home."
Iskandar Zakariya is one of an estimated 17,000 people abducted by rival Muslim and Christian militias in the Lebanese war from 1975 to 1990.
He disappeared in May 1985, and his mother says she believes he is being held by the pro-Iranian Party of God.


Kennelly Not Running For Governor
United States Representative Barbara B. Kennelly, a Hartford Democrat who came within a whisker of running for governor in 1990 and who was considered her party's unspoken front-runner in 1994, today withdrew from consideration.
She said she would remain in the House of Representatives, and made it sound final, though she declined to say she would never run for governor.


Eating Well
Two reports within the last year on breast cancer and diet have provided discouraging news for women who work hard to keep their fat consumption down, hoping to avoid a disease that affects one in nine American women.
Neither study showed a correlation between the level of fat consumption and the incidence of breast cancer.
The annual conference of the American Institute for Cancer Research, held in Washington last week, sought to shed light on the conflicting evidence about the role fat plays in the disease.
Despite the ambiguity in the research results, four of the five panelists at the session on studies conducted on humans presented information that tended to confirm, to one degree or another, that a high-fat diet increased the risk of breast cancer, though it may be just one of several factors.


Words Israelis Insist P.L.O. Drop in Pact
One barrier to the formal signing of the agreement on limited Palestinian self-rule has been the prolonged negotiations over mutual recognition of the Palestine Liberation Organization and Israel.
Israel is reportedly asking that the P.L.O. revoke the call for the destruction of Israel that is part of the organization's covenant, the Palestinian National Charter.
Here are excerpts from the charter, adopted in 1964 and revised in 1968:
Armed struggle is the only way to liberate Palestine.
. . .


Chrysler Has a Small Car for the Young Market
Zippy, inexpensive, environmentally friendly -- oh, and "huggable."
Such are the qualities, according to the Chrysler Corporation, of the Neon, a bubble-shaped, bug-eyed car it introduced today that will test two propositions: that a small car can make money and that Americans in the 20-something age group can be persuaded to buy a car built by the Big Three.


Running for an Old Job That Has a New Game
Howard Goodman, Irving Polinsky and Siegfried Mittelman were immersed in their pinochle game at a Bronx center for the elderly when word came that the room would soon be taken over for a campaign appearance by Donald M. Halperin, a candidate in the Democratic primary for New York City public advocate.
Mr.
Polinsky and Mr.
Mittelman looked up from their cards.
They said they had no idea what a New York City public advocate was.
Mr.
Goodman said he knew it was the new name for the old job of City Council president.


RESULTS PLUS
SOCCER  For England's Manager, It's Win or Else  Graham Taylor will face the most crucial game of his three-year reign as England's soccer manager today when his team plays host to Poland in a World Cup qualifying match it cannot afford to lose.
The matchup at Wembley Stadium in London is one of 11 World Cup qualifying games being played across Europe today, with spots beckoning for next year's finals in the United States.
Switzerland, which leads Group 1, visits Scotland, while in Group 3, Albania is host to Denmark, Ireland is host to Lithuania and Latvia plays at Northern Ireland.
In Group 4, Wales is at home against the Representation of Czechs and Slovaks (formerly Czechoslovakia) and Romania visits the Faeroe Islands.
In Group 5, Russia goes to Hungary and Iceland plays host to Luxembourg.
In Group 6, Sweden goes to Bulgaria and France visits Finland.


Italian Workers Riot to Protest Plant Closing
With unemployment swelling to perilous levels across broad swaths of southern Italy, hundreds of chemical workers in Crotone, on the sole of Italy's boot, barricaded themselves in their factory today after an angry night of riots.
During the night, workers poured barrels of toxic phosphorous on roads and set it afire in a protest against the planned closing of their unprofitable factory by its owner, the Italian Treasury.


Olympia U.S.A. Reappoints Chief and Names Chairman
Olympia &amp; York U.S.A., the American arm of the failed Canadian real estate giant, said yesterday that it had reappointed its chief executive and chosen a head for its new board of directors, both signals that the company is preparing to move ahead on efforts to restructure its $5.3 billion of debt.
The company said John E. Zuccotti, its president and chief executive, had been reappointed, and that Richard Shinn, a former chairman of the Metropolitan Life Insurance Company, had been elected chairman of the board of directors named for the company as a result of court proceedings this spring and summer.


Jackson Is No Flop With His Flip
Dan Reeves found it easy to laugh at the brashness.
He knows Mark Jackson, having spent eight years coaching him in Denver.
Other coaches might have frowned at Jackson's unorthodox scoring method on Sunday -- he back-flopped, Nestea-plunge style into the end zone -- but not Reeves.
Reeves likes the flash.
He likes the display of emotion.
And he especially likes what Jackson, a new Giants receiver, can do in Reeves's offensive system.


WNET Inquiry Finds No Proof Black Unit Freed 2 Nazi Camps
After a five-month review of a disputed documentary that portrayed members of a black tank battalion as liberators of the Nazi concentration camps at Dachau and Buchenwald, WNET, the public television station, said yesterday that it could find no evidence that the unit liberated either camp.
The film, "Liberators: Fighting on Two Fronts in World War II," which had been heralded by Mayor David N. Dinkins and other black and Jewish leaders as a heroic example of blacks helping Jews in crisis, and which was nominated this year for an Academy Award for best documentary feature film, was pulled from public television in February as questions about its accuracy mounted.
Yesterday, officials at WNET, Channel 13, said they had requested that the makers of the film, which is available on videocassette, remove the station's name because it does not meet WNET's "standards of accuracy." WNET helped produce the film, which was broadcast nationally on public television last November.


Elmer M. Blistein, 73, Humorist and Professor
Elmer M. Blistein, a humorist and emeritus professor of English at Brown University, died on Friday at his home in Providence, R.I.
He was 73.
The cause of death was congestive heart failure, a university spokeswoman said.


INSIDE
Botanical Garden Seeks User-Friendly Approach
The New York Botanical Garden is undertaking a seven-year, $165 million master plan to rebuild the landmark institution, both physically and philosophically.
The Bronx garden is increasing its financing for research and turning its collections into more user-friendly exhibits.
Page B1.
A New Surgeon General
After months of rancor caused by her outspokenness on abortion and sex education, Joycelyn Elders was confirmed by the Senate.
Page A18.
WNET Calls Program Untrue
Channel 13 says a program portraying a black battalion liberating two Nazi camps was untrue.
Page B1.
When Will School Bells Ring?
A setback in asbestos inspections raised new questions on when New York's schools would open.
And in Chicago, parents adapted to another delay in classes.
Pages B3 and B12.
Courier and Becker Fall
Jim Courier, the No. 1 player in men's tennis, and Boris Becker, seeded fourth, were the latest upset victims at the United States Open.
Page B15.


Wooing Visitors Into the Garden
There is a plywood fence around the Victorian conservatory at the New York Botanical Garden and the big glass rooms are being emptied of plants.
Some are priceless treasures, because the species have vanished from the earth.
The plant evacuation is the first step in a $21 million renovation of the elegant old Crystal Palace greenhouse -- and the start of a seven-year, $165-million master plan to rebuild, both physically and philosophically, one of the city's landmark institutions.


Sports of The Times; Thankfully, Open Form Loses Serve
AS the sky darkened and a cloud of match points hung gloomily over the top-seeded player's head, Louis Armstrong Stadium suddenly remembered that it preferred Jim Courier, American tennis star, to a Frenchman named Cedric Pioline.
This was after more than three hours of fans sounding bored by two guys in Nike caps and shirts trading top-spun ground strokes.
You almost couldn't tell the players without a computer-ranking printout, though this lamentable uniformity might explain the crowd's indifference to the struggle that was upon Courier.


Corrections
Articles on Aug. 24, 25 and 26 about a hostage crisis in Nicaragua referred incorrectly to Humberto Ortega Saavedra, whose dismissal some hostage-takers demanded.
He is the chief of the army, not Defense Minister.
The articles on Aug. 25 and 26 also referred incorrectly to Alfredo Cesar, one of the last five politicians held captive in Managua.
He is a former president of the National Assembly, not the current one.


Youth Receives Maximum Prison Term in 2 Students' Killings
After the mothers of two slain teen-agers told of their grief, and the youth who shot their sons apologized for his "terrible mistake," a Brooklyn judge imposed the maximum sentence yesterday for what he termed the "cold-blooded execution" of two students in a Brooklyn high school last year.
Kahlil Sumpter, 17, convicted of manslaughter but not murder by a jury that found he had acted "under the influence of extreme emotional disturbance," received 6 2/3 to 20 years in prison -- the longest term possible for someone guilty of two counts of manslaughter committed at the age of 15. 'I Have No Son'
"This is all I have from my son -- a plot from a grave," said Linda Moore, the mother of one victim, Ian Moore, 17, as she waved an envelope in State Supreme Court in Brooklyn.
Mr.
Sumpter, sitting nearby, looked away quickly.


SOUTH AFRICAN BLACKS GAIN SHARE OF POWER IN MONTHS BEFORE A MULTIRACIAL VOTE
The white Government of South Africa tonight agreed to share broad powers with a multiparty transition committee in the months leading up to South Africa's first universal election.
The accord would subject the police, the army, the budget and civil service to the oversight of a predominantly black interim council.
The agreement, completed today at negotiations involving most of the country's political rivals, means that as early as October, South Africa's disenfranchised blacks will have their first formal voice in the running of the country.


Washington Takes Leaf From Business Manuals
In its drive to streamline the Federal Government, the Clinton Administration is following the path that Corporate America has been on for years.
It is called "downsizing" or "re-engineering," in business jargon, while the code phrase among policy makers is "reinventing government." Whatever the terminology, it means drastically changing the way work is done -- and it also means significant job cuts.
In the private sector, the results have been decidedly mixed.
Companies like General Electric and Xerox have become leaner, more competitive forces in the global economy, while the jury is still out on struggling giants like I.B.M. and General Motors.


Tomatoes Love Clams
JUST about every country with a seacoast, from the United States and Mexico to Portugal and Italy, has some variation of a clam and tomato recipe.
It may be served as a soup or a stew, or perhaps over rice or pasta.
The version that follows is quite simple.
For those unlikely to have a good, rich fish stock in the freezer, there are two alternatives: a frozen fish stock available in some specialty markets, or bottled clam juice.


Corrections
A map on Aug. 31 with an article about politics and poverty in Nicaragua showed an incorrect location for La Esperanza, one site of desperation.
As noted in the article, it is just outside Leon, about 20 miles northeast of that city (not 200 miles).


Editorial Notebook; The Old Bridge at Mostar
The photograph, taken 23 years ago with a child's box camera, is faded now.
In it the river is not quite the intense aquamarine that I remember, and the hills that rise behind the old limestone houses seem sun-bleached.
The photographer -- myself -- framed the picture clumsily.
Even so the subject, Mostar's 16th-century Old Bridge, is beautiful.
I hadn't looked at that picture, or any of those I took during a journey to Yugoslavia, for a long time.
Then recently I saw a very different photograph in The Washington Post.
A man carrying buckets of water was crossing a curious structure swathed in scaffolding, tires, planks and blankets to protect it from shell blasts and sniper fire.
Were it not for the caption, I would never have guessed it was my bridge -- my bridge because love confers possession, if only in the mind.
And I had loved Mostar.


On This Night, Becker Digs Too Deep a Hole
Boris Becker's habit of falling into a two-set hole and then climbing out backfired last night when 60th-ranked Magnus Larsson closed the trap door on Becker in the fourth set of their fourth-round match at the United States Open.
The 6-2, 6-3, 3-6, 7-5 victory by the unheralded 23-year-old Swede claimed still another men's contender, as Becker was seeded fourth.
On the day the Open also lost its top-seeded player, Jim Courier, the fourth round was completed with 11 of the 16 men's seeds gone.
Becker's departure also insures a semifinal berth for the winner of Larsson's quarterfinal with the unseeded Australian Wally Masur, who rallied from 0-5 in the fifth set to beat his countryman Jaime Morgan last night.


In America; No Job, No Dream
New York City held its Labor Day parade as usual on Monday, but there was little to celebrate.
The bad news about employment just keeps on coming.
The Government reported last week that the number of payroll jobs fell by 39,000 in August, the first net drop in more than a year.


Labor Talks Cloud Carnegie Opening
The opening concert of Carnegie Hall's season may be threatened by a wage dispute between the musicians and the management of the Philadelphia Orchestra.
The musicians' current contract expires on Sept. 19, three days before the orchestra and its new music director, Wolfgang Sawallisch, are scheduled to perform at Carnegie Hall's 103d season opening night.
The concert is a benefit for the hall, with tickets priced from $20 to $1,000.
Catherine Gevers, the hall's music administrator, said that the hall had no contingency plans.
"We have been in close touch with our colleagues in Philadelphia," she said, "and they have given us the impression that a strike is unlikely."


Don't Throw Out the Baby in Parking Scandal
To the Editor:
As one of the few physicians who has survived more than 10 years of public service as an urban chief health officer, I occasionally stick my public health stethoscope on another city's chest.
During a delightful August visit to New York City, I read of Mayor David N. Dinkins's canceling a collection contract with Lockheed Information Management Services.





Koyasan Journal; For Japan Inc., Company Rosters That Never Die
In this nation of workaholics, people often devote their lives to their companies.
Here at Japan's largest cemetery, the companies show their appreciation after the workers have died.
Here, among the graves of shogun and samurai, are more than 250 corporate "tombs," built by some of Japan's leading companies to honor their dead employees.


Bonilla Hits Obstacle
Bobby Bonilla was finally at peace with New York and with his bat, but one divot later, the Mets' best player was gone.
Churning around second base tonight in a base-running adventure, Bonilla stumbled on a clump of red clay, jarred his left shoulder and partially dislocated it.
The Astros' team doctor, William Bryan, put Bonilla's arm back into place, X-rays at the Methodist Hospital here were normal, but he is expected to be out at least 10 days and possibly for the rest of the season.


Mortimer Brandt; Art Dealer, 88
Mortimer Brandt, a former New York art dealer who had been living in retirement in Baltimore, died there on Monday.
He was 88.
The cause was cancer, said his daughter Sandra Waters.


New York's Archaic Courts
Should there be a constitutional convention to amend the New York State Constitution?
Under the State Constitution, the question whether there should be a convention must be on the ballot every 20 years, or whenever the Legislature puts it there.
The next time it must appear is 1997.


Maryland Agency Prices an Issue
The Maryland Department of Transportation priced $249.1 million of consolidated transportation revenue and refunding revenue bonds yesterday through competitive bidding won by Goldman, Sachs &amp; Company.
Yields on the refunding bonds ranged from 3.05 percent in 1995 to 4.55 percent in 2005, while the yields on the new money bonds range from 3.30 percent in 1996 to 4.80 percent in 2008.


Essay; Is the Fix In?
George Bush privately assured Bill Clinton that he would not criticize the new President during the first year of his term.
I cannot attribute that to any source, but trust me.
And Mr.
Bush has kept his word.
In what may be an unspoken quid pro quo, the Clinton Administration has moved to quash any revelations about Bush's Iraqgate scandal.


Corrections
An article yesterday about proposals to streamline the Federal Government referred incorrectly to an official who oversaw an effort to streamline the Texas state government.
The official, John Sharp, is state comptroller, not the former comptroller; his term runs until 1995.


A Steel Town's Rescue Mission
In this smokestack city halfway between Cleveland and Columbus, a group of business people and merchants give a weekly bagpipe concert in a downtown parking lot at dusk.
Fritz's, the local hangout, lets diners pay for their meals on the honor system.
And out-of-towners who park illegally find "parking tickets" on their windshields with a cartoon of a smiling meter and the message, "This one's on us!"


MIDEAST ACCORD: Washington Memo; As History Unfolds, U.S. Takes to Sidelines
As the Israelis and Palestinians struggle with the final wording of a declaration recognizing each other's existence, the United States is settling into the role of hand-holder, fund-raiser and protocol chief.
It is calling on the players to press forward, asking the Europeans and the rich Persian Gulf Arabs to underwrite the cost of peace and wrestling with the guest list for a still-tentative signing ceremony.
Left out of the secret negotiations brokered by the Norwegians and unable to talk directly to the Palestine Liberation Organization, the Administration is not offering proposals of its own to help break the deadlock or functioning as the "full partner" it has offered to be.
Rather, officials involved in the process are dealing with details like whether to tell the Norwegians whether it is appropriate to pass on certain messages to the Egyptians and how to fend off old friends who are lobbying to get invited to the White House signing.


30-Year Bond Yield Continues to Drop
The yield on the 30-year Treasury bond fell again yesterday as the rally in the long end of the bond market continued.
But short-term interest rates moved a little higher.
The yield on the 30-year bond has plunged a quarter of a percentage point in just five trading days and many traders and analysts are still reluctant to say the run is over.


Resignation Setting Off Maneuvers Between 2 Top Democrats
Attorney General Robert Abrams's resignation set off a complex political dance between two of New York State's most powerful Democrats: Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo and Assembly Speaker Saul Weprin.
Before Mr.
Abrams's resignation takes effect on Dec. 31, the Legislature must select a replacement to fill the rest of his term, which ends next year.
Of the 211 legislators, 127 are Democrats, and Mr.
Weprin controls the single largest bloc of votes among them: 101 Assembly Democrats.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.00
3.11
3.08
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
2.96
2.95
2.90
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.04
3.03
2.94
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
4.82
4.85
5.80
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
5.86
5.90
7.24
TELEPHONE BONDS
6.82
6.82
8.40
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
5.43
5.47
6.22
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


The Talk of Hollywood; Honing a Movie on Rough Previews
Audience previews are nerve-racking for movie executives and film makers.
And officials at Columbia Pictures, and its parent company, Sony, are especially nervous over previews of "I'll Do Anything," a big-budget movie that may or may not have music and may or may not be released this Christmas.
These concerns would seem like another typical Hollywood anxiety attack, an almost daily occurrence, except for the fact that Sony and Columbia have endured a very troubled summer.
The embarrassing failure of Arnold Schwarzenegger's "Last Action Hero"; the allegations against Michael Jackson, who has a contract of between $50 million and $60 million with Sony, and the Heidi Fleiss call-girl scandal (and her friendships with a Columbia executive or two) have shaken the Japanese-owned company.


Delays Expected on George Washington Bridge
Commuters and other travelers: beware.
New York-bound traffic on the upper levels of the George Washington Bridge is going to be snarled until Monday morning because of two major repaving jobs.
The worst of the traffic jams are expected this morning and again tomorrow morning during rush hour.
On an average weekday, from 6 to 9 A.M., about 32,000 vehicles cross the bridge eastbound, from New Jersey to New York.


SENATE BACKS BILL ON PUBLIC SERVICE
The Senate today passed and sent to the White House the national service bill, the first new program proposed by President Clinton to be ready for his signature.
The 57-to-40 vote found 6 Republicans and 51 Democrats supporting the $1.5 billion, three-year program and 4 Democrats and 36 Republicans in opposition.


Rangers Are Expected to Deal Hurlbut
The Rangers are expected to announce todaythat they have traded defenseman MIKE HURLBUT, 26, to the Quebec Nordiques for defenseman ALEKSANDR KARPOVTSEV,23.
Karpovtsev is the former captain of Moscow Dynamo, one of the best teams in the former Soviet Union, and played with the current Ranger ALEKSEI KOVALEV.
Hurlbut spent time with the Rangers and their Binghamton farm team last season.
In 23 games with New York, he had one goal and eight assists.


Corrections
A picture caption in Business Day yesterday about the Comcast Corporation reversed the identifications of its top officers and misstated its revenues.
Ralph J. Roberts, the chairman, was at the right; his son Brian, Comcast's president, was at the left.
The company had revenues of $900.3 million last year, not $83 million.


The Daily News puts its first big Zuckerman-era campaign behind a new weekly television guide.
WHAT'S in The Daily News?
With apologies to Frank Loesser, I'll tell you what's in The Daily News: new TV book on slick paper with color listings and other stuff meant to make other TV books start singing the blues.
That's what's in The Daily News.


AT HOME WITH: Harry Belafonte; The Political Is Personal
HARRY BELAFONTE, dressed in three shades of green and sitting in a blood-red room in his rambling Upper West Side apartment, is talking about who he is.
It is a delicious summer afternoon in the 66th year of his life.
He speaks deliberately, but with such intensity that one imagines the words lingering in the air as they leave his mouth.
The apartment is quiet.
The temperature has dropped, so Mr.
Belafonte turns off the window air-conditioner.
Julie, a lithe former dancer and his wife of over 30 years, is out.
Omalu, his fat black cat, intermittently meows in another wing of the labyrinth of rooms.


Political Memo; The Road Show, Part II: Reinventing Bill and Al
The fellow on the left in the navy suit was the Vice President, the keeper of all the cryptic details.
The one on the right was the President; his role was to empathize, to talk about trust and to radiate sincerity while discussing belief in Government.


COMPANY NEWS
CORNING INC., Corning, N.Y., and Costar Corp. have completed the previously announced merger of Costar into a Corning subsidiary in a tax-free transaction.


Puerto Rico's Choice Must Be Heeded
To the Editor:
The Rev.
Dr.
Martin Luther King Jr. moved a nation with his dream, so eloquently stated 30 years ago on the steps of the Lincoln Memorial.


Devils and Senators Feud Over Damaged Goods
Executives and doctors representing the New Jersey Devils and the Ottawa Senators debated by telephone yesterday without resolving a dispute over the physical condition of goalie Peter Sidorkiewicz.
If they can't settle the issue, it may go to Brian Burke, the league's new vice president for hockey affairs, who has already discussed the matter informally with both sides.


Monaco Replaces Olympique Marseilles
French soccer officials named Monaco to replace scandal-ridden Olympique Marseilles in the European club championship.
The Union of European Football Associations, the sport's European governing body, banned Marseille on Monday from defending its European Cup title amid a match-fixing scandal.


Israeli Cabinet Official Quits, Imperiling Peace Plan
With his draft peace agreement with the Palestinians on the line, Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin suffered a potentially damaging blow today when the head of a religious party was forced to resign from the Cabinet, threatening the Government's hold on Parliament.
If the six members of Parliament from the religious Shas Party quit the governing coalition in sympathy with their leader -- and there is a chance they will -- the Prime Minister will lose his majority and thus the assured legislative support he needs for his peace plan.
The resignation was over a domestic issue unrelated to Palestinian autonomy, but nevertheless it could hurt the peace plan's chances.


Review/Television; The War After 11: Enter Chase
"And now," joked the announcer introducing the star of "The Chevy Chase Show," "he's still not ready for prime time." No, and if Tuesday's premiere on Fox at 11 P.M. was any indication, he's not ready for a late-night talk show either.
On a disaster scale of 1 to 10, this one rated a 12.
In the course of his first hour, Mr.
Chase had perhaps two or three minutes that didn't induce cringing.
And those were in a news-update segment, an idea filched from NBC's "Saturday Night Live," the show on which a one-year stint beginning in 1975 led to a rather lucrative but undistinguished movie career for Mr.
Chase.
As his talk-show debut unraveled embarrassingly, even Mr.
Chase seemed to sense the magnitude of his folly when he asked a guest, Whoopi Goldberg, whose own talk series was canceled earlier this year, "What are you doing now that your show's gone the way mine is about to go?"


Pop and Jazz in Review
Jacky Terrasson  Bradley's 70 University Place (at 11th Street) Greenwich Village Through Sunday
It's almost impossible to overemphasize the importance of Bradley's on the jazz scene in New York, and the club's booking of the young pianist Jacky Terrasson is a perfect example of why the club has the stature that it does.
Mr.
Terrasson, in his late 20's, is best known for holding the piano chair in the drummer Art Taylor's band; among close watchers of the jazz world, he has always been a player with a lot of promise and virtually no public identity.


Events: Design Exhibitions
Furnishings: Two Views  Newark Museum, 49 Washington Street, at Central Avenue, Newark; (201) 596-6550.
Starting on Wednesday and continuing through July 4, furnishings and decorative objects from the 1860's and the turn of the century will be exhibited together to explore changes in the American home over 40 years.
Items in the show, which focuses on furnishings for the dining room and the parlor, include a walnut sideboard from 1854, a silver tea set made by Baldwin &amp; Company of Newark, porcelain vases based on the novel "Uncle Tom's Cabin" and a bronze electric lamp made in 1914.
Open Wednesday through Sunday, noon to 5 P.M.
No charge.


Tartabull's Shoulder Aching
Danny Tartabull returned to right field for the first time in almost two months Tuesday night, felt the pain in his right shoulder today and wondered if he should be playing the outfield.
"It's not getting any better," said Tartabull, a bundle of ice draped over his shoulder.
"By me not resting it, it's not getting any better. If Buck wants me to play the outfield, I got to play the outfield."


Clinton Rebuffs Bosnian Leader In Plea for Help
The President of Bosnia came to the White House today to appeal to President Clinton to set a deadline for the use of force against the Bosnian Serbs if they do not lift their siege of Sarajevo.
But Mr.
Clinton's answer was essentially that the Bosnian leader should go back to the bargaining table and cut the best deal he can, because Washington is not coming to the rescue, officials said.
Mr.
Clinton explained that Washington is willing to use diplomatic and economic sanctions to keep the pressure on the Serbs and Croats to be more conciliatory at the bargaining table, aides said.
But Mr.
Clinton added that there is simply no support among the Western allies for an armed intervention in Bosnia at this time, and Washington is not inclined to go it alone, officials said.
Invokes Congressional Approval
The Bosnian President, Alija Izetbegovic, reportedly told Mr.
Clinton that his big worry is that even if he does return to the peace talks in Geneva and strikes a deal with the Croats and Serbs -- something he was not sure he could sell politically at home -- the Western allies would not come to monitor its provisions and he would be left on his own.


RESULTS PLUS
SOCCER  England Beats Poland to End Drought  England, at last playing like it belongs among soccer's elite, beat Poland, 3-0, last night in London to join five other teams who took major steps toward spots in next year's World Cup.
England ended its run of six games without a victory.
Ireland is on the brink of qualifying after a 2-0 victory over Lithuania.
Denmark, Romania, France and Switzerland also moved closer to berths.
England, which drew 1-1 at Poland in May, moved within 1 point of the lead in Europe's Group 2.
England, with 11 points after 8 games, trails Norway's 12-point tally in 7 games.
The Netherlands, is third with 9 points in 7 games, and Poland has 8 points in 6.
The top two teams in each of Europe's six groups advance to the 24-nation finals.
Six teams worldwide have qualified: United States (host), Germany (defending champion), Greece, Mexico, Russia and Colombia.


Back to School, but Only for Some


Corrections
A picture caption yesterday about two Florida defendants convicted of having set a Brooklyn man ablaze reversed their identities in some copies.
The man in the light suit was Charles Rourk; Mark Kohut wore a dark one.


The National Baptist Convention Opens in New York


Egrets of New York
To The Home Section:  As a former biology teacher, I was intrigued to learn that Roger Tory Peterson once "corrected his biology teacher, who maintained that snowy egrets were extinct" ("In the Studio With Roger Tory Peterson: Reluctant Earthling," Aug. 26.) The fact is that snowy egrets are very much alive and well right here within the confines of New York City.
They can easily be spotted at the Jamaica Bay Wildlife Refuge.
Here, with the distant World Trade Center towers fringing the background, there are lots of the tall, pure-white egrets on stiltlike legs to be seen foraging for food.


P.L.O. AIDE REPORTS PACT WITH ISRAEL OVER RECOGNITION
A senior Palestine Liberation Organization official said today that a tentative agreement for mutual recognition between the P.L.O. and Israel had been worked out and that Norwegian intermediaries were flying here tonight with a text of the accord.
The development took place as the P.L.O.'s 18-member Executive Committee -- with five missing -- began an important meeting here tonight that is widely expected to give a stamp of approval on Thursday or Friday to both the mutual recognition accord and the already-initialed agreement between Israel and the P.L.O. on self-rule by Palestinians in the Israeli-occupied Gaza Strip and part of the West Bank.
The meeting adjourned late tonight and will reconvene Thursday.


Sloan-Kettering Sues Empire on Payment Denials
The Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center filed suit against Empire Blue Cross and Blue Shield yesterday for refusing to pay for bone-marrow therapy and treatment with the drug Taxol for some patients.
Bills totaling $2 million for 58 patients who received one of the therapies have been turned down by Empire since 1990, sometimes months after the insurer initially authorized the treatments, Sloan-Kettering officials said.


SOVIET FILE FEEDS DEBATE ON P.O.W.'S
A new Russian document suggesting that Vietnam held more American prisoners of war than it acknowledged has been turned over to American authorities in Moscow.
The Pentagon released a translation of an account of a Vietnamese Communist Party meeting held in late 1970 or early 1971, quoting a Vietnamese official, Khoang Anya, as saying Vietnam held 735 "American aviator P.O.W.'s" although it had only given out the names of 368.


Traffic Alert
TODAY
At least one eastbound lane on the upper level of the George Washington Bridge is closed until 6 A.M.
Monday for repaving.
One-hour delays are expected during the morning and evening rush hours.
Construction will also close the exit ramp leading to the Henry Hudson Parkway, Riverside Drive and 178th Street.
TOMORROW
George Washington Bridge repaving continues, closing one eastbound lane on the upper level until 6 A.M.
Monday.
At 10 P.M., three of four lanes on the upper level that feed the Major Deegan and Cross Bronx Expressways will be closed until 9 A.M.
Saturday for construction.


Growth, Pollution and Crime Stifling Bogota
Though its population has surpassed six million, Bogota is still just one-third the size of Latin America's largest cities, led by Mexico City and Sao Paulo, Brazil.
But the Colombian capital faces similar problems of uncontrolled growth, pollution and high crime.
"Bogota is increasingly becoming like unmanageable cities such as Mexico City or Sao Paulo," said Saul Pineda, vice president of planning at the Bogota Chamber of Commerce.


METRO DIGEST
ATTORNEY GENERAL ABRAMS TO RESIGN
The New York State Attorney General, Robert Abrams, his hopes of winning a Senate seat dashed last year and his prospects for the governorship apparently stymied, abruptly announced that he would resign the post that he has held for 15 years to become a partner in a Manhattan law firm at the end of the year.
A1.
Attorney General Abrams's resignation set off a complex political dance between two of New York State's most powerful Democrats.
B9.


Market Place; Investors can only guess which video game device will conquer.
THE market for shares in the 3DO Company, a tiny video game start-up, shivered briefly last month after the Nintendo Company, the giant Japanese video game maker, and Silicon Graphics Inc., the American work station vendor, announced a partnership in video games.
Shares of 3DO, based in San Mateo, Calif., in the Silicon Valley south of here, fell $4, to $26, on Aug. 20 when word leaked out that Nintendo was planning to use a peppy Silicon Graphics chip at the heart of its next-generation game player.
But by yesterday, when 3DO stock lost 75 cents in Nasdaq trading, the shares had crept back up to $27.50.


Wait Till Next Year
For those spectators who were rained out of yesterday's day session, the National Tennis Center had mixed news.
Most tickets are exchangeable, but not until next year.


Martin Sets Sights on Stock-Car Mark
MARK MARTIN, who will try to set a record for Nascar's Winston Cup stock car series on Saturday night in Richmond, will testify to the role luck plays in auto racing.
Martin will seek a record fifth-straight race victory in Richmond.
But earlier this season, the 34-year-old driver from Batesville, Ark., was halted by everything from exploding engines to an empty gas tank on the way to sure victories.
"I do believe in the luck factor," he said yesterday via telephone.
"I do believe you can't win no matter how good you run unless things go your way."


TOSHIBA AND MICROSOFT TEAM UP ON SOFTWARE
The ToshibaCorporation and the MicrosoftCorporation said today that they would work more closely on future computer operating system software aimed at portable computers and handheld information appliances.
Toshiba said it would license Microsoft's At Work software, a system being developed to tie together all types of office equipment, and will incorporate the software into handheld devices it is developing.
A Toshiba spokesman said the company will get earlier access to information about Microsoft's operating systems, allowing the company to develop products quicker.


Back to New York
To the Editor:
Further on your Aug. 23 front-page article about the return of retirees to New York City: My wife and I moved out of the city when we married in 1949 and returned to Greenwich Village when we retired in 1991.
Many people questioned why we would consider moving to the noisy dangerous city instead of a quiet, peaceful place like Florida.
My answer was: "We will be dead a long time and don't need to practice." ELLIOT R. LANG  New York, Aug. 27, 1993


Corrections
The calendar of events in the Connecticut Weekly on Sunday about a showing of "The Misfits" at the Bantam Cinema tomorrow at 8:30 P.M. misstated the admission price.
It is $17.50, not $6.50.


Pop and Jazz in Review
Joe Chambers  Sweet Basil 88 Seventh Avenue South (at Bleecker Street) Greenwich Village Through Sunday
It's rare that the performance of a blues tune in a jazz club comes off as revelation, but on Tuesday night at Sweet Basil, Joe Chambers and his group launched into one, and it was exactly that.
Mr.
Chambers, one of the great drummers of the 1960's, had been performing mostly his own material, pieces with odd rhythms, unusual meters and jarring chord changes that moved a composition quickly from one place to the next, as if suddenly, in the middle of summer, it had begun to snow.
It was tense music that in its angularity and oddness demanded something from both the band and the audience.


A Day of Endorsements


Disputes Hamper U.N. Drive For a War Crimes Tribunal
A series of disputes over staffing and money are hampering the United Nations' efforts to set up an international tribunal to judge those accused of committing war crimes and other atrocities in Bosnia and Croatia.
After agreeing earlier this year to create the first such war crimes tribunal since those set up by the victorious Allies to judge German and Japanese leaders at the end of the World War II, the 15-member Security Council now finds itself divided over the choice of a prosecutor.


Accounts
*
Hollywood Entertainment Corp., Portland, Ore., to Aka Inc., Portland, to handle advertising for its Hollywood Video chain, previously at Cap Hedges &amp; Associates, Portland.
Billings were estimated at $2 million. *
Champion Products, Winston-Salem, N.C., to Long Haymes Carr Lintas, Winston-Salem, to handle sales promotion and sports marketing for the sports apparel division of the Sara Lee Corporation., previously at Lifestyle Management Group, New York.
Long Haymes already handles other Sara Lee accounts.
Billings were not disclosed.


Slow Start, But Sampras Sinks Chang
Pete Sampras is synonymous with the power serve, the stroke that has assumed a stranglehold on men's tennis, and it's an association he doesn't deny.
But when he took on his lifelong sparring partner Michael Chang last night in the quarterfinals of the United States Open, Sampras unveiled several covert weapons, the sum of which tangled Chang in a baffling trap of defiant ground strokes, geometric volleys and, inevitably, sonic serves.


U.S. and Russia Sign Peacekeeper Training Pact
American and Russian army divisions, which faced each other during the tense days of the cold war, will conduct joint peacekeeping exercises under an agreement the two countries signed today.
The peacekeeping exercises, in both countries and in Europe, will involve the Third Infantry Division based in Frankfurt, Germany, and the 27th Motorized Rifle Division from the Volga District in Russia.


Transactions
Baseball  National League
PITTSBURGH PIRATES -- Placed Randy Tomlin and Zane Smith, pitchers, on the 60-day disabled list.
Waived Mike Bell, first baseman-outfielder, for the purpose of giving him his unconditional release.
Recalled Midre Cummings, outfielder, and Paul Miller, pitcher, from Buffalo of the American Association and Rich Aude, first baseman, Danny Miceli, pitcher, and Tony Womack, shortstop, from Carolina of the Southern League.
Football  National Football League
CLEVELAND BROWNS -- Signed Louis Riddick, defensive back.
Waived Ernie Logan, defensive lineman, and Curtis Cotton, defensive back.
Signed Rich McKenzie, linebacker, and Chris Luneberg, offensive lineman, to the practice squad.
Waived Frank Hartley, tight end, and Eric Hamilton, defensive back, from the practice squad.
DENVER BRONCOS -- Signed Alphonso Taylor, nose tackle.
NEW ENGLAND PATRIOTS -- Signed Rich Baldinger, offensive lineman.
Cut Steve Gordon, center.
NEW ORLEANS SAINTS -- Re-signed Israel Byrd, cornerback, to the practice squad.
SEATTLE SEAHAWKS -- Signed Mack Strong, fullback, to the practice squad.


Austin G. Cooley, 93, Inventor Helped Develop the Fax Machine
Austin G. Cooley, a telecommunications pioneer who helped develop the fax machine, died on Tuesday at his home in Sequim, Wash.
He was 93.
The cause of death was a stroke, said his wife, Helene.


Southwestern Bell Sells Debt Issues
The Southwestern Bell Corporation, the regional telephone company based in San Antonio, sold $400 million in debt securities yesterday through underwriters led by Salomon Brothers Inc.
A $200 million issue of 6 5/8 percent debentures due 2024 was priced at 99.75 to yield 6.80 percent, or about 80 basis points more than Treasury securities with a similar maturity.
A basis point is one-hundredth of a percent.


NOMINATION OPENS COLD WAR WOUNDS
President Clinton's nomination of Morton H. Halperin, a former official in the Johnson and Nixon Administrations, to a Pentagon post has stirred up ideological animosities dating from the Vietnam War.
A conservative advocacy group and a growing number of Republican senators are leading the charge against Mr.
Halperin, who used to direct the Washington office of the American Civil Liberties Union and who is Mr.
Clinton's choice to become Assistant Secretary of Defense for Democracy and Peacekeeping, a newly created job to supervise policies overseeing the use of international peacekeeping forces.


Boeing Talks To Japanese About Project
The Boeing Company has held talks with its Japanese suppliers about jointly building a small jet that would hold about 80 passengers.
A Boeing spokesman, Russell D. Young, emphasized yesterday that the discussions were "very preliminary," saying that no decisions had been made on whether to work together on the jet, which would be called the YSX.


Time to Lift the Ban On Travel to Lebanon
To the Editor:
"Beirut Reborn," your Aug. 29 front-page special report, updates the world on a country that used to have "war-torn" unofficially part of its name.
Yet while Lebanon revives, Washington hinders it by maintaining a travel ban to Lebanon on United States passports, putting Lebanon in the company of Libya and Iraq.


Connecticut Sells Transport Bonds
The State of Connecticut sold $247.8 million of special tax-obligation refunding bonds yesterday for transportation purposes.
Underwriters led by Bear, Stearns &amp; Company initially priced the issue to yield from 2.60 percent for a bond due in 1994 to 3.90 percent in 1998, 4.50 percent in 2003 and 4.80 percent in 2006.


Elders Is Sworn In as Surgeon General


Berlin Ballet Director Picked for Danish Ballet
Peter Schaufuss, the director of the Berlin Ballet, has been named artistic director of the Royal Danish Ballet.
Mr.
Schaufuss succeeds Frank Andersen, whose contract expires in July.


Don't Strangle the U.N.
Forty-eight years ago, as a correspondent for an Army newspaper, I covered the founding conference of the United Nations in San Francisco.
In the pressroom in the basement of the Opera House, I met the great essayist E. B. White, who was there for The New Yorker.
One day he posed a riddle.
"Sergeant," he said, "what is the most important thing for a marriage?" "Love?" I asked.
"No," he said.
"The ring."


Pennsylvania Sets Mortgage Bonds
The Pennsylvania Housing Finance Agency priced $129.2 million of single-family mortgage revenue bonds yesterday.
Paine Webber was the lead underwriter for $75 million of bonds in the financing.
Of that total, $27.8 million of bonds due in 2017, which are subject to the Federal alternative minimum tax, were priced to yield 5.469 percent and $47.2 million of bonds due in 2025, which are not subject to the tax, were priced to yield 5.60 percent.


Bridge
After 30 deals of play in the Bermuda Bowl final at the NEC World Championships here this afternoon, Norway led the Netherlands by 8 imps.
A total of 160 deals are scheduled, ending Friday.
This is the first time either country has reached a world championship final.
After 30 deals of a scheduled 128 in the final of the Venice Cup, the United States led Germany by 27.
The American team consists of Kerri Sanborn and Sue Picus, both of Manhattan; Karen McCallum of Boston; Sharon Osberg of San Francisco, and Kay Schulle and Jill Meyers, both of Santa Monica, Calif.


Judge Bars Lorenzo's Air Venture
By Frank A. Lorenzo's reckoning, the 1980's were past, and so too was his role as the tallest lightning rod in the airline industry.
It was time to pursue his vision of a low-cost airline serving the East Coast.
An administrative law judge dashed that vision yesterday, perhaps for good.
Capping months of opposition from Washington lawmakers and labor unions, a judge appointed by the Department of Transportation said that although Mr.
Lorenzo's company, ATX Inc., had the money and management expertise to run a scheduled carrier, it "lacks the proper compliance disposition."


Beating a Path Uptown to the New Barneys Store
The Barneys New York store on Madison Avenue and 61st Street, touted for months for its spare, futuristic, design, opened its doors to the public for the first time at 10 A.M. yesterday.
Within minutes, the pristine space was barely discernible through the throng of the untidy public.
There were the sort of gawkers who stand by crime scenes.
There were fashion pilgrims who had made cross-country treks.
There were skeptical employees from the neighborhood's competing shops.
But most of all, there were shoppers.


First Boston Finishes Plan To Regroup
Seeking to end a period of turmoil at the investment company, the CS First Boston Group announced late yesterday that it had completed a series of organizational changes and named several key executives to new positions.
Among the changes, Allen D. Wheat, most recently president and chief executive of Credit Suisse Financial Products, was placed in charge of the firm's day-to-day operations as its president and chief operating officer.
He succeeds Archibald Cox Jr., who stunned Wall Street in July by stepping down as president and chief executive.


Robert Clements, 80, A Renaissance Scholar
Prof.
Robert J. Clements of Mahopac, N.Y., a Renaissance scholar who started the program of comparative literature at New York University in 1965 and headed it until 1978, died yesterday at Putnam Hospital Center, Carmel, N.Y.
He was 80.
The cause was a brain hemorrhage, according to his wife, Lorna.


Delays Stall Spinoff of Pacific Telesis Cellular Unit
A Pacific Telesis executive said yesterday that because of regulatory delays the company would not meet its December target date for completing the planned spinoff of its cellular operations, involving a widely anticipated billion-dollar sale of stock.
On Tuesday, an administrative law judge at the California Public Utilities Commission recommended that the commission undertake "a full review" and a comprehensive audit, and that Pacific Telesis prepare a detailed financial plan for the separated companies.
The judge, Gregory Wheatland, also found that compensation was owed rate payers for the deal, with the amount to be determined in further hearings.


No Headline
"The overall education level of Americans has increased in terms of schooling and even in fundamental literacy. But the demands of the workplace simultaneously have vastly increased. We simply are not keeping pace with the kinds of skills required in today's economy." -- MADELEINE M. KUNIN, Deputy Secretary of Education.  [ A22:4. ]


Review/Rock; Conjuring The 60's: Love, Love, Love, Love
A full-house singalong wasn't enough for Lenny Kravitz.
At the Academy on Tuesday night, the crowd sustained the tune of "Let Love Rule" while Mr.
Kravitz demanded more gusto.
"Ya gotta mean it!" he shouted, a particularly odd request from a performer so dedicated to posing.
The 28-year-old Mr.
Kravitz is a proud throwback.
He reclaims rock from the late 1960's and early 1970's, and he steals only from the best: the Beatles, Jimi Hendrix, Sly and the Family Stone, Marvin Gaye. (Meanwhile, the opening act for his tour, Raging Slab, revives the Southern hard-rock of the mid-1970's.) Yet Mr.
Kravitz still lives in the music-video era, and for him the golden age of rock means the right props and costumes: old guitars and keyboards, bell-bottomed pants, untamed hairdos and postures of artless sincerity, perhaps learned from repeated viewings of the "Woodstock" videotape.
"We're just gonna play," he said as one tune stretched out, alluding to a late-1960's Hendrix disclaimer.


Asbestos Inspection Widens To 100 Leased School Sites
As New York City school officials rushed to complete an emergency asbestos inspection that has already delayed the start of school for one million schoolchildren, they announced another setback: a decision to expand the inspection to an extra hundred leased school sites.
The extra inspections were ordered as the new Schools Chancellor, Ramon C. Cortines, attended his first Board of Education meeting and declared that despite the added burden the school year would begin as rescheduled on Sept. 20 but not without a "great deal of confusion."


Gore's Efficiency Plan Draws Nods in Congress (for Now)
While the Clinton Administration's call to streamline Government produced sympathetic echoes in Republican and Democratic cloakrooms, members of Congress predicted today that their most senior colleagues would still try to pick it apart.
In the glare of the attention paid to the announcement of the White House plan, no one in the House or Senate is daring to defend red tape at the Food Safety and Inspection Service.
Congressional supporters of mohair and wool subsidies are lying low.
And everyone is praising the Administration's objective of quickening Internal Revenue Service refunds.


Major Leagues Near Three-Division Format
With one American League swap agreed to and a National League switch to be discussed, major league club owners are expected to give at least their unofficial approval Thursday to a three-division format beginning next season.
The change would bring with it an extra round of playoffs, putting eight teams into post-season competition instead of four.
Whether the owners approve the plan unofficially or officially, they must still secure the agreement of the Players Association.
The union has been willing to move quickly to reach an agreement so that the changes could be implemented for the 1994 season.


Medicaid and Medicare Cutback Sought to Finance Health Plan
White House officials have told Congress that President Clinton's health plan will be financed in part by squeezing $124 billion from the projected growth of Medicare and $114 billion from Medicaid over five years, lawmakers and their aides said today.
The Administration's plans, disclosed in a whirlwind round of briefings on Capitol Hill in the last two days, dropped the White House squarely into politically hazardous territory only two weeks before the President is to unveil his health care initiative.


Ruling Expected Today on Kevorkian Charges
A Michigan judge is expected to decide on Thursday whether to dismiss charges against Dr.
Jack Kevorkian on the ground that a new state law banning assisted suicide is unconstitutional.
There is little dispute about the facts in the case.
Dr.
Kevorkian, a retired pathologist, has detailed how he helped Thomas W. Hyde, 30, who was suffering from amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, or Lou Gehrig's Disease, kill himself with carbon monoxide in the back of the doctor's van on Aug. 4.
Dr.
Kevorkian then challenged prosecutors to charge him under a new state law enacted in February that makes assisting in a suicide a felony punishable by four years in prison.
Legislators enacted the law to try to stop Dr.
Kevorkian, who has attended 17 suicides since 1990.


For Unholy Hollywood's Devotees, A Pariah Film Festival in France
Deauville is an elegant belle epoque beach resort and horse-racing center in Normandy, an easy two hours' drive from Paris.
For casual tourists or those innocently attracted to the Deauville Festival of American Films, the 19th installment of which continues until Sunday, it is an extremely pleasant, unpressured place to see a raft of American movies.
There are also nicely planned retrospectives, this year devoted to Jessica Lange, Richard Fleischer and John Malkovich, and a plausible number of directors and stars to titillate the assembled journalists and fans.


Pop and Jazz in Review
Ann Hampton Callaway  Rainbow and Stars 30 Rockefeller Plaza Through Sept. 25
No New York cabaret singer approaches a classic pop ballad with the technical finesse and intensity of feeling that Ann Hampton Callaway brings to the repertory.
The singer has a multi-octave range, a luxuriant timbre that injects a lovelorn lament with an almost tearful commitment, and long-lined phrasing that draws out the last ounce of melodic splendor from a love song.


A Title, and Pride, at Stake for Chavez
In the cantinas and garages that anchor the gritty, working-class neighborhood here called Tepito, the talk is all of Mexican guts and battered gringos, of past and future glory.
For all of the hype about a Mexican fighting an American on Friday night in the Alamodome in San Antonio, no one here seems to be remembering the Alamo much.
But ask them about Julio Cesar Chavez, Pernell Whitaker and the symbolic precedent, and the men of Tepito are of a single mind: history will repeat itself.


Another German Tourist Is Killed in Florida


Review/Film; Plain Talk and Clear Scenes On a Topic of Frequent Panic
Candid discussions of sex in the movies and on television often seem to be so fraught with anxiety and prurience that any useful information comes enveloped in an atmosphere of hysteria.
And if the sex is homosexual, that hysteria can become panic.
That's one reason "Sex Is . . .," Marc Huestis's documentary film about gay sex, is so welcome.
Although this very explicit film is not for everybody, it addresses male homosexual intimacy with a refreshing directness.
At a moment when gay sexuality is often glibly equated with AIDS, it is firmly but responsibly pro-sex.


Sports of The Times; Yank Omen: September No-Hitters
IN a pennant race, a good omen is often hard to find, but the Yankees' omen has been discovered.
Whenever a Yankee has pitched a no-hitter in September, as Jim Abbott did last Saturday and will try to do again tomorrow night in Kansas City, the Yankees have won the pennant and the World Series.
No other major league franchise can make that statement.
When the days on the schedule dwindle down to a precious few, September no-hitters are a precious few, too.
Especially for pitchers clawing through a pennant race.
But when Abbott no-hit the Cleveland Indians last Saturday, he emerged as the third Yankee pitcher to do it.


Diocese Finds Vision Claims Aren't Miracle
The Roman Catholic Diocese of Trenton declared today that although a spiritual awakening inspired thousands of pilgrims to visit the suburban New Jersey home of a man who claimed that the Virgin Mary came to visit, no true miracle occurred at the site.
Bishop John C. Reiss urged the faithful to stop their Sunday evening vigils at the Marlboro Township home of Joseph Januszkiewicz, a draftsman who began reporting the visions in the spring of 1992.
Mr.
Januszkiewicz was also admonished to stop taking steps to promote the visits to the blue spruce trees on his yard, where he said his vision appeared, or to the shrine he has erected on his property.


Haitian Police Chief Emerges From the Shadows
On the eve of a United Nations-led effort to begin retraining the Haitian police and armed forces, diplomats and human rights experts say a detailed picture has begun to emerge about the role of these forces in political violence sweeping the country.
Based on interviews with current and former members of the armed forces, as well as with their victims, investigators say the Port-au-Prince police chief, Col.
Joseph Michel Francois, has become one of the country's most powerful men by building a vast network of shadowy auxiliaries whose job it is to intimidate or even eliminate rivals and opponents.


Burying Ferdinand Marcos
They came to bury Ferdinand Marcos, and to praise him.
But they came in strikingly smaller numbers than his widow, Imelda, had advertised.
Not a million but 7,000 Marcos loyalists greeted the Philippine dictator's body Tuesday when it arrived in his home province of Ilocos Norte.
Tomorrow's burial is expected to be similarly anticlimactic.
For the Philippines, mercifully, Marcos is no longer the issue.
For 20 years he dominated its politics and looted its economy, turning what had been one of Asia's most prosperous and democratic states into one of its least.


In a Mill, a Way of Life
Louis E. Johnson, a 72-year-old retired steelworker who drives the four blocks to Mr.
T's coffee shop here each morning for breakfast, is grateful that the mill was there for him during his working years.
It was a hard and dangerous life, but he earned $14.90 an hour, got 13 weeks of paid vacation a year and had an assistant who helped him check the temperatures in the pits every hour.


Tandem Appoints a Chief For Ungermann-Bass Unit
Tandem Computers Inc. yesterday named Roel Pieper, a multilingual computer executive, as president and chief executive of its struggling Ungermann-Bass Inc. computer networking subsidiary.
Mr.
Pieper succeeds Ralph Ungermann, 51, who resigned from the company he co-founded on July 28.
The same day, Tandem Computers started a cost-cutting and streamlining drive that surprised industry analysts and led to a $550 million third-quarter loss.
Ungermann-Bass, acquired by Tandem in 1988, was not spared in the corporate overhaul, a company spokesman said.
In the first nine months, the unit had $269 million in revenue, 18 percent of Tandem's total.


INSIDE
Holtzman Loses Composure
Comptroller Elizabeth Holtzman broke down while taping an interview, and an aide cited the strain of a campaign-loan inquiry.
Page B1.
Victory for a Steel Town
The fight to keep a company from closing a steel mill united a small Ohio town in a long-shot battle, which in the end it won.
Page D1.
Trade Pact Takes Back Seat
Focused on health care, the President has delayed any campaigning for the North American Free Trade Agreement until late this fall.
Page D20.
Furor on Pentagon Nominee
The nomination of Morton Halperin to be Assistant Secretary of Defense has renewed ideological animosities dating from the Vietnam War.
Page A21.
Diocese Finds No Miracle
Roman Catholic officials said no miracle had occurred at a New Jersey home where a man claimed that the Virgin Mary had appeared.
Page B1.


Joseph Scoma; Restaurateur, 77
Joseph Scoma, who, with his brother Al, turned a six-table coffee shop into a landmark restaurant on Fisherman's Wharf in San Francisco, died on Friday at his horse ranch in Sebastopol.
He was 77.
The cause was emphysema and heart trouble, his brother said.


Garden Q.&amp;A.
Diseased Cannas
Q.
The new leaves and flower buds on several of my cannas are black, and some older leaves are distorted and sticky.
What's going on here?
Lynn Goldschmidt, Allegheny, Pa.


Palestinians Seen in Need Of Billions in Foreign Aid
However the Palestinians and Israelis solve their diplomatic differences, the success of any peace plan could depend in large measure on whether the Palestinians get billions of dollars of aid from the United States, Europe, Japan and wealthy Arab nations.
Worried that continued poverty could cause explosive political tensions even with a peace accord, the United States is leading an effort to round up pledges of large-scale assistance even before the Israelis and Palestinians complete a deal that would grant limited self-rule in the West Bank and Gaza Strip.


Whiten Missed a Third Exclusive Club
Mark Whiten came so close, so very, very close Tuesday night to joining an exclusive major league circle.
But as the St.
Louis Cardinals' leadoff batter in the fourth inning of the second half of a doubleheader against the Reds in Cincinnati, Whiten, a 25-year-old oufielder, blew it.
His cut was just a shade off on a 3-1 pitch from starter Larry Luebbers, and the result was a pop foul to the Reds' third baseman, Chris Sabo.


Car-Rental Computers Rejecting High-Risk Drivers
Hertz, Avis and other car rental companies are using electronic links to government computers to check driving records of potential renters.
And because of the screening, which takes only seconds, the companies are turning away 6 to 10 percent of the people who want cars.
Some are rejected because their licenses have been revoked or suspended.
Others have valid licenses but the companies think their records over the last few years make them high risks.


Bosnia Croats Admit Inhumane Conditions in Camps
Bosnian Croat leaders admitted today that living conditions in prison camps in which they are detaining thousands of Muslim men have been inhumane according to international law and that prisoners may have been physically abused.
About 4,000 Muslim men are still being held in three detention camps within a few miles of this internationally renowned shrine to the Virgin Mary, said Kresimir Zubac, vice president of the Croatian Defense Council, the main militia of Bosnia's Croatian nationalists.


Through a Pane in the Rain


Study Says Half of Adults in U.S. Lack Reading and Math Abilities
Nearly half of the nation's 191 million adult citizens are not proficient enough in English to write a letter about a billing error or to calculate the length of a bus trip from a published schedule, according to a four-year Federal study of literacy in America.
The study, released yesterday by the Education Department, presented a bleak statistical portrait of the nation's literacy.


To Grow Gardeners, Start Them Young
GARDENING -- or horticulture, to the lofty -- is making its way to the prekindergarten set.
If you have a sprout who grows excited at the sight of a flower box on the sill or a bed of bachelor's buttons in the back yard, you might want to consider the fall children's workshops in harvesting and plant and animal studies offered by the New York Botanical Garden and the Brooklyn Botanic Garden.
These courses, along with the following books, issued within the last year, address most seasonal gardening chores (weeding, watering, planting bulbs for next year, planting cold-crop seedlings, drying herbs) and provide concrete answers to a young gardener's earthy questions ("Do sunflowers drop from heaven?").
And one book especially, on wildflowers, is ripe for use now.


The True Face of Nuns
To The Home Section: I question the accuracy of Anne Lamott's depiction of "glowering nuns" who cared for "all those fast girls in the 50's and 60's one read about in 'Dear Abby,' who got knocked up and had to go to special homes to have their babies" ("Single but Mothers by Choice: When Going It Alone Turns Out to Be Not So Alone at All," Aug. 5).


WHERE TO FIND IT
DAVID GAGE'S TriBeCa workshop smells of wood and contains cabinetmaker's tools.
But Mr.
Gage and his four associates aren't repairing bookcases.
Trained musicians, they are busy restoring string instruments -- cellos, violins and the house specialty, wounded double basses.
Like anything made of wood, string instruments are vulnerable to changes in temperature and humidity.
They can also need adjustments.


Review/Theater; Psychological Forces That Helped Shape History
Of all of Shakespeare's titular monarchs, poor, weak-willed King John has always been the ungainly stepchild.
The play that bears his name, a bafflingly amphibious blend of history and tragedy, was seldom performed in this century until relatively recently.
And most productions and analyses of "The Life and Death of King John" have tended to emphasize the more dynamic character of the Bastard, the patriotic son of Richard the Lion-Hearted, over John himself, who has all of Macbeth's infirmity of purpose with none of his more Olympian qualities.
The great interest of Robin Phillips's emotionally gripping, if somewhat muddled, production at the Stratford Festival here is that it makes John its unconditional center and, in doing so, presents him as a disturbingly pertinent statesman for our times.
"Macbeth" and "Richard III," with their portraits of raveningly ambitious, Machiavellian heads of state, were the perfect choices for politically slanted revivals in the paranoiac heyday of the late 60's and early 70's, the years of Johnson and Nixon.
"King John," on the other hand, has vital resonance for an age that often sees its politicians less as monsters than mediocrities, distanced from greatness by all-too-pedestrian frailties.


Lack of a Mexican Judge Angers Chavez
Angered by what he described as "a slap in the face to the people of my country" because there is an American judge but not a Mexican, Julio Cesar Chavez today threatened to pull out of Friday night's welterweight title fight against Pernell Whitaker.
But Chavez apparently recanted when the Texas commission that chose the officials refused to make any changes.
If it had, said Whitaker's promoter, Dan Duva, "We would pull out of the fight."


Montana's Status Uncertain for Oiler Game
JOE MONTANA didn't practice yesterday because of a sore wrist and was listed as questionable by the Kansas City Chiefs for the game Sunday against Houston.
Montana, who spent the day doing squeezing exercises, was hurt in the third quarter of the Chiefs' opener Sunday at Tampa Bay.


'Phantom' in Washington, With Tape
Last March, when Susan and Ray Simmons bought tickets to see "The Phantom of the Opera" this week at Kennedy Center, they had expected to be as thrilled with the performance there as they had been in London.
But when the Simmonses, from suburban Virginia, showed up for Tuesday evening's performance, they found the orchestra pit practically empty, occupied only by the show's music director and a sophisticated sound system with a tape of Andrew Lloyd Webber's score.


I.B.M. Head's Purchase of Stock Hailed
In the two weeks after I.B.M. reported a record loss in late July, Louis V. Gerstner Jr., the new chairman, spent more than $750,000 to buy his company's shares.
According to a company filing on insider trades that will be sent to the Securities and Exchange Commission today, Mr.
Gerstner bought a total of 17,500 shares in the International Business Machines Corporation for $772,250 in August.


Holtzman Breaks Down At Interview
Six days before Primary Day, New York City Comptroller Elizabeth Holtzman broke down during the taping of a television interview yesterday morning, so upset when a reporter asked her to sum up her career that she left her office for 20 minutes to gain her composure.
The incident came on a day when it became clear Ms.
Holtzman faced a difficult decision: whether she would allow the findings of a city investigation into her handling of a campaign loan to be released before the primary.


An Islander Rookie Hopes to Make Impact
As a first-round draft choice with a reputation for rugged play, Todd Bertuzzi had hoped to make a strong impression in his first Islanders training camp this fall.
He is a big guy who plays a muscle game at forward, a dimension the Islanders lack, and Bertuzzi hoped he could make the roster as an 18-year-old with two seasons of junior eligibility left.
But Bertuzzi's chances of impressing in camp have dimmed considerably.
Three weeks ago, in London, Ontario, he underwent surgery on his left elbow.
He arrived with the other rookies today at the Rinx, a new facility in Suffolk County where the team will spend its first week of training camp.


Bill Proposed to Stymie Yankee Move
FERNANDO FERRER, the Bronx Borough President, has drafted a bill that would prohibit New York State from financing any plans to move the Yankees to Manhattan or anywhere else in the state.
The bill is to be presented to the state legislature when it reconvenes later this year.
The Yankee owner, GEORGE STEINBRENNER, has threatened to move his team out of the Bronx, complaining that attendance has been low at Yankee Stadium because of poor parking and perceptions that the area around the Bronx ball park is unsafe.


BROADER USES SEEN FOR ABORTION PILL
The French abortion pill, RU-486, and other drugs in its class should be extensively studied as possible treatments for many health problems, a National Academy of Sciences panel said today.
The committee of experts empaneled by the academy's Institute of Medicine to review a class of drugs used in the pill, antiprogestins, said the drugs showed considerable promise.
RU-486 is made of an antiprogestin called mifepristone.


Treasures From the Trash
LAST Thursday night, Anita Sarsidi went to the Upper East Side in search of a desk.
"Something to set my sewing machine on," she said.
The only odd elements of her expedition were the hour and the preparation.
Miss Sarsidi, a freelance photo stylist, purposely left cash and credit cards at home, put on pavement-friendly white sneakers and ventured out at 8:30 P.M., well past the closing time of most furniture stores.
"My mother would be appalled if she saw me doing this," Miss Sarsidi said.
Proceeding north on Madison Avenue and wandering through the East 60's, 70's, and 80's, she stopped occasionally to poke her head into overflowing Dumpsters and gently probe a score of promisingly lumpy green plastic garbage bags.
No desk turned up, but the 90-minute excursion wasn't a total loss.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Companies
Frank Lorenzo was denied permission to start a new airline.
A judge said that while his new company had the money and management expertise to run a scheduled carrier, it lacked "the proper compliance disposition."  [ Page D1. ]
Hertz, Avis and other car rental companies are checking driving records of potential renters over government computers, turning away 6 to 10 percent of those who want cars.  [ A1. ]


Broadway Musicians Defend Their Sound
Members of Local 802 of the American Federation of Musicians, who play for Broadway productions and whose contract expires on Sunday, held a midday rally in Times Square yesterday, on matinee day, hoping to enlist the support of theatergoers to their cause.
The union's negotiations with the League of American Theaters and Producers broke down on Aug. 12 over a proposal by the league to reduce the minimum number of musicians required to staff Broadway shows.


Unilever to Gain Breyers In Kraft Ice Cream Deal
Unilever P.L.C., already the world's largest marketer of ice cream products, has fattened its presence in American markets with an agreement to acquire the ice cream division of Kraft General Foods, the largest maker of ice cream products in the United States.
In the deal, which was announced yesterday, Unilever would acquire the nation's best-selling brand, Breyers, giving the British and Dutch consumer products company a major presence in American grocery store freezers with cartons of ice cream and making it a leading force in the highly competitive $2.2 billion ice cream industry.


Six Public Advocate Candidates Divided on Duties of New Office
New York City's six candidates for Public Advocate diverged sharply in a debate last night on the prerequisites and responsibilities of an office that is poorly understood by the public.
The debate at the City University of New York Graduate Center, carried by New York 1 News, the cable television station, came amid a week of intense campaigning in which the candidates have sought to define the office and to criticize their opponents as inexperienced or lacking the indepedence to carry out its mandate.


Why Family Leave Makes Good Business Sense
To the Editor:
Tama Starr, a business owner, wants to know in "Family Leave Law Will Hurt Women" (letter, Aug. 30) what 9 to 5, National Association of Working Women said to all those pregnant women fired in the weeks before family leave legislation went into effect.
Simple: We told them their employers were breaking the law.
Treating women differently because of pregnancy has been prohibited in this country since 1978.


Nowhere to Hide From a School Bus Camera
As transportation coordinator for the Greenville County School District, Glenn Miller wants his bus drivers to have all the tools they need to do their jobs, and that includes camcorders.
The video cameras record fights, back talk and vandalism that are now commonplace on bus trips to and from school.
Hundreds of school districts around the country are turning to video surveillance to stop students' misbehaving on buses.


McCormick and CPC Team Up on Europe
McCormick &amp; Company, the largest spice maker in the United States, said yesterday that it hoped to increase its sales in Europe through a joint venture with CPC International Inc., the food company, and Rabobank, a Dutch bank.
The new company, European Spice Partners B.V., will be run from Brussels.
If the venture gains approval from European regulators, it will acquire Germany's leading spice maker, Karl OstmannG.m.b.H.
Rabobank, based in Utrecht, the Netherlands, will own 25 percent of the venture's preferred stock.


Economic Scene; Finding a saner way to regulate health and safety risks.
STEPHEN BREYER'S 15 minutes of fame may appear to have ended with the choice of Ruth Bader Ginsberg for the Supreme Court.
But in Washington, Mr.
Breyer, the chief judge of the United States Court of Appeals for the First Circuit, will long be remembered as the legal adviser to the Senate Judiciary Committee who converted suspicious liberals to the cause of airline deregulation.
And now Judge Breyer is back in the bully pulpit, this time attempting to bring sweet reason to the overwrought world of health and safety regulation.
His new book, "Breaking the Vicious Circle" (Harvard University Press), may not convince those who have dedicated their careers to stamping out risks ranging from aflatoxins to X-rays.
But this lucid, nontechnical essay on risk regulation will intrigue pragmatists in search of a bigger bang for a regulator's buck.


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt  *
Arkansas Electric Cooperative Corp. is tentatively offering $23.9 million of tax-exempt pollution control revenue refunding bonds for Jefferson and Independence counties through Goldman, Sachs &amp; Co.
Yields range from 2.80 percent for a bond due in 1994 to 4.05 percent in 1998, and 4.60 percent in 2003.
The bonds are rated A1 by Moody's and A+ by S.&amp; P.
*
Dallas is offering $30 million of waterworks and sewer system refunding and improvement revenue bonds through J. P. Morgan Securities Inc.
Serial bonds are priced to yield from 2.60 percent in 1994 to 5.10 percent in 2012 and 2013.
The issue is rated double-A by Moody's and S.&amp; P.


CHRONICLE
JOHNNY CARSON, the nation's quintessential talk show host, was named yesterday as one of the five performers and artists to receive this year's Kennedy Center Honors for lifetime contributions to American culture.
JAMES D. WOLFENSOHN, chairman of the John F. Kennedy Center for the Performing Arts, described Mr.
Carson as "an entertainer whose 30-year career on television made him a national icon."


Almost Free in South Africa
Score a victory for humanity and realism in South Africa.
A breakthrough agreement was reached Tuesday to establish a Transitional Executive Council in which blacks for the first time will share a governing role with a white minority regime.
Probably starting in October, President F. W. de Klerk will have to consult with blacks on the council and its seven sub-councils on organizing a new security force, punishing human rights crimes and sharing state funds, files and television.
That's change, and it puts enormous momentum behind the movement toward multiracial democracy.


S &amp; A Restaurant Selects Temerlin
The S &amp; A Restaurant Corporation said yesterday that it had moved the account of its Steak and Ale and its Bennigan's restaurant chains to Temerlin McClain in Irving, Tex., after two years at Rotando Lerch &amp; Iafeliece in Stamford, Conn.
Billings were estimated at $20 million.


Electronic Music Goes Back to Louis XV
To the Editor:
The theremin is not "the world's first electronic musical instrument," as you state in your otherwise excellent and fascinating Aug. 24 article on Leon Theremin, subject of a new documentary film.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article and a headline on Tuesday about the resignation of Torie Osborn as head of the National Gay and Lesbian Task Force confused two gay organizations.
The Los Angeles Gay and Lesbian Community Services Center, not the national task force, is the nation's largest organization devoted to the concerns of homosexuals.
Ms.
Osborn previously led the Los Angeles organization.
And that group, not the national task force, was moribund when Ms.
Osborn became its leader, tripling its staff to 150.


Attorney General Abrams to Quit To Join a Law Firm in Manhattan
His hopes of winning a Senate seat dashed last year and his prospects for the governorship apparently stymied, Robert Abrams abruptly announced yesterday that he would resign after 15 years as the Attorney General of New York State to become a partner in a Manhattan law firm at the end of the year.
Mr.
Abrams, New York's senior statewide official, its chief law-enforcement officer and a popular figure in state and city Democratic politics for more than 25 years, is the second top state official to resign this year.
Comptroller Edward V. Regan quit last spring to head an economics study center at Bard College.


Calendar: Talks and Harvest Fairs
Talking About Cities  Municipal Art Society, 457 Madison Avenue (51st Street); (212) 935-3960.
On Tuesday at 6 P.M., there will be an illustrated lecture on efforts by communities to develop their waterfront areas.
Admission is $5; members, $3.
Reservations are required.


Boundary of Abuse Is Difficult to Map
THERE'S often a fuzzy line separating acceptable and unacceptable behavior between adults and children.
When can members of the opposite or even the same sex see each other naked?
Who, if anyone, is allowed to spank or otherwise punish a child?
When can an adult and a child share a bath?
There are no definitive answers to these questions.
While parents may not know the precise boundaries of appropriate adult-child relationships, they can usually agree when something is amiss.


Tourist Is Killed in Florida Despite Taking Precautions
Uwe-Wilhelm Rakebrand did everything the authorities had been telling tourists to do for their own safety since the slaying of a visiting German woman here last spring.
But in the end, those precautions did not save his life.
In the latest attack on a tourist here, Mr.
Rakebrand was fatally shot early today as he was driving a rental car on the city's main expressway, just minutes after arriving from Germany with his pregnant wife for a vacation.


A Mudslinging Democratic Match; On L.I., a Race Grows Ugly on Who Will Challenge the G.O.P.
Four years ago, it would have been almost unthinkable that Democrats in Nassau County, home of one of the last great Republican political machines, would be fighting among themselves over who would challenge the incumbent Republican County Executive, Thomas S. Gulotta.
The Democratic nominee, one top party official said of previous county executive races, was "basically the last person to leave the room," often someone who agreed to be sacrificed at the polls after preferred candidates opted for safer electoral climes.


Resignation Unsettles Israel
With a draft peace pact on the line, the head of a religious party resigned from Israel's Cabinet, threatening its hold on Parliament.
Page A12.


In SoHo, More Design Showrooms Open
DURING August, the quiet in SoHo -- the closed galleries, the shuttered lofts -- was deceptive.
Three showrooms for home furnishings opened, clustered on Wooster and Greene streets, bringing to more than 20 the number of companies selling furniture wholesale in the area, said Barry Dinerstein, a city planner at the New York City Department of City Planning.


Shove Over Jay, Chevy, Dave. Here's Al.
If the conventional wisdom in politics is that Vice President Al Gore needs to lighten up, it is hard to think of a better place to start than the "Late Show" with David Letterman.
Never mind the risk of losing a little dignity by mixing it up in the decidedly wacky atmosphere of late-night television.
Mr.
Gore tried to shed his stiff upper-body image last night, and it almost worked.


Dow Falls 18.17 Points in 2d Day of Selling
Growing concerns over the future of corporate profits caused the stock market to plummet yesterday for the second straight day, before it recovered somewhat, easing a wave of anxiety about the end of the bull market of 1993.
The Dow Jones industrial average was down nearly 35 points from its high for the day before being rescued by a 3 P.M. wave of buying.
It finally closed at 3,588.93, off 18.17 points for the day, after a drop of 26.83 points on Tuesday.


Books of The Times; Kennedy Assassination Answers
Case Closed  Lee Harvey Oswald and the Assassination of J. F. K.  By Gerald Posner.
Illustrated. 607 pages.
Random House. $25.
A simple point accounts for the force and freshness of Gerald Posner's "Case Closed," a persuasive new study of President John F. Kennedy's assassination.
Amid the mounting welter of conspiracy theories, one set of facts tends increasingly to get overlooked: those having to do with the biography and character of Lee Harvey Oswald, whom Mr.
Posner tries to prove once and for all was the lone assassin.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-15  P.L.O.
SEES RECOGNITION PACT  As P.L.O. leaders began a crucial meeting in Tunis, a senior P.L.O. official said a tentative agreement for mutual recognition had been worked out with Israel.
A1  The United States settles into the role of Mideast hand-holder.
A12


Poetry Reading Is Reset
Because of rain yesterday, a reading of Russian poetry by the actresses Alla Demidova and Marian Seldes has been rescheduled for today at 6 P.M. at the Hudson River Park Pavilion, Battery Park City.
Information: (212) 945-0505.


Baptists Raising Their Voices in Song at the Garden
In a hallway off the main floor of Madison Square Garden, Angelique Banks Coleman was having a difficult time explaining why music was such an integral part of the nation's black churches and of the 8.5 million-member National Baptist Convention, which is holding its annual meeting this week in New York City.
Mrs.
Coleman was certainly not at a loss for words, including biblical phrases about "singing to the Lord" and "making a joyful sound" from the Psalms.


Queens Man Is Accused of 14 Robberies at Bridge Tollbooths
A man who was traced to his home in Bayside, Queens, by his car registration plates was arrested early yesterday and accused in a series of 14 armed holdups at New York City bridge tollbooths.
Detectives, who identified the suspect as Ilan Glia, said he robbed at least nine tollbooths since the fall of 1991, culminating with three robberies over the Labor Day weekend.


Woolworth Picks New Chief For Its Variety Store Unit
Executives at the Woolworth Corporation played musical chairs yesterday, and Robert G. Lynn, who had been president and chief executive of its F. W. Woolworth variety stores, found himself without a seat.
In the first big management decision by William K. Lavin, a 12-year Woolworth employee who became chairman and chief executive in July, Mr.
Lynn was replaced as head of the variety stores by Edgar Swain, an executive vice president of Woolworth's specialty stores unit.


A 3d Trooper Is Sentenced In Tampering
A former New York State police lieutenant was sentenced today to two and a half to seven and a half years in prison for faking fingerprints in three criminal cases, the latest development in a widening evidence-tampering scandal.
Despite a pre-sentencing report that recommended leniency and what she called a unique outpouring of support, Justice Betty D. Friedlander of State Supreme Court sentenced the lieutenant, Craig D. Harvey, to the maximum term permissible under a plea bargain arranged in July.


Kidere Journal; Atop a Sea of Oil, Nigerians Are Mired in Misery
The people of the Niger Delta basin are used to hearing their homeland called "Nigeria's Kuwait." It seems an apt description for one of the world's richest oil-producing regions.
And by that measure, Chief Edward Kobani, a senior elder in the Ogoni ethnic group, whose ancestors have lived here for hundreds of years, should be content, very happy and very, very wealthy.


CHRONICLE
There have been dozens of tributes to Arthur Ashe since he died of AIDS in February, but some of his friends feel that they have not truly said farewell in a satisfying way.
So on Monday, some 60 of them will hold their own benefit and get-together at the Doral Arrowwood Conference Center and Resort in Rye Brook, N.Y., to play golf and tennis and reminisce about their friend.
"We will sit and talk about the deeds of Arthur and the monumental things he did for mankind," said ALVIN SCHRAGIS, who knew Mr.
Ashe for 24 years and is one of the organizers of the day.
"Douglas Stein, who was one of his good friends and is godfather of his daughter, Camera, and I were talking about it, and we both cried and said we should have done this before Arthur passed away.


Let Crown Heights Case Have Its Day in Court
To the Editor:
J.
J.
Goldberg's "Justice and the Hasidim" (Op-Ed, Sept. 1) terms the Crown Heights community civil suit against Mayor David N. Dinkins's administration a "disservice," and suggests that the failure of New York's mainstream Jewish community to speak out against that suit is wrong.
He misses the point.


Corrections
An article on Tuesday about mining landfills to recycle old garbage referred incorrectly to a New York State agency that is financing mining projects at dumps.
It is the Energy Research and Development Authority.


For City Council: Bronx, Queens
The shortage of plausible challengers in next week's Democratic primary elections for New York City Council in the Bronx and Queens means that many undistinguished members will glide to re-election despite lackluster records.
Voters in the Bronx's 18th Councilmanic District have particular reason to feel cheated by the non-contest in their district.
With the borough's Democratic Party organization helping to clear the field of potential contenders, and with no dissent from the Borough President, Fernando Ferrer, the incumbent, Lucy Cruz, has an unobstructed path -- notwithstanding her alarming pattern of ethical abuses.


New Agency Wins Air France Account
The American marketing operation of Air France said yesterday that a newly formed agency, Blum/Herbstreith in New York, would handle the creative portion of its estimated $4 million account.
The new shop was formed by a creative team that recently left TBWA Advertising in New York, which had handled Air France's American account until it was divided into creative and media portions.
"We're excited about further developing the campaign we started almost three years ago," said Alan Blum, a 31-year-old copywriter, who is chief executive and creative director.
His partner, Charles Herbstreith, 34, an art director, is executive vice president and creative director.
Jill Beraud, who is 33, was named president; she had been a senior consultant at Dunham &amp; Marcus International, a New York marketing and management consulting company.


Judge's Decision In Custody Case Raises Concerns
The decision by a state judge here to give a grandmother custody of her lesbian daughter's son has delivered a legal shock to the nation's homosexuals, who had been cautiously hopeful about progress toward achieving equal rights with heterosexuals.
The action has led some to voice concern that if the Richmond decision stands, other custody challenges to lesbian and gay parents may follow and that, carried to the extreme, even heterosexual parents could find their child-rearing conduct legally questioned, not just by grandparents but perhaps even by people or groups with no blood relation.


T2 Medical
T2 Medical's stock plunged another 15 percent yesterday on the news that a group of current and former company officials had abandoned plans to buy the company, which provides in-home medical care.
The company's shares plummeted 38 percent on Aug. 12 on news that T2 had overstated its earnings in the first and second quarters because of "irregularities and errors" in its accounting.


2 London Executives Take New Positions
Prominent executives at two London agencies have been appointed to new positions.
Chris Jones, executive vice president of agency operations at the J. Walter Thompson Company in London, was promoted to managing director for multinational accounts.
Mr.
Jones, 38, will continue his management responsibilities for Thompson's Kellogg account, adding worldwide responsibilities for the agency's Unilever, Nestle, DeBeers and Rolex accounts.


Why Family Leave Makes Good Business Sense; Allowing for Sickness
To the Editor:
In "Women's Work -- and Men's, Too" (editorial, Aug. 17), you note that the provisions of the Family and Medical Leave Act are widely misunderstood.
Contrary to popular belief, the law gives a man the same opportunity as female co-workers to spend time with his new baby or take his sick mother to the doctor.
The sooner employers learn that the family leave act makes family leave available to both sexes, the closer we'll be to a nondiscriminatory workplace.


Expansion Plan for Tennis Center in Queens Wins Approval From Council Committee
Expansion of the National Tennis Center, the site of the United States Open tennis tournament, was approved yesterday by a City Council committee, all but insuring an official go-ahead for the $172 million project.
The Council's Land Use Committee voted 10-3 in favor of the proposal, which will be considered by the full City Council on Sept. 23.
If approved, the United States Tennis Association could begin construction in Flushing Meadows-Corona Park as early as next spring, tennis officials said.


Fed Economic Study Shows Striking Regional Contrasts
The economy displayed "slow to moderate" overall growth in midsummer but was marked by striking differences among geographic areas and industries, a Federal Reserve survey said today.
"Economic growth appears weaker on the East and West Coasts while central areas such as Cleveland, Dallas, Kansas City and Minneapolis report stronger than average growth," said the Fed's so-called beige book, an anecdotal survey of business conditions in late July and August.


Union at the Post Sets Strike Deadline
Officers of the Newspaper Guild, the union that represents news, advertising and circulation employees in contract negotiations with the New York Post, said yesterday that they had set a strike deadline for tonight.
"Nobody wants it," said Harry Leykis, the guild chairman at the Post.
"But we've considered the alternative, and it's not good."


Kile No-Hits Incredible Shrinking Mets
Mets bats must be at the lost-and-found.
The Astros' Darryl Kile, a 6-foot-5-inch right-hander who blushed at the standing ovations, threw a no-hitter at New York tonight, punctuating the Mets' morose season.
He won, 7-1, in front of 15,684 at the Astrodome, was only a fourth-inning walk away from a perfect game and had sticky defense behind him.
In fact, the left side of the Houston infield saved him.


U.S. Businesses Eager For South Africa Trade
After the negotiators sealed their deal on Tuesday night on South Africa's transition to democracy, the euphoria spread quickly from the political conference room at the World Trade Center to a neighboring hall where 200 American companies have come to appraise the new African Klondike.
For the participants in what was billed as the continent's largest American trade show ever, peddlers of trucks and shampoos, software and body armor, gaskets and encyclopedias, pinball machines and electric wheelchairs, it was a giddy confluence of political and economic opportunity.


Yankees Mirroring Jays, Loss By Loss
The Yankees were eager to leave Texas tonight, and they were elated that they would not have to play the Rangers again at Arlington Stadium, at least during the regular season.
The only part of this dungeon of doom that the Yankees will miss is the portion of the scoreboard that flashed promising scores from Toronto this week.
The scores in Texas were depressing for the Yankees.
For the third straight evening, the Rangers defeated the Yankees and prevented them from moving into first place.
Each night, the Yankees controlled their fate.
Each night, they faltered.
Each night, another day in this lifeless pennant race vanished.


Soros Real Estate Fund In $634 Million Purchase
The real estate fund run by George Soros and Paul Reichmann has made its first buy: a $634 million package of foreclosed real estate and troubled mortgage loans acquired from the Travelers Corporation, the insurance giant.
The deal, announced yesterday, featured a perfect marriage of buyer and seller.
Travelers had disclosed in the winter that it planned to sell off big chunks of its portfolio of distressed real estate, one of the biggest held by any insurance company.
And the Soros-Reichmann venture has had hundreds of millions of dollars burning a hole in its figurative pocket since it was founded on March 1 during a rising wave of commercial real estate bottom-fishing.
Earlier Effort
Mr.
Soros, the financier, started the Quantum Realty Fund in association with Mr.
Reichmann, head of Olympia &amp; York Developments Ltd., the crippled Canadian real estate empire.
The Soros-Reichmann venture was the second-highest bidder when a Manhattan skyscraper at Broadway and 47th Street was sold to Morgan Stanley this summer, and many people in the real estate world had been eagerly waiting to see what the fund's first purchase would be.


Israel Confirms That Deportees Are to Return Today


Merrill Lynch Names a Marketing Director
J.
Arthur Urciuoli, a Merrill Lynch executive who helped found the securities firm's highly successful small-business division, was named director of marketing for the retail brokerage business yesterday.
Merrill Lynch &amp; Company has not had a director of marketing for its network of 500 offices and nearly 12,000 brokers for many years; it has allowed different parts of its business to manage their own marketing.
Mr.
Urciuoli, who is 55, said the individual units had done a good job, but "we expect to better orchestrate the different parts."


Clinton to Delay Effort for Trade Pact
President Clinton's plans to make a personal sales pitch on behalf of the troubled North American Free Trade Agreement have been delayed until late this fall as Mr.
Clinton prepares for the fight over health care that his advisers have judged to be more critical to his longterm political health.
The trade agreement has accumulated an unenviable list of enemies in the labor and environmental movements and among Democratic leaders in Congress and the supporters of Ross Perot and Ralph Nader.


With Little Reason to Be Wary of Bucs, Giants Are
If they played football games on paper, the Giants would wipe out the Tampa Bay Buccaneers here Sunday.
After all, while the Giants were rallying for a 26-20 victory over the Bears in the season opener last Sunday in Chicago, the Bucs were being routed by Joe Montana and the Kansas City Chiefs, 27-3.
In addition, the Bucs announced today that they will start a new and inexperienced quarterback in Craig Erickson, and in his debut he must contend with the pass rushing of a revitalized Lawrence Taylor.


Schools Would Benefit From a New Dress Code
To the Editor:
"Appearances Are Destructive" by Mark Mathabane (Op-Ed, Aug. 26), on the advisability of a school dress code, reminds me of an old Jewish custom.
On certain occasions, all the young maidens of the "shtetl" exchanged dresses, so that the young men could not tell which ones were wealthy and which poor.


It Won't Get Easier For Jets' Defense
Before their game last Sunday against Denver, the Jets identified tight end Shannon Sharpe and rookie running back Glyn Milburn as the two players they had to contain if New York was to have a chance to win.
Milburn finished with 113 yards rushing and receiving, including a 25-yard touchdown catch, and Sharpe had 7 receptions for 79 yards, including a 37-yard catch.
The Broncos won, 26-20.


Bills' Kelly to Have Tests on Ailing Knee
EMMITT SMITH, a holdout, may be missing from the Dallas Cowboys' lineup for Sunday's game with the Buffalo Bills, but the Bills may have their own missing star: JIM KELLY.
Kelly said his right knee was sore and that he would be getting a magnetic resonance imaging test today to see if arthroscopic surgery would be necessary.


Three Spoilers Stamp Their Marks on Tourney
One of them is a 30-year-old Australian, a scrappy alley cat of a player who figures he's probably embarked on the ninth, and best, of his professional lives by reaching the quarterfinals of the United States Open on his ninth attempt.
Wally Masur came back from the dead, first from a two-set deficit, then from a 5-0 fifth-set hole, to thump Jamie Morgan, an up-and-coming countryman, in a dramatic fourth-round tangle the weary Masur termed "ridiculous. I'm too old for that."


New BBDO Study Of Hispanic Viewing
Prime-time television viewing differs significantly between Hispanic households and other households, according to a study by BBDO Worldwide.
The study, called the Special Report on Hispanic Television Viewing, was based on an analysis of the second half of the 1992-93 television season.
The study found that just one of the top 10, and 8 of the top 20, highest-rated prime-time shows in Hispanic households were among the most popular with all viewers.


Stocks Halt Two-Day Slump; Dow Up 0.56
The stock market staged a modest recovery yesterday on some good economic news, including a drop in first-time unemployment claims, ending two days of bloodletting that had knocked 45 points off the Dow Jones industrial average.
Stocks of banks, auto makers and technology companies did well.
The recovery was particularly strong in the over-the-counter market, where the companies are generally smaller.


CHRONICLE
When SETH LIPSKY, editor of The Forward, invited LUCETTE LAGNADO, an investigative reporter and occasional columnist for The Village Voice, to lunch recently, she assumed that he would ask her to write a few pieces for the weekly, a descendant to the Yiddish newspaper Forverts.
Instead, he asked her to be the executive editor.
"I was thunderstruck," she recalled yesterday.


Aspin Disputes Report of 'Star Wars' Rigging
Defense Secretary Les Aspin said today that the United States developed a secret plan in 1983 to deceive the Soviet Union about the progress of the "Star Wars" program by rigging crucial tests but that the scheme was never actually carried out.
Making public the conclusions of an unusually speedy Pentagon inquiry into a disputed "Star Wars" test in 1984, Mr.
Aspin discounted assertions reported by The New York Times last month that the deception program had caused Congress to be misled about the apparent success of that experiment, in which an interceptor missile hit a target missile over the Pacific Ocean.


JUDGE NULLIFIES JURY AWARD TO GOLD STANDARD
A Utah judge has nullified a jury's award of $404 million to Gold Standard Inc. of Salt Lake City in a dispute with Getty Oil and Getty Mining, subsidiaries of Texaco Inc.
Third District Judge Frank G. Noel yesterday overturned the Sept. 3 verdict in favor of Gold Standard, which had been a partner with Getty in a tiny gold mine in western Utah.
Gold Standard had accused Getty Oil of failing to abide by a 1973 deal in which it bought 75 percent of the mine.
Gold Standard owned the rest.(AP)


Lee Wagner, 83, Dies; Founder of TV Guide
Lee Wagner, the founder and original owner of TV Guide, died on Tuesday at the Eisenhower Memorial Hospital in Rancho Mirage, Calif.
He was 83.
His wife, Esta, said the cause was a stroke.


Beyond the Shock of Recognition
Yasir Arafat urges Palestinians to reject violence and work for reconstruction, development, cooperation and "the normalization of life." The Palestine Liberation Organization renounces armed struggle and recognizes Israel's right to exist "in peace and security." Israel recognizes the P.L.O.
"as the representative of the Palestinian people."
Yes, you're reading these words in the newspaper.
The Middle East, biblical land of miracles, has spawned these modern-day astonishments that almost defy belief.


Retrial Is Set in Libel Case, but Without Magazine
A Federal judge today ordered a new trial in the libel case of Jeffrey M. Masson against Janet Malcolm over a profile she wrote for The New Yorker, but the judge also ruled that the magazine be severed from the case.
A first trial ended in June after three weeks of testimony when an eight-member jury found that Ms.
Malcolm had fabricated five defamatory quotations in her 1983 series of articles about Mr.
Masson and that two of those quotations were libelous.
The jury deadlocked on the amount of money Mr.
Masson should receive, and the judge was faced with the question of ordering an entirely new trial or a new trial only on the question of damages.


Wu Han in Concert
The Taiwan-born pianist Wu Han is to perform tonight and tomorrow at 7:30 P.M. at the Taipei Theater, 1221 Avenue of the Americas, at 49th Street.
She is to be joined by members of the Emerson String Quartet for performances of Brahms's Scherzo in C minor for Violin and Piano, Schumann's "Marchenbilder" and Beethoven's Piano Trio in C minor, Op. 1, No. 3.
The program ends with the complete Emerson Quartet and Ms.
Wu playing Dvorak's Piano Quintet in A, Op. 81.
Tickets: $10 and $15.
Information: (212) 373-7171.


Rates May Fall Like Rain In a Land of Rising Gloom
It was pouring buckets here today, so the Bank of Japan may cut its discount rate.
Normally, the weather and monetary policy are not so closely linked, but this has not been a normal year.
The coolest and wettest summer in 39 years has helped to reverse Japan's limp recovery from what was already a deep recession, forcing the new coalition Government of Prime Minister Morihiro Hosokawa to consider an array of urgent measures to get the faltering economy on track.
Everything from interest rate reductions to tax cuts are being considered.


Fight Vowed By Giuliani On Narcotics
Returning to his campaign theme of a city out of control under an administration that is out of touch, Rudolph W. Giuliani said yesterday that if elected mayor, he would crack down on small-time drug dealers, create safe zones around city schools and do away with "swirling masses of garbage" left behind by illegal vendors whom he accused of turning city streets into "vast flea markets."
Using the theme of "term of indifference," he elaborated on issues he has raised throughout the campaign and then said Mayor David N. Dinkins's nearly four years in office had been marked by "a detached reaction to the disorder that is driving the city down."


Review/Music; Youth and Expertise, Too
When Olga Bloom began her Bargemusic series in 1977, her idea was to use students who needed the performing experience and would not break the budget.
It seemed a reasonable notion, and the idea of hearing concerts on a barge floating in the East River (it is moored under the Brooklyn side of the Brooklyn Bridge) was quirky enough to make the series popular from the start.
But eventually, the arts agencies on which the series depended objected that student performances were too inconsistent to qualify for subsidies, and Mrs.
Bloom rethought her approach.
She has not given up on young musicians.
Now the concerts she presents on her 94-year-old coffee barge feature ensembles that bring together seasoned performers and talented newcomers.
The group that played at Bargemusic on Sunday afternoon included Edward Auer, a pianist well known to New York concertgoers; Christiaan Bor, a Dutch violinist who directs the Amsterdam Kamermuziek Society, and Sung Won Yang, a young cellist whose performance of a Beethoven sonata showed considerable promise.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Companies
Dow Corning announced a proposed agreement to settle silicone breast implant suits.
A $4.75 billion fund would be set up to compensate women with implants.  [ Page A16. ]  Shares of Corning, Dow Chemical and other implant companies rose.  [ D4. ]
Insurance companies are selling millions of dollars of real estate because new rules penalize them for holding many kinds of property and require that they deal with troubled assets.  [ D1. ]


In Debate, Dinkins Ties Innis to Giuliani
Looking past Tuesday's Democratic primary to the general election, Mayor David N. Dinkins used the first formal debate of the primary campaign last night to accuse one of his two challengers, Roy E. Innis, of being a "stalking horse" for the Republican-Liberal candidate, Rudolph W. Giuliani.
In a wandering debate that ran from fiscal policy, to gun control, education, crime and race relations, Mr.
Dinkins did his best to dismiss or ignore Mr.
Innis, the national chairman of the Congress of Racial Equality, and Eric Ruano Melendez, a real-estate broker and civil engineer in the New York City Department of Environmental Protection.


Owners Approve Realignment Of Divisions
Barring a breakdown in negotiations with the union over the players' share of playoff money, major league baseball will sport a new look for 1994: three divisions in each league and a new round of playoffs in October.
The alignment of the National League remained unsettled, but the owners of both leagues voted, 27-1, today to adopt the new format and replace the two-division setup that has existed since 1969.
The Texas Rangers, who don't like the three-division setup, an extra post-season round or their placement in the American League's new Western Division, cast the lone dissenting vote.


Pioline le Magnifique in the Semis
Once again, the dilapidated Stadium Court at the United States Open, a Grand Slam tournament on the cusp of razing its home to build something bigger, better and newer, showed a soft spot for tennis's geriatric generation: it smiled upon a 30-year-old neophyte quarterfinalist, Australia's Wally Masur.
And late last night, in the curious case of 15th-seeded Cedric Pioline, who outstroked and upset the Open's fabulous freshman, eighth-seeded Andrei Medvedev, the Open laid out a welcome mat for an anonymous Frenchman.
The crusty conquistador who rattled his way into the semifinals beneath an appropriately gray sky yesterday afternoon wasn't the five-time champion Jimmy Connors, who turned 39 during a phantasmagorical campaign here two years ago.


Turkey Holds Talks on Caucasus War
The new Prime Minister of Turkey held urgent talks in Moscow today, the latest in a flurry of diplomatic efforts as the five-year-old conflict between Armenia and Azerbaijan threatens to draw in Turkey, Iran and Russia.
The two-day visit by the Prime Minister, Tansu Ciller, followed a call by the Azerbaijani leader, Geidar A. Aliyev.
And it coincided with the publication of a letter from Secretary of State Warren Christopher expressing great concern over the conflict and urging Armenians to adopt "a more constructive approach" toward its resolution.


For Children
Children's Harvest Festivals
New York Botanical Garden  200th Street and Southern Boulevard  The Bronx  (718) 817-8982  Recommended for all ages  Tomorrow  Brooklyn Botanic Garden
1000 Washington Avenue  Crown Heights  (718) 622-4433  Recommended for all ages  Tomorrow
The best condition for a harvest is a long dry spell beforehand.
These two festivals are operating under fairly optimum conditions, with plenty of squirt-juicy tomatoes and hefty sunflowers about.


Market Place; Insiders' trades point the way for Optical Data Systems' stock.
CALLED on to explain their heavy sales of company stock, corporate insiders usually offer the same few reasons about sending children to college, making a big real estate purchase, and, of course, that old favorite about deciding to diversify.
Those explanations always sound pretty reasonable.
But investors would do well to remember the market wisdom of one sage: no one sells shares that they think will rise in price.


Posters: Populist Art For the Collector
THE poster started out in life in humble circumstances.
Before the age of radio and television, it was an important medium for getting a message across to the broad public, especially on the streets of large cities.
The mandate was clear and simple.
"They were designed specifically to appeal to people," said Jack Rennert, a poster dealer in Manhattan and the author of more than 20 books on poster art.
"They had to have a graphically interesting way of grabbing your attention, otherwise they couldn't sell that beer, or fill that concert hall."
The values of simplicity and immediacy continue to attract poster collectors a century after the dynamic, colorful posters of Jules Cheret, the father of the poster, first appeared on the streets of Paris.
They are a populist art form that somehow never learned to be snooty, even in the hands of masters like Pierre Bonnard, Henri Toulouse-Lautrec, Leonetto Cappiello, A. M. Cassandre or Alphonse Mucha.


Diner's Journal
At the Former Sam's, in the Spring
For the last few months, the restaurant industry has been rife with speculation about what would happen to Sam's, the restaurant owned by Mariel Hemingway and Steve Crisman, which closed in June.
More than a dozen restaurateurs, including many of the city's major players, seemed eager to take over the handsome, high-ceilinged space at 152 West 52d Street in the Equitable Center.
The list of contenders gradually shrank, and a winner has been named. (The envelope, please.)
Ahron Matalon and Shaul Natan, who built and now own Corrado in midtown and also own Soleil and Busby's on the Upper East Side, plan to open the replacement for Sam's in the spring.
They haven't chosen a name or a cuisine, and the name of the chef is still a secret.
A spokesman for Corrado says the concept is to "deliver four-star food at two-star prices," with dinners running $35 to $40 in a setting that is to be grand but not formal.


Review/Art; A Movement Monger's Many Moods
Asger Jorn, the Danish Expressionist who died in 1973 at the age of 59, seems to have been a natural painter for whom painting was not enough.
This conflict fuels his vibrant Expressionist canvases, which sometimes seem about to dance off the walls at the Andre Emmerich Gallery on 57th Street, even while it also renders some of them naggingly unresolved.
And this same ambivalence may also have set Jorn restlessly exploring painting's periphery.
There, as the non-Expressionist works at Emmerich suggest, he edged into appropriation in ways that make him seem almost prototypically post-modern, a precursor to Sigmar Polke and other stylistically polymorphous painters of today.
Jorn was active, perhaps overactive, in the postwar European art world.
He wrote almost compulsively on art and theory (usually from a Marxist stance), lived in Paris and northern Italy as well as in Denmark, and was part of several of the shifting, short-lived art movements that characterized his time.


Bonilla Is Done for '93 as Mets Play On
The Mets' season, hopelessly crippled for months, went a little more limp yesterday when it was learned that Bobby Bonilla would undergo surgery and not play again in 1993.
Bonilla, who had set a personal mark with 34 home runs, ruptured ligaments in his left shoulder Tuesday night in Houston when he fell while rounding second base.
Surgery has been scheduled for Monday at the Hospital for Special Surgery in Manhattan, and the Mets predicted that Bonilla would be 100 percent by the start of spring training.


Heart, Not Crime, Led to Woman's Disappearance
A 22-year-old Brooklyn woman who disappeared while on her way to visit her fiance in Connecticut was not the victim of foul play, she was just a prospective bride with cold feet, her family and the Westport police said today.
The woman, Venetta Vallas, a St.
John's University student, met with Westport detectives to assure them that she had voluntarily left her car at the Metro-North Commuter Railroad station here and then traveled to Boston with a former boyfriend.


Reviews/Film; Desperadoes, Young at Heart With Gun in Hand
"True Romance," a vibrant, grisly, gleefully amoral road movie directed by Tony Scott and dominated by the machismo of Quentin Tarantino (who wrote this screenplay before he directed "Reservoir Dogs"), is sure to offend a good-sized segment of the moviegoing population.
But those viewers are the ones who would never go to see a film starring Christian Slater in the first place, and who have no taste for the malevolently funny bad-boy posturing that is the very essence of "True Romance."
Its title notwithstanding, this film is about tough guys.
And it has been cast to present a super-hip white villains' Hall of Fame.
Despite the unexplained absence of Harvey Keitel, practically every other dyed-in-the-wool contemporary heavy is on hand, each of them thoroughly enjoying Mr.
Tarantino's arch, colorful dialogue and the ripe opportunities it provides.
The story also has a heroine, a jiggly, bird-brained call girl named Alabama Whitman.
Though played with surprising sweetness by Patricia Arquette, Alabama will do nothing to melt the hearts of those who object to films like this one on principle.


Germany, Heeding Appeals, Lowers 2 Rates
Germany's central bank, widely blamed for Europe's monetary chaos and deepening economic recession, went some way toward appeasing its many critics today by lowering its two influential interest rates by half a percentage point each.
The Bundesbank cut its discount rate, which is the cheapest rate for loans to commercial banks, to 6.25 percent from 6.75 percent and it lowered its Lombard rate, the rate for lending emergency funds to banks, to 7.25 percent from 7.75 percent


MIDEAST ACCORD: News Analysis; The Brave New Middle East
The Middle East will never be the same.
The mutual recognition agreement between Israel and the Palestine Liberation Organization today fundamentally alters both the political and psychological maps of the region.
It may not bring peace tomorrow or the day after, but it will reshape the Middle East more than any other single event since the establishment of Israel in 1948.


Abbott Can't Afford to Look Back in Pleasure
Jim Abbott jogged around Arlington Stadium in the oppressive Texas heat Monday afternoon, soaking his gray T-shirt and trying to complete a cleansing process.
With every stride he took and every drop of sweat that poured off his body, Abbott was hoping to forget one of the finest moments of his baseball career.
He wanted to erase his no-hitter.
Maybe in the winter when he is relaxing and reflecting, Abbott will recall last Saturday's no-hitter against the Indians.
Maybe then it will be safe to reminisce, but not now.
Not while the pennant race is percolating in the incomprehensible American League East.
After his workout, Abbott began pondering Friday's start against the Royals and tried storing the no-hitter deep in his mind.


Review/Art; A Wanderer With an Eye For Textures of His Time
American Social Realism has never received much critical attention, and many artists identified with that style, particularly those outside New York, dropped from sight after World War II.
Arthur Murphy (1906-1991) was one of them.
Yet a show at the Mary Ryan Gallery, drawn from his extensive lithographic work and from a cache of recently discovered watercolors, reveals a polished, versatile and oddly provocative artist who is well worth a look.
Murphy was born in Ohio.
After what he referred to as a "one-room, backwoods schoolhouse" education, he taught himself illustration and cartooning through correspondence courses, then moved to Manhattan in 1928 to study at the Art Students League.
Within a few years, however, he headed west, beginning the kind of on-the-road wandering that has long been the stuff of American myth.


Restaurants
In Japan an expensive object is prized because of its price.
This explains why people actually buy those $100 melons you sometimes see in Tokyo.
It also helps explain why all my Japanese friends are so taken with Honmura An.
"Very expensive soba?" they ask when they hear of the SoHo noodle parlor.
"They must be good."
They are.
The buckwheat noodles known as soba have been eaten in Japan for 400 years.
As soba restaurants multiplied, the Japanese urge for perfection set in, and soba masters began competing to see who could make the purest soba.
This is not easy.
Buckwheat is extremely nutritious, but it resists turning into malleable dough.
Ordinary soba noodles are made mostly of wheat: to make pure buckwheat noodles that do not shatter and crack apart requires the hand of a true master.
The Japanese say it takes a year just to learn to mix the dough, another year to learn to roll it, a third to learn the correct cut.
The soba chefs at Honmura An have clearly put in their time.


MIDEAST ACCORD: Deportees; Israel Sends Home Half of the 400 Palestinians Exiled in December
Nine months after it expelled some 400 accused Islamic militants to Lebanon, Israel allowed nearly half of them to return today despite concerns among Israeli officials that they would fuel opposition in the occupied territories to an accord between Israel and the P.L.O. on Palestinian self-rule.
Most of the returning deportees are believed to be members of militant groups like Hamas and Islamic Holy War that are vehemently opposed to any kind of peace agreement with Israel.


OTHER MAJOR NEWS
Proposed Settlement On Breast Implants
The Dow Corning Corporation announced a proposed $4.75 billion fund to compensate women with silicone breast implants.
Lawyers on both sides of the bitter dispute said they expected it to be ratified.
Women who have suffered any one of eight diseases would be eligible for compensation ranging from $200,000 to $2 million, while others, even those claiming no physical effects, could receive lesser amounts.
Page A16.
Baseball's New Lineup
If the players' union goes along, major league baseball will have a new look next season: three divisions in each league, instead of the current two, and a new round of playoffs in October.
Page B11.
Masson v.
Malcolm, Again
A Federal district judge ordered a new trial in the libel case between Jeffrey Masson and the writer Janet Malcolm but severed The New Yorker from the case.
Page A20.
Wachtler Ordered to Prison
Sol Wachtler, above, New York State's former Chief Judge and onetime gubernatorial hopeful, was sentenced to 15 months in prison for threatening his ex-lover.
Page B1.
Penalties Proposed For High Drug Prices
The Clinton Administration has told Congress that it wants the Government to review prices of new prescription drugs so that Medicare coverage can be denied for drugs whose prices are deemed excessive.
Such a penalty, proposed as part the new health care plan, would be a powerful means of restraining prescription drug prices, which have risen twice as quickly as other consumer prices.
Page A17.
No Early Holtzman Report
The New York City Comptroller, Elizabeth Holtzman, said in a candidates' debate that she would not allow the early release of the findings of a city investigation into a campaign loan that she received last year.
Page B5.


U.S. Petroleum Data
In millions of barrels except refinery utilization
Sept. 3
Aug. 27
Sept. 4
1993
1993
1992
Gasoline production, daily
7.1
7.3
6.8
Distillate production, daily
3.3
3.1
2.8
Gasoline stocks
202.9
200.4
202.1
Distillate stocks
126.3
124.6
123.5
Crude imports, daily
6.3
7.9
5.8
Product imports, daily
1.5
1.8
1.5
Crude stocks
339.6
346.9
327.1
Crude production, daily
6.8
6.8
7.0
Refinery utilization (%)
92.3
93.7
85.5
Source: American Petroleum Institute


My Next Guest's Policy Opens Today!
It was a thoroughly post-modern media moment.
On Wednesday night, Vice President Al Gore was appearing on the "Late Show" with David Letterman, selling his plan for "reinventing government." He wanted to make it clear that he and his audience spoke the same language.
And so he offered a list of the top 10 good things about being Vice President.


As the gay and lesbian market grows, a boom in catalogues that are 'out, loud and proud.'
AS more gay men and lesbians become open about their sexual identities, they are being asked to fill their recently vacated closets with merchandise from an increasing number of catalogue marketers addressing them as homosexuals.
Offerings aimed at gay men and lesbians are developing into a nascent niche in the nation's estimated $54.7 billion catalogue industry.
Slick brochures with names like Made in Gay America, Proud Enterprises and Shocking Gray carry items from leather jackets and "pride" flags to K. D. Lang recordings and T-shirts bearing such slogans as "I can't even think straight."


Knicks Cut Kimble
In a move that was inevitable, the Knicks waived seldom-used guard BO KIMBLE yesterday.
Kimble, 27, would have been a bench-warmer again this season, with JOHN STARKS, HUBERT DAVIS and ROLANDO BLACKMAN in front of him at shooting guard.
The Knicks, according to salary cap rules, will be allowed to use half of Kimble's $1.1 million guaranteed salary to sign another player.
Kimble is expected to sign with a team in Europe, although he plans to check other options in the National Basketball Association.
Whoever signs him will be responsible for paying part of his salary.


MIDEAST ACCORD: Jordan; Jordan Waits to Ratify Pact With Israel
Jordanian officials said today that they would approve an outline of their own draft agreement with Israel "hours" after the Palestinians sign their accord with Israel.
"We have not announced a final approval on this yet," Prime Minister Abdel Salam Majali said.
"We are waiting now to see what the Palestinians are going to announce officially."


Art in Review
'Projects' 'Gabriel Orozco'
Museum of Modern Art  11 West 53d Street  Manhattan  Through Oct. 18
Gabriel Orozco's work at the Museum of Modern Art has a light touch, so light, in fact, that it is a bit difficult to actually see at first.
Rather than being confined to the gallery usually reserved for the museum's "Projects" series, which spotlights younger artists, his sculptures, photographs and objects are unobtrusively installed on two levels of the lobby and in the Sculpture Garden as well as outside the museum entirely.


Blackstone Sets Convertible Notes
Alco Holdings Ltd. of Hong Kong, a manufacturer of consumer electronics, and Blackstone Capital Partners L.P., an investment fund based in New York, jointly announced yesterday that a subsidiary of Blackstone would invest $15.5 million in Alco through the purchase of two convertible notes.
Alco said the proceeds would be used to open factories in China.


30-Year Bond Yield Jumps To 5.96% as the Rally Pauses
After a stunning rally that took the yields on long-term Treasury securities to their lowest levels in 25 years, the bond market paused yesterday for a bout of selling that knocked the price of the 30-year bond down almost one and a half points and sent its yield up to 5.96 percent.
But traders and analysts said this retreat was not yet a signal that the rally was over.
Instead, it appeared to be just a chance for investors to catch their breath and lock in some profits.
The selloff also sent short-term and intermediate rates higher.


Review/Art; Celebrating Self-Images In 2 Media
For many artists, making a self-portrait is simply a matter of convenience: no other model is more available, more willing to sit through tedious hours of posing.
But self-portraits can also be psychologically and emotionally fraught, mirrors that allow artists to look not only at their faces, but also into their inner selves.
"Self-Evidence: Self-Portraits in Prints and Photographs," now at the New York Public Library, offers examples of both of these kinds of pictures, as well as other works in which the artist's image just happened to fall into the frame.
Among other things, "Self-Evidence" demonstrates how diverse artists' attempts at portraying themselves have been.


Panel Faults Choices Made In Foster Care
New York City's foster-care system often fails to provide troubled children with appropriate placements or the psychological, medical and educational help they need, a panel of social work experts studying the system's confidential files has concluded.
The experts, who gave their report to a Federal judge yesterday, found that the problems of abused and neglected children often grew worse in foster care.
In fact, many churned in the system in a vicious cycle as overwhelmed foster parents rejected them, causing further harm.


Critic's Notebook; Where the Ages Meet, and Sometimes Collide
Three times a week, at the cavernlike Festival Theater of the Stratford Festival, Miss Mazeppa, the trumpet-playing stripper of "Gypsy," is belting out a legendary piece of show-business advice: "You gotta have a gimmick, if you want to get ahead." Doubtless, this is counsel that the festival organizers have wearily and repeatedly considered over the 41 years of the institution's history.
With minimal government subsidies for the arts, which now represent less than 10 percent of the festival's budget, and a discouraging 7 percent increase in ticket prices dictated by Canada's grumble-provoking Goods and Services Tax, the Stratford Festival, which runs a narrowing but continuing deficit, has got to get a very big audience.
And the ecdysiast is right: to get that audience -- particularly after repeated productions of the Shakespearean standards that made the festival's name -- you gotta have that gimmick, or, indeed, many gimmicks.
It represents no small achievement that the festival can report that it will probably take in its largest box-office grosses ever this year.
While this season offers none of the stars with guaranteed drawing power -- Alec Guinness, James Mason, Maggie Smith and Brian Bedford -- who have trodden the boards here in years past, the festival has inaugurated several popular discount programs.
Its gift shop is well stocked with groovy-classical T-shirts (one, showing Shakespeare in sunglasses, reads "Rebel with applause"), coffee mugs and umbrellas.
And in his last year as artistic director here, David William, who will be succeeded by Richard Monette, has carefully created a something-for-everyone schedule of plays.
They are clearly intended for an audience, a majority of which comes from within a 150-mile radius, that Janice Price, the director of marketing and communications, admits is innately conservative.


Washington Post Co. in Shift at Top
Katharine Graham, chairwoman of the Washington Post Company, today relinquished the position to her son, Donald E. Graham.
Mr.
Graham now holds all the former corporate offices of his mother as chairman and chief executive of the Washington Post Company and publisher of the daily newspaper.
Mrs.
Graham, who is 76, named him publisher in 1979.


Heisman Recovery Act
JOHNNY RODGERS will soon be reunited with the Heisman Trophy he won at Nebraska in 1972.
HENRY RAMIREZ, a lawyer from San Diego who had held the trophy since 1987 as collateral for money he claims Rodgers owes him, recently returned the trophy to a local friend of Rodgers'.


Health Plan Would Use Medicare to Penalize Excessive Drug Prices
The Clinton Administration has told Congress that as part of the President's health care plan it wants the Government to review prices of new prescription drugs so that Medicare coverage can be denied those whose prices are deemed excessive.
Such a penalty would be a potent means of restraining drug prices, which increased more than twice as fast as other consumer prices in the last decade.


COLLEGE FOOTBALL REPORT
Metro Atlantic Athletic Conference
St.
John's is the host team for the first game of a new Division I-AA football league, the six-team Metro Atlantic Athletic Conference.
Commissioner Rich Ensor, calls it low-budget, with no athletic scholarships.
"We plan a competitive league that stresses academic, as well as athletic, achievement," Ensor said.
"We are a part of the N.C.A.A.'s stress on cost containments."


Musicians Authorize Broadway Strike
Members of Local 802 of the American Federation of Musicians, who play for Broadway productions, voted 309 to 7 yesterday to authorize a strike when the union's contract expires this Sunday.
The union's negotiations with the League of American Theaters and Producers broke down on Aug. 12 over a proposal to reduce the number of musicians required to staff Broadway shows.


Soukre Journal; Aristide Is Returning, and the Spirits Get Credit
In a country where governments have rarely been seen by the people as friends, and international promises have a history of being broken, Haitians long ago learned to depend on their own devices for both hope and survival.
For the people of this village on the edge of the provincial capital, Gonaives, as for Haitians in every region of the country, chief among these devices has always been their ancestral religion, Vaudou, commonly known as voodoo.


Baker Could Play for Jets
Former Giants receiver Stephen Baker is still unemployed, but there's a remote chance he could end up with the Jets.


Wall Street Welcomes Settlement Plan on Breast Implants
Wall Street saw good news yesterday in the possibility of a $4.75 billion settlement of the breast implant cases plaguing a number of big companies.
Shares of Corning Inc., the company that has been most hurt on Wall Street by uncertainty surrounding the litigation, rose $1.625, to $32.25, in heavy trading on the New York Stock Exchange.


Review/Design; When America Stole the Runway From Paris Couture
"YOU could wear any of those clothes right now," a woman was overheard telling her companion at a preview of "Versailles 1973: American Fashion on the World Stage," which opens today at the Costume Institute of the Metropolitan Museum of Art.
The woman was right, but that is not the point of the exhibition pegged to the fashion show at the Palace of Versailles on Nov. 28, 1973, presumably the moment American fashion came of age.


Art in Review
'Heaven Missing' 'Young Art L.A.'  Jose Freire Fine Art 130 Prince Street SoHo Through Oct. 2
Word that Los Angeles is rife with a large and diverse population of young artists is confirmed by this lively show of nine, most of whom are exhibiting their work in New York City for the first time.


Boston Teachers' Pay Is Tied to Performance
Students returned to the public schools here today after the Boston Teachers Union voted on Wednesday night to ratify a new contract that will make this the nation's only large city to link teachers' pay to the performance of their students.
The contract, which still must be approved by the city, calls for a bonus to be paid to all the teachers in schools meeting goals for attendance, standardized tests, dropout rates and reduced suspensions.
If the whole school system improves, every teacher in Boston will receive a bonus.


Ruby Keeler Memorial
A memorial tribute to the dancer and actress Ruby Keeler is to be held on Monday at 5 P.M. at the Promenade Theater, Broadway at 76th Street.
Among those scheduled to participate are Helen Gallagher, Donald Saddler, Kaye Ballard, Lee Roy Reams and Luther Henderson.
Ms.
Keeler died in March at the age of 82.
The memorial is open to the public.


At Baptist Meeting, Tales of Wild Cab Rides and Prices
It's been five days since the National Baptists rolled into town.
And if you talk to those among the faithful they will probably tell you there's been enough good preaching to save a weak man's soul -- and enough traffic and rain to try a strong man's nerves.
There has been plenty of balm for the spirit, from late-night sermons to early-morning services for the 50,000 delegates to the National Baptist Convention, USA Inc. at Madison Square Garden.
But the Baptists also tell of wide-eyed walks through Times Square, harried cab rides through crowded streets and shopping trips from the Garment District to Bloomingdale's.


What's It to Hecuba? Not Much Really
To the Editor:
The treasure of Troy deposited in Berlin by the archeologist Heinrich Schliemann and taken by the Russians at the end of World War II was not, as an Aug. 27 Associated Press article states, "the treasure of King Priam who ruled around 1200 B.C. during the Trojan War."


Where Trouble Is Rare And Governing Is Easy
If the Clinton Administration has its way, all of America will operate like this highly computerized, relentlessly self-evaluating city in the heart of Silicon Valley.
Like the kind of efficient and results-oriented operations the Soviet Union failed to achieve with its rigid and often-mocked five-year plans, Sunnyvale's city departments work to meet precisely calculated goals, with the lure of a 10 percent bonus for managers who exceed their targets.


Bulls, Bears And Us
Welcome to the bull market, the fifth of the century.
It's been a strange one, though, hasn't it?
The bond market is going crazy, the Dow Jones industrial average has risen 600 points in just over two years, yet only recently has anybody paid much attention.
By contrast, the bull market that began in August 1982 was widely heralded within months of its start.
The other thing that's so different about this bull market is that it is so plainly ours.
It is we -- we who make up the great body of middle-class Americans -- who started this thing, and who have been feeding it these past two years.


MIDEAST ACCORD: Unanswered Questions; Details Unsettled In Accord
The mutual recognition accord and draft peace agreement between Israel and the Palestinians leave many questions unanswered, both large and small, about the practical aspects of creating two autonomous regions.
JERICHO'S LIMITS The Gaza Strip has clear borders, but how will the boundaries of Jericho be drawn?
Will the autonomous enclave include only the small town, or extend to unpopulated and agricultural land around Jericho?
How will the border be marked -- with a fence, patrolled on both sides by security forces?
How will people who live in Jericho but work in other parts of the West Bank or in Israel cross the border each day?


COMPANY NEWS
BEAMAN BOTTLING CO., the country's ninth-largest independent Pepsi bottler, has been acquired by Pepsi-Cola North America, in a stock transaction.
Further terms of the deal were not disclosed.
KAMAN CORP., Hartford, plans to eliminate 600 jobs, or more than 10 percent of its work force, in the next two years because of declines in the military and airline industries.


Read Viemeister; Industrial Designer, 70
Read Viemeister, an industrial designer, died on Sunday at his home in Yellow Springs, Ohio.
He was 70.
His family said he had had an extended illness.
Mr.
Viemeister designed for print media, packaging, products and architecture.
In 1947, he was among a group of designers assembled by Preston Tucker in Detroit to design the innovative but financially ill-fated Tucker automobile.
In 1949, Mr.
Viemeister founded the Department of Industrial Design at the Dayton Art Institute.


South Carolina Prices Bonds
South Carolina's Public Service Authority yesterday priced for sale to the public $642.5 million of tax-exempt refunding revenue bonds through underwriters led by Goldman, Sachs &amp; Company.
Underwriters said that shorter-maturity serial bonds due in 2003 through 2009, and long-term bonds due in 2013 and 2024, were all insured by the Ambac Indemnity Corporation and the Financial Guaranty Insurance Company.
This gave them a rating of triple-A by Moody's Investors Service Inc. and the Standard &amp; Poor's Corporation.
The remaining uninsured maturities are expected to be rated A-1 by Moody's and A+ by S.&amp; P.


A Wooded Backdrop Portends a Season Ahead


CHRONICLE
Notes from the ambassadorial circuit: SWANEE HUNT, the oil heiress, philanthropist and 43-year-old daughter of H. L. Hunt, the late Texas billionaire, has been nominated by President Clinton to be Ambassador to Austria, The Associated Press reported yesterday.
Ms.
Hunt has been a strong supporter of the President, and helped organize a benefit in Colorado last fall that raised $1 million -- including her own $251,000 contribution -- for his campaign.
She is known in Colorado for her work as president of the Hunt Alternatives Fund, which last year gave more than $1 million to programs that deal with poverty and racial discrimination.


Paramount-Viacom Talk Lifts Stocks
Shares of Paramount Communications Inc. and Viacom Inc. jumped yesterday amid increasing speculation that the giant entertainment companies would merge.
Paramount's board met yesterday, but both companies declined to comment on reports that Viacom was planning a bid for Paramount.


A Prison Term Of 15 Months For Wachtler
Sol Wachtler, New York State's former Chief Judge, who had once hoped to be governor, was sentenced today to 15 months in Federal prison for threatening to kidnap the daughter of his former lover, Joy A. Silverman.
In handing down a sentence that split the difference between a possible 12 to 18 months, Judge Anne E. Thompson of Federal District Court weighed competing arguments about how Mr.
Wachtler should be treated.
His lawyers argued that given his once-exalted position, Mr.
Wachtler's public disgrace should move Judge Thompson toward leniency; United States Attorney Michael Chertoff said the advantages of education, wealth and station Mr.
Wachtler once enjoyed, if anything, demanded a higher standard of behavior of him.


The Spoken Word
READING, Beatrix Books and Pix, 33-18 Broadway, Astoria, Queens.
Anna Monardo reads from her novel "The Courtyard of Dreams." Tomorrow at 8 P.M.
Free.
Information: (718) 204-5775.
"HAPPY HOUR," Biblio's, 317 Church Street, TriBeCa.
Robbie McCauley and Rebecca Moore read from their work.
Tonight at 6.
Free.
Information: (212) 334-6990.


Clinton Adds to Government to Help Him Subtract
In his first official act of "reinventing government" into a quicker, slimmer, smarter creature, President Clinton today created -- a new Government entity.
"I am going today, as soon as I finish talking, to sit down here and sign a new order to my Cabinet, to create a Community Enterprise Board from my Cabinet," Mr.
Clinton told several thousand people gathered in the parking lot of an inner-city shopping center here.
"Not a domestic policy group to tell people what to do, but a Community Enterprise Board."


There Goes That Debt Ceiling Again; Health Care Woes
To the Editor:
I'm a living example of what's wrong with our health care system.


Bruce Teicholz, 79; Rescued Thousands Of Jews From Nazis
Bruce B. Teicholz, who helped save many Jews from the Nazis in World War II and later became a real-estate owner, manager and broker in the New York area, died on Tuesday at his home on the East Side of Manhattan.
His family said he was 79.
The cause was heart failure, and he had been in ill health for a few years, said his son, Tom.


Review/Film; In Jerusalem, Flipping Out About a Coin
In "The Seventh Coin," Peter O'Toole shamelessly hams it up as a retired British army officer named Emil Saber who will stop at nothing to get his hands on a priceless ancient coin.
Mr.
O'Toole has specialized in characters gripped by obsession.
And in Saber, a homicidal madman who believes himself to be the reincarnation of King Herod, he has one of the weirdest roles of his career.
For the movie, which opens today at the Sutton, the 61-year-old actor is made up to look like something out of a wax museum.
As he stalks the streets of Jerusalem, his glazed eyes bore out of a face that is as cadaverous as a death mask.


CHRONICLE
JAROSLAV PELIKAN, a scholar of the history of Christianity, has been elected president of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences.
He will assume office in April and serve as head of the honorary society of scholars and leaders for three years.
Professor Pelikan is the Sterling Professor of History at Yale and the author of more than 30 books, including "The Christian Tradition," a five-volume work published between 1971 and 1989 by the University of Chicago Press.


Art in Review
Brennan McGaffey and Lynne Yamamoto  Information Gallery 411 East Ninth Street East Village Through Oct. 2
In Brennan McGaffey's beautiful but vacuous sculptures, Minimalism goes natural: his wedge shapes and divided circles are made of packed mud and topped, like icing, with salt or lime that will change in time.
The star of the show, however, is "Wash Closet," Lynne Yamamoto's installation piece, or at least one wall of it.


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt  *
Bank of Montreal is offering $300 million of 6.10 percent subordinated notes due in 2005 at 99.75 to yield 6.13 percent through Merrill Lynch.
The noncallable notes are rated A+ by Standard &amp; Poor's.
*
Ford Motor Credit Co., Dearborn, Mich., a subsidiary of the Ford Motor Co., is offering $500 million of floating-rate notes due in 1998 at a price of 100 through Merrill Lynch.
Callable in two years, the notes float 35 basis points above the three-month London interbank offered rate.
The notes are rated A-2 by Moody's Investors Service, A by S.&amp; P. and A+ by Duff &amp; Phelps.


Miscellany
*
Publishers Information Bureau, New York, said magazine advertising pages in August fell 1.7 percent from August 1992, to 11,428.9.
For the first eight months of 1993, pages rose 1.2 percent, to 102,475, from the corresponding period a year ago.


Three Letters That Sealed The Diplomatic Bargain
Following are letters from Yasir Arafat, chairman of the Palestine Liberation Organization, to Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin of Israel and Foreign Minister Johan Jorgen Holst of Norway and from Mr.
Rabin to Mr.
Arafat.
The letters were provided by Mr.
Rabin's office.
Rabin to Arafat  Sept. 9, 1993
Mr. Chairman,
In response to your letter of Sept. 9, 1993, I wish to confirm to you that in light of the P.L.O. commitments included in your letter the Government of Israel has decided to recognize the P.L.O. as the representative of the Palestinian people and commence negotiations with the P.L.O. within the Middle East peace process.
YITZHAK RABIN
Prime Minister of Israel Arafat to Rabin  Sept. 9, 1993
Mr. Prime Minister,
The signing of the Declaration of Principles marks a new era in the history of the Middle East.
In firm conviction thereof, I would like to confirm the following P.L.O. commitments:
The P.L.O. recognizes the right of the State of Israel to exist in peace and security.
The P.L.O. accepts United Nations Security Council Resolutions 242 and 338.
The P.L.O. commits itself to the Middle East peace process and to a peaceful resolution of the conflict between the two sides and declares that all outstanding issues relating to permanent status will be resolved through negotiations.
The P.L.O. considers that the signing of the Declaration of Principles constitutes a historic event, inaugurating a new epoch of peaceful coexistence, free from violence and all other acts which endanger peace and stability.
Accordingly, the P.L.O. renounces the use of terrorism and other acts of violence and will assume responsibility over all P.L.O. elements and personnel in order to assure their compliance, prevent violations and discipline violators.
In view of the promise of a new era and the signing of the Declaration of Principles and based on Palestinian acceptance of Security Council Resolutions 242 and 338, the P.L.O. affirms that those articles of the Palestinian Covenant which deny Israel's right to exist and the provisions of the Covenant which are inconsistent with the commitments of this letter are now inoperative and no longer valid.
Consequently, the P.L.O. undertakes to submit to the Palestinian National Council for formal approval the necessary changes in regard to the Palestinian Covenant.
Sincerely, YASIR ARAFAT  Chairman Palestine Liberation Organization Arafat to Holst Sept. 9, 1993
Dear Minister Holst,
I would like to confirm to you that upon the signing of the Declaration of Principles I will include the following positions in my public statements:
In light of the new era marked by the signing of the Declaration of Principles the P.L.O. encourages and calls upon the Palestinian people in the West Bank and Gaza Strip to take part in the steps leading to the normalization of life, rejecting violence and terrorism, contributing to peace and stability and participating actively in shaping reconstruction, economic development and cooperation.
Sincerely, YASIR ARAFAT  Chairman Palestine Liberation Organization


G. Arthur Blanchet; Lawyer, 91
G.
Arthur Blanchet of Manhattan, a retired senior partner of the Wall Street law firm of Bigham Englar Jones &amp; Houston, died on Wednesday at St.
Vincent's Hospital.
He was 91.
The cause was an abdominal infection, said Carole Brown, a daughter.


More Surgery for Krone
Four surgeons operated on JULIE KRONE's fractured right ankle for four hours yesterday, inserted another metal plate and eight more screws into the main bone and predicted that she would need at least six months to recover.


Huskey Powers His Way To Majors
There will be strikeouts, epic arcs of emptiness at the plate.
There will, in all likelihood, be home runs, shots that register on radar screens as well as scoreboards.
It might not all add up to success.
But then the Mets aren't exactly in a position to be too discriminating.
"I am coming to look; I am coming to play," said Butch Huskey.
"I will try to be solid. I don't know what's going to happen."


Talks With Union Continue at The Post
The union representing news, advertising and circulation employees reported minor progress in contract talks with The New York Post late last night and said it had suspended a strike threat and agreed to continue negotiations with the bankrupt tabloid today and over the weekend.
"Our intention is to continue bargaining until we have a contract," Barry F. Lipton, president of the Newspaper Guild of New York, said after nearly nine hours of talks with representatives of Rupert Murdoch, who controls and seeks to buy The Post under an arrangement with the Federal Bankruptcy Court.


U.S. Troops Fire on Somalis; Death Toll May Reach 100
In a battle that is expected to heighten the debate over the United States role in Somalia, American and Pakistani forces opened fire today on a crowd of Somali soldiers, women and children after United Nations peacekeeping troops came under attack.
Two American Cobra attack helicopters and Pakistani tanks and armored personnel carriers fired cannons and rockets at the Somalis in Mogadishu, the Somali capital.
United Nations officials said as many as 100 Somalis may have been killed in the fighting, and that some appeared to be women and children.


MIDEAST ACCORD: The Overview; P.L.O. AND ISRAEL ACCEPT EACH OTHER AFTER 3 DECADES OF RELENTLESS STRIFE
Enemies to the death for three decades, Israel and the Palestine Liberation Organization opened a new era in their blood-soaked history today by recognizing each other's legitimacy and the rights of both to represent their people's dreams.
Yasir Arafat, the P.L.O. chairman, said in a letter to Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin that his group recognized Israel's right "to exist in peace and security," renounced "the use of terrorism and other acts of violence," and was ready to discipline any of its loyalists who break this pledge.


Eviction Of Theater Is Barred
A State Supreme Court Justice in Manhattan ruled yesterday that the American Jewish Theater had the right to stay in its performance space in the Susan Bloch Theater at 307 West 26th Street in Chelsea.
The action was the latest development in the continuing battle between the American Jewish Theater and its landlord, the Roundabout Theater Company.
The American Jewish Theater, which has rented the space for five years and has 2,500 subscribers, said in June that it had been asked to leave by the Roundabout, which has used the space in the past and again wants it for its own productions.


Last Chance
Here is a sampling of shows in New York City that are to close soon: Closing This Weekend  ANSEL ADAMS, Robert Mann Gallery, 42 East 76th Street.
A show of Adams's photographs.
Through tomorrow.
Hours: today and tomorrow, 11 A.M. to 6 P.M.
Free.
Information: (212) 570-1223.
"THE DINOSAURS OF 'JURASSIC PARK,' " American Museum of Natural History, Central Park West at 79th Street.
Models of dinosaurs and sets from the film, plus actual fossils.
Through Sunday.
Hours: today and tomorrow, 10 A.M. to 8:45 P.M.; Sunday, 10 A.M. to 5:45 P.M.
Admission: $5; $2.50 for children.
Information: (212) 769-5100.
Closing Next Weekend  "A PERFECT GANESH," Manhattan Theater Club, City Center Stage 1, 131 West 55th Street.
A drama by Terrence McNally about two American women on a trip to India.
Through Sept. 19.
Performances: Tuesday through Friday at 8 P.M.; Saturday at 2 and 8 P.M.; Sunday at 2 and 7 P.M.
Tickets: $40.
Information: (212) 581-1212.
"THE SECOND DIMENSION: 20th-CENTURY SCULPTOR'S DRAWINGS," Brooklyn Museum, 200 Eastern Parkway, at Prospect Park.
Through Sept. 19.
Hours: Wednesday through Sunday, 10 A.M. to 5 P.M.
Admission: $4; $2 for students; $1.50 for the elderly; free for children under 12.
Information: (718) 638-5000.
CHIN-SAN LONG, Taipei Gallery, McGraw-Hill Building, 1221 Avenue of the Americas, at 49th Street.
Photographs inspired by Chinese paintings.
Through Sept. 17.
Hours: weekdays, 11 A.M. to 6 P.M.
Free.
Information: (212) 373-1854.


Review/Film; A Thief Faces the Cost Of Personal Happiness
Idrissa Ouedraogo, the film maker from Burkina Faso whose spare, beautiful films command worldwide attention, uses little more than people and places to tell his stories.
The places are quiet, just barren landscapes or tiny groupings of thatched-roof mud huts.
And the people are often nonprofessional actors, so un-self-conscious before Mr.
Ouedraogo's camera that they seem to be doing little more than expressing the broad outlines of their characters' attitudes.
Yet this director's films -- among them "Yaaba" (1989), "Tilai" (1990) and now "Samba Traore," the story of a thief who returns to his native village -- achieve the kind of deep resonance that such simplicity rarely allows.
Mr.
Ouedraogo permits nothing to come between his audience and the basic, universal matters his films consider.
A true and brilliant Minimalist, he tells his stories with extraordinary humanity and without embellishment.
Mr.
Ouedraogo sustains his gentle, enveloping films with little more than the clarifying honesty of his vision.


U.S. Attorney General Delays Closing Inquiry on Crown Hts.
Attorney General Janet Reno today put off an announcement that the Clinton Administration had decided to close its civil rights investigation of the 1991 disturbances in Crown Heights after the Brooklyn District Attorney pleaded for more time to argue for a Federal prosecution.
Ms.
Reno had planned to announce this morning that the Justice Department had decided not to intervene and would not file a civil rights case against anyone involved in the slaying of a Hasidic scholar because the case would be exceedingly difficult to win, officials involved in the case said today.


Gorman Is Out As Cup Captain
The American Davis Cup captain, Tom Gorman, an eight-year veteran of that position, announced yesterday that he would not seek reappointment in 1994.
During Gorman's tenure, the United States team won a record 17 matches and captured 2 Davis Cups by defeating Australia in the 1990 final and sweeping Switzerland for the 1992 championship.


Review/Film; Dopey Writer, Evil Siren, Comatose Critic and More
"Crush," the New Zealand film opening today at the Village East, begins with a certain amount of evil promise.
Two youngish women are motoring through a picturesque New Zealand geothermal landscape.
Christina (Donogh Rees), a blond Meryl Streep lookalike, is a local literary critic who's on her way to interview a reclusive novelist.
Lane (Marcia Gay Harden), whose jet black hair looks like a wig, is American and apparently without any occupation except as a seductress.
It's clear the two women know each other extremely well.


BOSNIAN SEEKS AID FROM CAPITOL HILL
His hopes for military help dashed by President Clinton, President Alija Izetbegovic of Bosnia turned his efforts today to soliciting Congressional support for American participation in a multinational peacekeeping force that would oversee the partition of his country if a peace accord is reached by its warring factions.
In a meeting with members of Congress, Mr.
Izetbegovic urged that the United States contribute a significant number of ground troops to such a force; that troops from Russia, a traditional ally of Serbs, be excluded, and that the commander of the Sarajevo region be an American.


Oldenburg Quits as Head of Modern
Richard E. Oldenburg, the director of the Museum of Modern Art for the last 21 years, resigned yesterday, effective June 30, 1994.
During his tenure, Mr.
Oldenburg oversaw the expansion of the museum building to more than double its size, increased both the museum's endowment and its attendance and helped organize several blockbuster exhibitions, including the Matisse retrospective last fall and a Picasso retrospective in 1980.
The resignation of Mr.
Oldenburg, who is 59, apparently came as a surprise to some members of the museum's board.
Since early this year, the museum has been considering a reorganization of its administration.
Last January, it announced its intention to hire a paid president, to work alongside Mr.
Oldenburg, and it is actively searching for a secondary exhibition space.
Mr.
Oldenburg has been instrumental in helping shape these plans, and his decision to step down is seen by many in the art world as a way of clearing the decks for a new administration.


Bernard Stengren, 68, An Ex-Utility Official
Bernard P. Stengren, a retired public information official of the Consolidated Edison Company in New York, died yesterday at Central General Hospital, Plainview, L.I.
He was 68.


Review/Film; Of a Test-Tube Mixup, an Identity Crisis and a Pig That Bleats
If you mated a sheep with a pig, would the offspring be kosher or nonkosher?
That is one of the amusing questions raised in "Leon the Pig Farmer," a dry satirical comedy from England, which opens today at the 68th Street Playhouse.
When the product of an accidental crossbreeding of the two species is actually born on a Yorkshire farm, two rabbis hurry down from London to inspect the creature, which is heard but not seen in the movie.
The sound it emits comes in two parts: an ovine bleat immediately followed by a porcine snort.


3 Companies Are Picked For Ferries
Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo announced yesterday that three companies have been chosen to negotiate for rights to operate ferry routes in New York City, including a new route from Staten Island to midtown Manhattan.
The announcement hastens the day when the harbor and the East River may be crisscrossed by sleek ferryboats with plush seats and airline-style amenities, perhaps including fax machines and cellular phones.
Some of the planned ferries, including the Staten Island line, will glide along at up to 35 knots, compared with 15 knots for the present Staten Island Ferry to Manhattan's southern tip.


Styron's Time Past Shows Its Hold on the Present
A Tidewater Morning  Three Tales From Youth By William Styron 142 pages.
Random House. $17.
A key to what made William Styron a writer can be found in a passage from the title story in "A Tidewater Morning." All three stories in the book, Mr.
Styron says in an author's note, represent "an imaginative reshaping of real events" in his own life, and in this particular tale, his alter ego, a 13-year-old boy named Paul, tries to cope with his mother's cancer and his father's grief, by distancing himself from the situation.


Corrections
An obituary yesterday about Mortimer Brandt, a New York art dealer who retired to Baltimore, misstated the address of the gallery he operated in Manhattan for 30 years.
It was 15 East 57th Street, not West 57th.


Baptists Give Endorsement, And Top Award to Dinkins
The National Baptist Convention, the nation's largest denomination of black churches, gave Mayor David N. Dinkins its highest award yesterday and spelled out as explicitly as possible the organization's support for the Mayor's election campaign.
"When we leave New York," the Rev.
Theodore J. Jemison, president of the denomination, told thousands of Baptists gathered at Madison Square Garden yesterday, "I don't want you to leave David Dinkins. I want you to stay with him and work for his re-election."


Mullen Enters Hospital To 'Pick Up the Pieces'
The seriousness of his condition hit home for BRIAN MULLEN late last month when he returned home from the hospital after suffering a minor stroke.
His children sensed that something was wrong, although 3-year-old CHRISTOPHER couldn't understand the complex reasons.
"My little guy wouldn't leave my side and I couldn't pick him up," Mullen said yesterday as Islander veterans opened training camp in Hauppauge, L.I.
"It's like someone took my life, turned it upside down, shook it out on the floor and said: 'Here are the pieces. Put it back together again.' "


Fund Proposed for Settling Suits Over Breast Implants
Lawyers representing defendants and plaintiffs in bitter lawsuits over silicone breast implants said yesterday that they were proposing to set up a $4.75 billion fund to compensate women with the implants.
If the proposal is ratified, as both sides expect it to be, a woman with an implant who acquired one of eight diseases would collect $200,000 to $2 million, and others could seek lesser amounts to pay for things like removing implants and for medical care.
Women with no diseases attributable to implants could also seek money to compensate them for mental anguish.


Sounds Around Town
Carole King's Voice
Carole King, Beacon Theater, Broadway at 74th Street, (212) 307- 7171.
Ms.
King, who is playing a rare New York engagement, has always been a compellingly open-hearted performer.
With her vigorous pop-gospel piano and Brooklyn-style "natural woman" voice, she projects an unimpeachable honesty, earthiness and musical integrity.
Expect to hear many of her standards of the 1960's and 70's, along with selections from her recent album, "Color of Your Dreams," in which her singing and songwriting talents seem firmly intact.
Shows are at 8 tonight and tomorrow night.
Tickets: $35.
Laura Nyro Now
Laura Nyro, the Bottom Line, 15 West Fourth Street, Greenwich Village, (212) 228-6300.
Aspects of this introspective singer and songwriter's personality that might have seemed eccentric in the late 1960's and early 70's have coalesced into a lyrical sensibility that could be described as a radical feminist earth mother.
Her musical style has changed little over the years.
On her new album, "Walk the Dog and Lite the Lite," it is anchored in doo-wop ballads filtered through Philadelphia soul and trimmed with Broadway.
Shows are tonight and tomorrow night at 8 and 11.
Tickets: $17.50.
Bowie From Brazil
Ney Matogrosso and Aquarela Carioca, Town Hall, 123 West 43d Street, Manhattan, (212) 244-3005.
Mr.
Matogrosso has been called the Brazilian David Bowie for his extravagant self-designed clothing and theatrical concerts.
A star since 1973, he sings material by the cream of Brazil's songwriters, among them Caetano Veloso, Milton Nascimento and Jorge Ben.
His vocal trademark is his juggling of songs between a punchy tenor and a sweet lyrical alto.
Show time is tomorrow night at 8 P.M.; tickets range from $17.50 to $32.50.
On Tuesday he begins an engagement through Sept. 26 at the Ballroom, 253 West 28th Street, Chelsea, (212) 244-3005. 26.


Devils Cry Foul
The Devils asked the National Hockey League yesterday to review the trade they made with the Ottawa Senators in which they acquired goalie PETER SIDORKIEWICZ, who is still sidelined by a shoulder problem.
The Devils asked the league to step in because the Senators have refused to change the deal.
Sidorkiewicz had off-season surgery on his right shoulder after injuring it in the Senators' final game last season.
He and left wing MIKE PELUSO were dealt to New Jersey for goalie CRAIG BILLINGTON, left wing TROY MALLETTE and a fourth-round draft choice this year.
There is no indication when Sidorkiewicz can play.


Drug Sweep Nets 26; Man Held in Killing
A sweep of crack dealers in Hempstead has resulted in the arrests of 26 people on drug charges and of one man in the killing of a Hempstead woman last Sunday, the Nassau County District Attorney, Denis Dillon, said today.
The arrests followed a five-month undercover investigation, involving the County District Attorney's Burglary and Narcotics Bureau and the Hempstead and Freeport Police Departments.
The police used hidden video cameras to record many of the deals.
All 26 people are charged with criminal sale of controlled substances.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-14  ISRAEL AND P.L.O.
IN RECOGNITION  Israel and the Palestine Liberation Organization opened a new era in their violent history by recognizing each other's legitimacy and the rights of both to represent their people's dreams.
A1  RESHAPING THE MIDEAST  News analysis: The Israeli-P.L.O. agreement fundamentally alters the political and psychological maps of the region, and will reshape it more than any other single event since Israel became a nation in 1948.
A1


On the Trail of the Whale: A Landsman's Seafaring Adventure
CALL me a schlemiel.
But there I was, some dollars in my purse and not much to interest me on shore as summer was wearing down on the island of the Manhattoes.
I felt the call of the sea and thought I would sail about a little in search of whales and adventure.


Sports of The Times; For 2 Weeks, World Looks To New York
DO I detect a tremor of ennui among the home folks because only one American, Pete Sampras, is among the eight semifinalists at the United States Open?
Are Americans really not going to tune into the semifinals because there will be one German, one Swiss-Bulgarian, one Czech, one Spaniard from Catalonia, one Yank, one Australian, one Russian and a Frenchman in the semifinals?
I'd like to think we're more worldly than that.


Views in MS. on the Lincolns Are Questioned
To the Editor:
An Aug. 25 news item states that William Morrow &amp; Company has canceled plans to publish memoirs about the Abraham Lincolns in Springfield, Ill., by Mariah Vance, the Lincolns' laundress, because of doubts of their authenticity.
This is erroneous and leaves a very harmful impression.


View From Pay-Per-View
By the time the Julio Cesar Chavez-Pernell Whitaker World Boxing Council welterweight title fight wraps up tonight in San Antonio, its distributors hope to break the pay-per-view sales record for a nonheavyweight fight.
Showtime Event Television (SET) and KingVision expect to exceed last year's Chavez-Hector Camacho fight, which generated a 4.2 percent buy rate, or more than 800,000 purchases, said Suzan Couch, the senior marketing consultant to SET.
But a lower 3.7 rate, or 740,000 buys, was figured by Paul Kagan Associates, a media research firm.
The telecast, which starts at 9 P.M.
Eastern time, costs $29.95.


Gay Journalists Leading a Revolution
Homosexual journalists, once as hidden in newsrooms as they were in much of America, have become sharply more visible in major news organizations in the last several years and they are helping to change news reports and reporting.
No one knows how many there are, but journalists at many news organizations now openly identify themselves as being gay.
And there is wide agreement that homosexual journalists are bringing about more, and more sophisticated, treatment of gay subjects.
These range from accounts about national issues, like whether homosexual recruits should be in the military, to those dealing with everyday concerns, like how a lesbian couple copes with the stresses of a high school reunion.


Corrections
A picture caption on Wednesday about a re-enactment of a cattle drive along the Chisholm Trail described its historic route incorrectly in some copies and misspelled the name of the re-enactment's starting point in Oklahoma.
The trail eventually ran, with various feeder routes, from San Antonio to Abilene, Kan.; the modern cowboys began their trek in Hennessey, Okla.


TV Weekend; Beyond the Re-editing, Rage Over AIDS
Mauled and maimed, "And the Band Played On" finally lurches onto television tomorrow night at 8 on Home Box Office.
The adaptation of Randy Shilts's devastating 1987 chronicle of the AIDS epidemic has undergone commercial-network cancellations, innumerable rewrites, last-minute re-editings and a public tug-of-war between HBO and the director, Roger Spottiswoode.
That the film still manages to pack a considerable wallop is little short of miraculous.
Obviously, this could not have been an easy project.
The Shilts book, more than 600 pages long, brought together a cast of hundreds as it painstakingly traced the horrifying progress of AIDS in this country.
His thesis focused on what he saw as "the unalterable tragedy at the heart of the epidemic: By the time America paid attention to the disease, it was too late to do anything about it." To shape this complex, sprawling story into coherent drama, the writer, Arnold Schulman, has built his screenplay around the figure of Don Francis, a medical researcher for the Centers for Disease Control.


Insurers Face Up to Reality on Real Estate Assets
When Travelers sold $643 million in real estate to a partnership headed by George Soros two days ago, a little wave of excitement washed over the insurance industry.
Travelers is not alone: The Equitable Companies sold $393 million of real estate in the first six months of this year, almost twice what the company sold in all 1992.
The Prudential Insurance Company of America is getting ready to sell up to $700 million of real estate, company officials say.


MIDEAST POLICY: U.S. Policy; Washington to Restart Talks With P.L.O.
The United States will resume a dialogue with the Palestine Liberation Organization, now that it has accepted Israel's right to exist and renounced terrorism, senior White House officials said today.
President Clinton was prepared to announce the policy shift at a ceremony in the Rose Garden this afternoon, but postponed it until Friday, pending the signing of the declaration of mutual recognition by the P.L.O. and Israel, the officials said.


Continental Plans More Short Flights
Continental Airlines has begun testing a new strategy for short-haul routes, adding more frequent service for flights of less than two hours while lowering ticket prices, industry executives said yesterday.
The executives said Continental is expected to announce next week that it will put the strategy into effect on Oct. 1 on flights from cities including Jacksonville and Tampa, Fla.; Greensboro, N.C.; Atlanta, and Baltimore.
Fares are expected to be lowered on these more frequent flights.
Continental believes the strategy will allow it to make better use of its planes and raise its profits.


Home Video
On Oct. 1, customers in video stores will reach for Disney's "Aladdin," which distributors say could eventually sell some 30 million copies and become the best-selling video ever.
In fact, though, many people have been grabbing another "Aladdin" since March, and therein lies a dispute just ruled upon in Federal District Court in Manhattan.
The "Aladdin" in question is not Disney's but the "Aladdin" issued six months ago by Good Times Entertainment, a large distributor in Manhattan.


Rohatyn to Leave City Watchdog Post
Felix G. Rohatyn, the investment banker who helped engineer New York City's recovery from the brink of bankruptcy 18 years ago and has played Cassandra to free-spending public officials ever since, has submitted his resignation as chairman of the state board that oversees the city's finances and borrows money on its behalf.
Mr.
Rohatyn's resignation from the panel, the Municipal Assistance Corporation, came in a letter to Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo, and he took the step on the eve of today's meeting, at which Mayor David N. Dinkins's $30 billion budget for 1993-94 will be reviewed.
The agency's board is expected to pronounce the budget balanced, but repeat its periodic reservations about looming deficits.


Art in Review
'California Photography From a 70's Perspective'  Seagram Building Fourth Floor 375 Park Avenue (at 53d Street) Through Nov. 5
Like a time capsule that has just been opened, this small show, hung in a reception gallery open to the public, has an air both sweet and odd about it.
The photographs in the show were bought in 1979 for Seagram's California offices and are by artists who were then working in the state.
Among them are such older masters as John Gutmann, Wright Morris and Marion Post Wolcott, as well as younger photographers like Roger Minick and Richard Misrach.


Peanuts, Popcorn, Panic: It's September
An awful lot of attention and type have been devoted to the tent collapsing on the San Francisco Giants.
So much so that Giants Manager Dusty Baker has reminded people that it's the Atlanta Braves doing the chasing, not the Giants.
The Giants, however, have no corner on the market when it comes to stirring up angst.
For up and down the Eastern Seaboard and into the St.
Lawrence Seaway, there is a lot of major league hand-wringing going on.


Inside Art
SoHo's Grand Reopening
In these precarious economic times, SoHo dealers are betting there is safety in numbers (not to mention increased visibility).
Tomorrow, to inaugurate the fall art season, more than 30 galleries and nonprofit spaces in lower SoHo will have simultaneous openings from 5 to 8 P.M.
The dealers have decided to make the event a virtual block party, with Wooster Street closed to traffic between Grand and Broome Streets.
"Last year we called each other in order to plan our openings on the same day; this year we decided to formalize it," said Ann Philbin, the director of the Drawing Center, a nonprofit exhibition space at 35 Wooster Street.
"It's really a way to break open the season and not be depressed about it," she added, alluding to several recent seasons of poor business.


Greek Chief Calls Election After Losing Majority
Prime Minister Constantine Mitsotakis dissolved Parliament today and called general elections seven months ahead of schedule after losing his slim parliamentary majority because of the withdrawal of dissenting deputies in his conservative party.
After a weeklong political crisis, Mr.
Mitsotakis conferred with President Constantine Karamanlis and then announced the dissolution of Parliament and new elections.
Under the Greek Constitution, the elections must take place next month on a date to be set by the President.


An American Premiere
The Harmonia Opera Company is to present the American premiere of Tohroku Takagi's opera "Tojin Okichi" on Sunday at 3 P.M. in Borden Hall, Manhattan School of Music, Broadway at 122d Street, Morningside Heights.
The opera will be sung in Japanese with English supertitles.
Tickets: $6 to $35.
Information: (212) 870-1500.


On My Mind; Bosnia: Empty Promises
Here on the table is a recent open letter to President Clinton urging the U.S. to lead a Western air war against Serbia to save Bosnia and Bosnian Muslims.
And here, on yesterday's front page, is President Clinton telling the President of Bosnia, to his face in Washington, to make the best partition deal he can with the Serbs and Croats because the U.S. will not be coming to the rescue.


Senator Goes Before Texas Grand Jury
Senator Kay Bailey Hutchison complied with a subpoena and appeared briefly today before a state grand jury, but her lawyers said they had advised her to invoke the Fifth Amendment and refuse to answer questions.
After leaving the Travis County Courthouse, Senator Hutchison said it would be inappropriate to discuss with reporters what had transpired before the grand jury, which is investigating accusations of wrongdoing during her tenure as state treasurer.


Nonstop Toll Is Approved For Bridge
An arbitrator yesterday helped usher in the era of electronic toll collection in the metropolitan New York region, overruling toll takers' objections to special lanes on the Tappan Zee Bridge that would let motorists breeze through without stopping.
The toll collectors' union, Teamsters Local 72, had objected to the nonstop lanes, which let drivers pay tolls using a small, computerized transmitter mounted on their windshields.
The union had argued that the nonstop lanes would endanger the safety of the toll collectors on the bridge, who must walk across as many as 13 lanes to get to and from their booths.


Judge Wachtler Heads for Prison
For what the sentencing judge in an understatement called "bizarre and aberrational" behavior, Sol Wachtler, once the highest-ranking judge in New York State, will serve 15 months in a Federal prison.
The penalty, halfway between the defense and prosecution proposals and three months less than the maximum, seems about right.
Yet the case closes without shedding much light on the mysteries it raised.
How could a lawyer and judge of such luster and promise have behaved so cruelly to former loved ones as to send vulgar, harassing messages to his former lover and threaten to kidnap her young daughter?
Yesterday's sentencing before Judge Anne Thompson in a New Jersey Federal court left the public little more informed than at the time of his stunning arrest last November.


There Goes That Debt Ceiling Again
To the Editor:
The major United States governmental activity of the year has certainly been the budget-deficit-debt triangle, which appeared to have terminated with enactment of the Administration's program and budget.


A &amp; W Sale To Cadbury Is Planned
For the second time in two weeks, Britain's Cadbury Schweppes P.L.C.  has bought a sizable piece of the American soft drink industry.
The maker of Canada Dry and Schweppes sodas said yesterday that it had agreed to acquire A &amp; W Brands Inc. of White Plains, which makes the country's leading brands of root beer, cream soda and several other non-cola soft drinks.


For City Council From Brooklyn
As in the rest of New York City, many City Council incumbents from Brooklyn face no serious challenge in this year's Democratic primary.
That virtually guarantees their re-election in this overwhelmingly Democratic borough.
Here are The Times's endorsements in some of the more spirited races.
38th District (Sunset Park, Red Hook, Gowanus and parts of Park Slope, Windsor Terrace, Boerum Hill, Bay Ridge, Borough Park, Cobble Hill and the Brooklyn waterfront): The incumbent, Joan Griffin McCabe, faces John O'Hara, an attorney and local community planning board member who has sought office several times, and Migdalia Rivera, a political newcomer who runs a paralegal training school.


At the Bar; Has the Supreme Court become irrelevant? Or will history again demand to be written there?
As the Berlin Wall tumbled four years ago, a State Department analyst, Francis Fukuyama, offered the provocative theory that what was happening was not simply the end of the cold war but "the end of history."
With the last great ideological battle fought and won, Mr.
Fukuyama predicted in a widely noted article in The National Interest magazine, the world was in for "a very sad time," devoid of noble thoughts and deeds and mired in "the endless solving of technical problems" and the "perpetual caretaking of the museum of human history."


Serbs Continue Heavy Shelling of Croatian Cities


Grape Harvesters Hold Tradition in Their Hands
IT was crunch time.
The grapes in the vineyard were ripe, the skies above them threatening, the time short.
In a few hours, 12 acres of vines -- about 12 tons of grapes -- had to be handpicked, trucked off and deposited into giant presses, the start of a three-year process of squeezing and fermenting the juice into something that would bubble in a champagne flute.


Bridge
An American team seems headed for one title at the NEC World Championships here, but the other crown is up for grabs.
The American women's team, in the final of the Venice Cup, began the day leading Germany by 8 imps, but built the margin to 73 in the first 32 deals, with 32 to be played.
The Americans are Kerri Sanborn and Sue Picus, both of Manhattan, Sharon Osberg of San Francisco, Karen McCallum of Boston, and Kay Schulle and Jill Meyers, both of Santa Monica, Calif.


Review/Film; A Burglar, Once, but Also a Mom
"The Real McCoy" looks like a television movie that won a raffle and became a theatrical film instead.
The high concept: a beautiful cat burgler (Kim Basinger) wants nothing more than to go straight and raise her young son after serving six years in prison.
Mother love is thwarted when her former associates kidnap the child to force her to carry out one last bank job.
The movie has a certain store-bought surface polish, but, inside, it's just as rickety as it sounds.


Day for Second-Guessing on Asbestos Delay
It was to have been a day of noise and confusion, tears and squeaky chalk as a million New York City children reported back to school after the summer break.
Instead, as schools remained locked and hallways silent because of the huge asbestos-inspection program, it was a day for anger and second-guessing by adults.
"I think that New York finds this embarrassing and we would like to get this behind us," said Ramon C. Cortines, the new Schools Chancellor, in a telephone interview from Washington.
"We are working our tails off."


BOXING: Sports of The Times; A Time to Remember the Alamo (Dome)
DURING the negotiations for the Julio Cesar Chavez-Pernell Whitaker fight, which might attract 60,000 spectators to the new Alamodome tonight, Don King's sense of history somehow got confused with his sense of hype.
"The slogan for this fight," King intoned, "will be, 'Remember the Alamo,' and this time the Mexicans will win."


MIDEAST ACCORD: Refugees; Palestinians' Reactions: Anger, Doubt and Hope
Many of the 1.5 million Palestinians who live in the boxy concrete hovels that make up the refugee camps in and around Amman greeted the stunning news of an agreement between the Palestine Liberation Organization and Israel with a mixture of skepticism, anger and cautious encouragement today.
Jordanian officials estimate that perhaps as many as 500,000 of the refugees in Jordan may return to the land they or their families came from if a Palestinian enclave is created in the West Bank and the Gaza Strip.


RESULTS PLUSStricker in the Lead At the Canadian Open  Strong, blustery winds swept away the hopes of any afternoon challengers and left Steve Stricker as the long shot first-round leader yesterday in the Canadian Open in Oakville, Ontario. Even Stricker, a native of Edgerton, Wis., who has played the Canadian tour the last four years, was surprised at his position atop the leader board.   "I was looking at my name up there all day long," he said after shooting a 66 on the Glen Abbey Golf Club course. It was an unexpected pleasure. "I didn't expect much coming in here. I'd been struggling with my driver."


Only the Multinationals Win in Free Trade Pact; Commitments Lacking
To the Editor:
In many respects, Mexican law is more than adequate to protect workers.
Child labor laws, comparable to those in the United States, are mandated by the Mexican Constitution.
Mexican occupational safety and health standards for many toxic substances in the workplace (based on 1983 scientific data) are more stringent than outdated standards used in the United States (based on 1968 scientific data).
But even with the best of efforts, Mexico lacks sufficient numbers of trained safety and health professionals, and the Mexican Government lacks the resources, equipment, research capacity and personnel to keep pace with its industrial base -- not to mention the expansion that the North American Free Trade Agreement would bring.


No Headline
"You don't make peace with friends. You make it with very unsavory enemies." -- PRIME MINISTER YITZHAK RABIN  [ A12:1. ]





MIDEAST ACCORD: The P.L.O.; P.L.O. Lining Up Palestinian Support for Accord
In a mood of resignation and quiet satisfaction, top leaders of the Palestine Liberation Organization continued their final deliberations tonight on texts of agreements with Israel.
And senior P.L.O. officials appeared to have made breakthroughs in taming opposition to the accords by Muslim militants and the organization's leftist flank.
A senior official asserted that the P.L.O. leadership in Tunis had succeeded in persuading Sheik Ahmad Yassin, the spiritual leader of the Palestinian Muslim militant Hamas movement in the Gaza Strip, who is held by the Israelis, to issue a statement calling on his followers not to use violence to demonstrate their opposition to the deal.


Recital Honors Segovia
In tribute to Andres Segovia, the guitarist Jose Salazar is to present a concert on Sunday at 8 P.M. at Weill Recital Hall.
Mr.
Salazar is to perform works by J. S. Bach, Albeniz, Tarrega and Turina, as well as the premiere of his own "Homage to Segovia." Tickets: $6 to $10.
Information: (212) 247-7800.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.00
3.02
3.06
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
2.97
2.96
2.89
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.07
3.04
2.92
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
4.94
4.82
5.80
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
5.96
5.86
7.24
TELEPHONE BONDS
6.88
6.82
8.40
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
5.46
5.43
6.23
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


H. Bart McHugh, 60, Radio-TV Programmer
H.
Bart McHugh 3d, an expert on national radio and television programming, died on Wednesday at his home in Tinton Falls, N.J.
He was 60.
His family said he had had a brief illness.


Corrections
An article yesterday about the Democratic primary for Nassau County Executive compared the county's population incorrectly with that of Arkansas.
While Long Island's total population of 2.6 million is greater than that of Arkansas, with 2.4 million, Nassau's population of 1.3 million is not.


Initial Jobless Claims at a Low
The number of Americans filing first-time claims for unemployment benefits unexpectedly dropped by 10,000 last week to the lowest level in more than four years, the Government said today.
The Labor Department said new applications for unemployment insurance totaled 316,000, down from a revised 326,000 for the week that ended on Aug. 28.
The original Aug. 28 estimate was 324,000.


A Klansman's Black Lawyer, and a Principle
The grand dragon of the Texas Knights of the Ku Klux Klan, Michael Lowe, was thrilled when the American Civil Liberties Union agreed to defend him against the state's demands that he surrender the membership list of his Waco-based group.
He hopped in his car and sped the four hours to a meeting here with his new A.C.L.U. lawyer, Anthony P. Griffin.
Mr.
Lowe and his girlfriend were in the waiting room.
"I saw this N.A.A.C.P. pin on the wall," Mr.
Lowe recalls.
"Then I started looking at the shelves, and there were these books on African and African-American history. So I turned to her and I said, 'Holy Moly, I think this guy's black.' "


Honda Marries Rahal
After months of testing and indecision over the rules, Honda announced yesterday that it would supply engines to the Indy-car driver BOBBY RAHAL starting next season.
Rahal, who is a Honda dealer, won the 1986 Indianapolis 500 and his third Indy-car title in 1992, his first year as an Indy-car team owner.
Rahal had been testing the Honda engine since June, but the company had been hesitant to join the series because of rules that might force it to supply more drivers with its engines than it wishes to.
By announcing that Rahal will field a car for a teammate next year -- most likely MIKE GROFF -- the chances are slim that Honda will have to supply an engine to any other driver next season.


On a Big Issue, the City Gets a Big 'Thank You'


Corrections
A chart on the Market Indicators page in Business Day yesterday, about the put-call ratio for trading in options on the Standard &amp; Poor's 100-stock index, included erroneous data for the ratio during the prior week.
In addition, the chart mislabeled the data for previous weeks, depicting the figures one day late.
That error had persisted for several months.
The correct ratio for Wednesday was 1.4, showing high pessimism among options traders.
A corrected chart appears on page D6.


Rangers Have a Question: Is Big Ben a Defenseman?
The double sessions don't start until next week, when the New York Rangers set up training camp in Glens Falls, N.Y.
This week in London, though, the team isn't exactly on a sightseeing tour.
Scheduled to play exhibition games against the Toronto Maple Leafs at Wembley Stadium on Saturday and Sunday, the Rangers are using this six-day trip to England to rebuild morale after a disappointing 1992-93 season, and to get used to Mike Keenan, the new head coach.
After just two full practices, Keenan isn't ready to make too many judgments about player potential.
But it is clear from conversations over the past few days that he arrived in training camp with a lot of issues on his mind:


Court Blocks Southwestern's El Paso Plan
The Central and South West Corporation today won a big victory in its four-month battle to acquire the bankrupt El Paso Electric Company when a Federal bankruptcy judge refused to allow the rival Southwestern Public Service Company to file a competing reorganization plan for El Paso.
Southwestern officials said they were not surprised by Judge Frank Monroe's ruling in Austin, but indicated they would not drop their pursuit of El Paso Electric, which has operated under Federal bankruptcy protection since January 1992.
They also again criticized the bankruptcy proceedings as biased toward Central and South West's plan because it courted creditors, while Southwestern maintains that its plan provided for lower proposed rate increases and was thus more favorable for rate payers.


PRO FOOTBALL
Linebacker Marvin Jones, the Jets' first-round draft pick out of Florida State, spent the first 14 days of training camp waiting at his home in Coconut Grove, Fla., for the negotiations on his contract to be completed.
When he wasn't waiting at home Jones was working out or hanging around the Miami Dolphins' training camp at St.
Thomas College in Davie, Fla.
In his best conspiratorial voice Jones refuses to talk about what he saw at the Dolphins camp.


KODAK BOARD TO MEET AMID SUCCESSION RUMORS
The board of the Eastman Kodak Company was to meet today amid speculation that the directors were considering successors to Kay Whitmore, the chief executive who was ousted on Aug. 6.
Analysts and others close to the company said they did not expect a decision soon and some of those being considered did not appear to meet the board's desire for an outsider with cost-cutting, marketing and international experience.


Candidates On Television
The Democratic candidates for mayor, David N. Dinkins, Roy E. Innis and Eric Melendez, will appear in a half-hour debate on Sunday on Channel 4 at 11:30 A.M.
Their hourlong debate last night will be replayed at 10 A.M. on Sunday on Channel 7.


Accounts
*
Buyers' Factory Outlet, New York, to Dweck &amp; Campbell, New York, to handle the men's apparel chain's account, previously at Romann &amp; Tannenholz Advertising Inc., New York.
Billings were estimated at $1 million. *
The Stanhope Hotel, New York, to Chavin Lambert Advertising, New York, to handle advertising for the hotel and its new restaurant, previously handled by Goldsmith/Jeffrey Inc., New York.
Billings were estimated at $1.3 million.


Mothers Work
Mothers Work, a Philadelphia-based retailer of maternity clothes, fell nearly 23 percent in Nasdaq trading to a 52-week low yesterday on news that same-store sales had dropped during the summer because of the weak economy and bad weather.
Trading volume was seven times the daily average.


A Start on National Service
Congress handed President Clinton his first major policy victory this week when it passed his national service initiative.
True, the three-year, $1.5 billion plan is small compared with the $11 billion program he originally proposed.
But it's a worthy start for a good idea.
National service, along with welfare reform, lay at the center of Mr.
Clinton's claim to be a "New Democrat" who would tie government help to reciprocal obligations.
Originally he promised to offer all Americans enough money to attend college if they performed public service for a few years in return.


Women Notably Absent At Religions Parliament
To the Editor:
I was fascinated (and disheartened) to read about the Parliament of the World's Religions held in Chicago (news article, Aug. 30).
Surely, a few women might have attended, if only to put up a good front.
And if there were women in attendance, they were certainly in the silent minority, since you didn't mention even one.


Early Issue For Inquiry Is Rejected By Holtzman
New York City Comptroller Elizabeth Holtzman said in an hourlong candidates' debate last night that she would not allow the early public release of the findings of a city investigation into a campaign loan that she received last year.
Departing from her previous position that the facts about the loan should be made public before the Democratic primary on Tuesday, Ms.
Holtzman said it would be unfair to her to release the findings of the Department of Investigation inquiry before the city's Conflicts of Interest Board has time to hold private hearings, which could take months.


Only the Multinationals Win in Free Trade Pact
To the Editor:
The North American Free Trade Agreement will be a disaster for this country and especially its working people if the Clinton Administration insists on supporting what is basically a flawed investment agreement.


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY  ROHATYN RESIGNS
Felix G. Rohatyn, the wily investment banker who helped engineer New York City's recovery from the brink of bankruptcy 18 years ago and regularly played Cassandra to free-spending public officials ever since, has submitted his resignation as chairman of the state board that oversees the city's finances.
B3.
SECOND GUESSING OVER ASBESTOS
It was to have been a day of noise and confusion, as a million New York City children reported back to school after the summer break.
Instead, it was a day for anger and second-guessing about whether the delay because of asbestos contamination was even necessary.
B3.


Holtzman's Friends Attribute Her Tearful Interview to Stress
To her friends, the sight of New York City Comptroller Elizabeth Holtzman breaking down in tears during a television interview came as a surprise.
But some said the last year has been particularly tough on a politician who, after a career of questioning the ethics of others, finds herself defending her own.
"She's been under extreme attack for the kinds of things she's taken such pride in," said Minna Schrag, a Manhattan lawyer who was Ms.
Holtzman's classmate at Radcliffe College.


Intel and MCI Study Computer-Phone Link
The Intel Corporation and the MCI Communications Corporation said today that they had agreed to explore and develop ways to integrate the personal computer and the telephone.
The announcement marked the first such agreement between Intel and a long-distance carrier, though the company has entered similar arrangements with the local exchange carriers Ameritech, Bell Atlantic and Pacific Bell.


The Night Preparation Met Total Domination
Pete Sampras walked into the men's locker room at the National Tennis Center yesterday at about half-past noon, and it was not all that hard to see from the bounce in his step and the smile on his face that he was still charged from the night before.
And it was not only him.
The room was buzzing about what Sampras had done to Michael Chang between 10:40 and 11:40 Wednesday night on Stadium Court, an hour's worth of lightning bolts that illuminated the quarterfinals of the United States Open.
People were passing in the hall, eager to make eye contact, so they could grin and nod, the implicit message being "Beautifully done."


A High-Tension Draw For Short and Kasparov
After 51 moves of a battle that was difficult for both sides, Nigel Short and Gary Kasparov agreed to a draw in Game 2 of their world championship match yesterday in London.
Kasparov maintains his lead over Short at 1 1/2- 1/2.
From the start, each player tried to discomfort the other.
Short adopted an attack he had never used before and Kasparov responded with a defense that is not a normal part of his repertory.
But after they had accommodated themselves to these initial surprises, they held each other at bay as though each was locked inside a separate prison.
The Russian injected a colorful confrontation into the play by sacrificing material for positional superiority, but neither he nor Short could grasp enough leverage to win the contest.


Sounds Around Town
Bass, Sax and More
Ray Drummond, Village Vanguard, 178 Seventh Avenue South, at 11th Street, Greenwich Village, (212) 255-4037.
Mr.
Drummond, one of the great bassists working in jazz, has put together a band that includes two of the more imposing tenor saxophonists on the scene, Joe Lovano and Craig Handy.
Danilo Perez, the pianist, is brilliant, as is the drummer, Smitty Smith.
Shows are tonight and tomorrow night are at 9:30, 11:30 and 1, and Sunday at 9:30 and 11:30 P.M.
Today and tomorrow, there is a $15 cover and an $8 minimum.
On Sunday there is a $12 cover and an $8 minimum.
Quartet Times 2
Max Roach, Blue Note, 131 West Third Street, Greenwich Village, (212) 475-8592.
Max Roach has one of the best-sounding sets of drums in jazz; it's worth the price of admission to hear the inevitable solo piece.
He'll be joined by his double quartet: his regular quartet plus his string quartet, a group unlike anything in jazz.
The strings swing and give the pieces gorgeous color.
Sets are tonight and Saturday night at 9, 11:30 and 1:30, and Sunday at 9 and 11:30 P.M.
There is a $30 cover and a one-drink minimum.


AST to Build PC Factory Near Beijing
AST Research Inc., the fourth-largest American personal computer maker, today announced a joint venture with China to build a $16 million computer factory near Beijing that would make 100,000 PC's a year.
The deal, which will include efforts to develop China's nascent market for computers in schools and homes, could help AST solidify its position as China's best-selling computer maker.
AST is so popular in China, where its PC's have been sold since 1985, that rivals promote their machines as "AST compatible" and clone makers turn out counterfeits of AST products.


Have You Heard the One About Taylor Retiring?
If Lawrence Taylor were a struggling comic, some of the one-liners he told reporters today might have landed him a shot at the Improv.
But they didn't, and since Letterman hasn't called yet, either, the Giants' defensive leader is sticking to playing football.
And this afternoon, he again raised questions as to how long he is going to do that.
The general assumption has been that the 10-time Pro Bowl linebacker, who has a new two-year contract, would play this year and next and then live happily ever after on the golf course.
After all, his contract pays him $2.2 million a year.
No one gives up that kind of money easily and retires early.
Now, however, Taylor has intimated again that this could be his final season.


Kevorkian, Ordered to Trial, Aids in a Suicide
Dr.
Jack Kevorkian was ordered today to stand trial on charges of violating Michigan's new ban on assisting suicide after a judge refused to rule the law unconstitutional.
About eight hours later, Dr.
Kevorkian assisted in the suicide of a patient for the 18th time since 1990.
The suicide took place about 10 P.M. in a home in Redford Township, just outside Detroit, when Richard O'Keefe, 73, a retired tool and die worker who was suffering from cancer, used one of Dr.
Kevorkian's devices to asphyxiate himself with carbon monoxide, Geoffrey N. Fieger, Dr.
Kevorkian's principal lawyer, said.


German Travelers to Florida Asking Tough Questions
Travel agents in Germany said today that they expected that tourists might begin choosing other destinations in the aftermath of Wednesday's slaying of a German tourist in Miami, but there was no national outcry over the crime.
"Florida's image is suffering as a result of the recent series of crimes," said Ruth Sharma, an agent for the Jet On travel agency here.
"Tourists who want to go there are asking more and more questions about safety. Many don't want to go to Miami anymore, and are choosing Orlando or other destinations. If this continues, Florida's business in Germany is definitely going to be hurt."


Chavez and Whitaker: Fight Versus Flight
He can hide.
He can run.
He can spin.
But at some point on Friday night, while most of the crowd of 60,000 will be booing his every move, Pernell Whitaker will have to fight.
And that is what his opponent, the almost-mythic Julio Cesar Chavez, does best.


The Red Army Leaves Lithuania
The Pope has come and the Red Army has gone -- two reasons for jubilation in Lithuania.
Thanks to the determination of the Lithuanians themselves, and some timely help from their Nordic neighbors, a half-century of Soviet occupation has ended.
Stalin seized Lithuania, along with Estonia and Latvia, in 1940 after his pact with Hitler.
Red Army troops had been garrisoned there ever since.
Natives were exiled from the Baltics and Russians were encouraged to settle there.


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY  FROM DINKINS, BUNDLE OF IDEAS
Striving to invigorate his campaign on the eve of a desultory Democratic primary and counter criticism that he lacks a vision for the future, Mayor Dinkins is taking a flurry of actions to argue that he, not just Rudolph W. Giuliani, can be a candidate for change.
Page 24.
FOR MARK GREEN, A PLATFORM
While the race for public advocate has not exactly seized the attention of the public, it has provided Mark Green with a platform to discuss two subjects he clearly enjoys: his record as the city's consumer advocate and his copious ideas for reshaping the position formerly known as City Council president.
Page 24.  2 DEAD IN SUBWAY YARD SHOOTING
A subway employee apparently angry over a dispute of murky origins drew a revolver, shot and killed a co-worker, critically wounded a supervisor and shot himself to death in a tower shack overlooking a sprawling end-of-the line train yard outside Van Cortlandt Park in the Kingsbridge section of the Bronx.
Page 25.
CUOMO OFFERS A GOSPEL OF WORK
After wondering aloud whether American society still had the ability to define its guiding values, Gov.
Cuomo told the National Baptist Convention, meeting at Madison Square Garden, that nothing would do more to solve the country's problems than providing jobs for everyone willing to work.
Page 25.
UNITED NATION SUSPENDING TOURS
Amid growing concern about the threat of terrorism, the United Nations tour will be suspended for a few months in one of several measures intended to improve security at the organization's headquarters.
Page 25.
CORTINES TO MEET LOCAL SUPERINTENDENTS
The incoming New York City Schools Chancellor, Ramon C. Cortines, pledged to meet with local school superintendents on Monday to begin providing a school-by-school assessment of asbestos cleanup efforts.
Page 27.
REWARD IN TWIN TOWERS BOMBING CASE
The Clinton Administration plans to offer up to $2 million for information leading to the capture of a suspect in the World Trade Center bombing who is believed to have fled to Iraq.
Page 25.
REGION
DEFINING ISSUE IN PRIMARY
In the Democratic primary race for Nassau County executive, in which both candidates talk about lowering taxes and trimming the budget, one issue has emerged that may define the difference between the two: should the county's only public hospital remain public?
Page 26.
VICTORY FOR INDEPENDENT CANDIDATES
The written statements of all 19 candidates for governor of New Jersey must be published by county clerks and distributed to voters, a judge ruled.
Page 26.
Forty-seven law firms earned nearly $17.5 million in fees from bonds issued by the State of New Jersey and its authorities since 1990, Treasurer Samuel F. Crane reported.
Page 26.
The state police moved to patrol the streets in Hartford following the latest gang-related slaying: the shooting of a 17-year-old woman just hours after a new curfew began.
Page 26.
About New York by Michael T. Kaufman 25


CLINTON'S HEALTH PLAN: The Consumers; A Benefit for Some Patients, Difficult Choices for Others
For the 37 million Americans who now lack health insurance, and the tens of millions more who may find themselves without it in the next few years when they lose or change jobs, the appeal of the Clinton proposal is obvious: guaranteed coverage regardless of employment status, age or illness.
But the majority of Americans who are already decently insured and happy with their own doctors may have a harder time deciding about their own prospects.


Fraud Issue Is Raised In Loan to Holtzman
City investigators looking into New York City Comptroller Elizabeth Holtzman's receipt of a 1992 campaign loan from the Fleet Bank have referred a possible bank fraud case to the Manhattan United States Attorney, a source familiar with their report said early today.


Inflation Report Gives Stocks a Rebound
Eager buyers flooded back to the stock market yesterday, erasing most of the week's previous losses on the strength of surprisingly good news about inflation and a subsequent drop in interest rates.
Technology, banking and oil stocks were among the strongest sectors of the market, which took off early in the day after the Government reported that wholesale prices declined six-tenths of a percent in August, the biggest drop in two and a half years.


Jets' Burkett Unfazed By Double-Duty Role
In the last two years, Chris Burkett has really come into his own.
In 1991, as a special teams player, he was voted the Jets' most valuable player by his peers.
And last season he led the team in receptions with a career-high 57 for 724 yards, stepping in for the injured Al Toon, who retired late in the season.
Last week, however, in the Jets' season-opening loss to the Denver Broncos, Burkett caught just 2 passes for 33 yards.
That was sixth best on the Jets while Rob Moore, the team's other starting wide receiver, emerged as the American Football Conference's leader with 9 catches for 140 yards.
Moore beat out Burkett for the team lead in yardage by only 2 yards last season.


Her Memories Are Rich With Days of Poverty
THE woman with the catlike eyes and the voice made for teasing was talking earnestly about homelessness.
In a luxury suite of a Times Square hotel, the woman who has sung "C'est si Bon" a million times was talking about how bad it is.
"It is dreadful, horrible -- how did there ever get to be 90,000 homeless people?" asked Eartha Kitt.
She had just finished rehearsing for a benefit reading of a play called "Sam's Song" to be given on Monday night at All Soul's Unitarian Church at Lexington Avenue and 80th Street.
In it she plays Loose Change Wilma, a woman who rambles in and out of conventional reality in a shelter where she lives with dispossessed people she calls her family.


COMPANY BRIEFS
CABOT OIL AND GAS CORP., Houston, signed a letter of intent to buy natural gas properties and gathering-system operations in southern West Virginia from CNG Transmission Corp., a subsidiary of Consolidated Natural Gas Co., Pittsburgh.
Terms were not disclosed.
KINARK CORP., Tulsa, Okla., said it would lose a chemical storage contract from the Union Carbide Corp., Danbury, Conn., next year that provided about 13 percent of the company's overall revenue.


Pop and Jazz in Review
John Martyn The Bottom Line
The blues is a touchstone for John Martyn.
In the blues, he found music that transmutes pain into beauty, music that initiates select listeners into a secret world of loneliness and danger.
But he didn't become one more blues imitator.
Instead, he forged a highly individual style from British folk songs, jazz, soul and his own eccentricities: music with pinpoint syncopated vamps under hazy, free-form vocals, in songs that contemplate death and mourn lost love.


Big Game, Huge Crowd: Sounds Like Ann Arbor
College football's major event today will take place in Ann Arbor, Mich., where 102,501 spectators are set to attend the Michigan-Notre Dame game.
This is the match that stirs ambition, and contention, each year and it is one that could fill any stadium.
Perhaps that is why the Notre Dame president, the Rev.
Edward A. Malloy, has recommended that his university's stadium be enlarged from its comparably modest capacity of 59,075.


MIDEAST ACCORD: Gaza; Supporters Rally for P.L.O., But Opposition Is Also Seen
Thousands of backers of the Palestine Liberation Organization marched here today in support of its agreement on mutual recognition with Israel.
Dozens shook hands with Israeli soldiers while others carried olive branches and chanted slogans in support of the P.L.O. chairman, Yasir Arafat.
It was the first large peace march in Gaza since Arab-Israeli negotiations began in Madrid nearly two years ago.


Cortines Promises List of Asbestos-Safe Schools in Days
Responding to complaints of misinformation and confusion, the incoming New York City schools chancellor, Ramon C. Cortines, pledged to meet Monday with local school superintendents to begin providing a school-by-school assessment of asbestos cleanup efforts.
Mr.
Cortines told a City Council panel yesterday that most superintendents and principals would know by early next week whether their schools would be ready to open Sept. 20 and whether spaces in their buildings might have to be sealed off because of asbestos exposure.


Ex-Bush Aide Is Said to Face Fine In Case Tied to Clinton File Search
A top political aide to former President George Bush faces jail or fines for refusing to turn over records related to her role in the search of Bill Clinton's passport files last fall, lawyers following the case said today.
The aide, Janet G. Mullins, was the White House political director for Mr.
Bush last year when State Department officials searched Government files, apparently for embarrassing information on the man who was the Democratic Presidential candidate at the time.
She was among an inner circle of aides to James A. Baker 3d, Mr.
Bush's Secretary of State, and she came along with Mr.
Baker when he moved to the White House as Mr.
Bush's chief of staff in August 1992.


San Antonio Foes: Whitaker and Chavez Draw
Julio Cesar Chavez, Mexico's most treasured athlete, failed to win for the first time after 87 victories tonight.
But he didn't lose either.
Instead, Pernell Whitaker mixed cold fury with a remarkable boxing display to beat the legendary Mexican on one judge's card, but was good enough only for a draw on the cards of the other two judges.


Other Destinations Until School Is In


Microsoft to Charge for Technical Help
The Microsoft Corporation said today that it would begin charging for some of the technical support provided to customers.
While individual users of Microsoft applications, like word processing or spreadsheet software, will still be able to have questions answered at no charge by telephone, large customers with more elaborate needs will be offered various options, ranging from a $25-a-call fee to a $20,000 annual charge, Microsoft said.


Paramount-Viacom Talks Heat Up
In what would be the biggest media merger since Time married Warner four years ago, Paramount Communications and Viacom Inc. may announce a deal as early as this weekend, industry executives familiar with the negotiations said yesterday.
While each company is already a power in its own right, their merger would create a more viable force on a field increasingly ruled by giants like Time Warner, Sony and Capital Cities/ABC.


Dinkins Acts To Show He Is Candidate For Change
Striving to invigorate his campaign on the eve of a desultory Democratic primary and counter criticism that he lacks a vision for the future, Mayor David N. Dinkins is taking a flurry of actions to argue that he, not just Rudolph W. Giuliani, can be a candidate for change.
This week the Dinkins campaign sent a mailing to more than 100,000 households in liberal swing neighborhoods like the Upper West Side and Park Slope, Brooklyn, highlighting his efforts to start new programs despite tough times.
The eight-page flier invites voters to "Give Mayor Dinkins a Piece of Your Mind" by returning the back page with their own views on whether the city should keep building housing for the homeless, place tolls on the East River bridges and other questions.
Outlining His Priorities
On Monday Mr.
Dinkins plans a speech to outline a broad range of programs in fields like education, crime and the economy that would be among his top priorities should he win a second term.
His proposals -- a mix of old and new ideas -- range from a longer school year to a new core curriculum of educational basics to neighborhood business centers, financed with the help of computer companies, that would provide access to office equipment for the owners of small shops who could not yet afford their own.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Clinton's Health Plan
The Administration has settled on a bold plan to guarantee health insurance for all Americans while vastly expanding Federal power to control private spending on medical care.
A bootleg copy of the closely guarded proposal began to circulate.
It shows a plan that is breathtaking in its sweep, complexity and ambition, but murky in its financing.  [ Page 1. ]  President Clinton's health care plan is imposing not just in its intricacy and detail, but also in its political audacity.
News Analysis.  [ 1. ]
The appeal of the proposal is obvious to the 37 million Americans who lack health insurance.
But Americans who are insured may have a harder time deciding about their own prospects.  [ 1. ]
The proposals could throw into fast forward trends that are already reshaping the fates of doctors, hospitals and insurers.  [ 10. ] The Economy
The Producer Price Index fell 0.6 percent in August, the Government said, in a report showing surprisingly low inflation.
Plunging tobacco prices were largely responsible.  [ 37. ] Companies
Paramount and Viacom may announce a merger as early as this weekend, industry executives said.
The deal, estimated at $6.2 billion in stock and $1 billion in cash, would be the biggest media marriage since Time wed Warner four years ago.  [ 35. ]
Microsoft will begin charging large customers for some of the technical support it provides.  [ 39. ] .
Rhone-Poulenc Rorer consolidated its top management in the wake of an executive's departure to Metpath Laboratories.  [ 39. ]
Broderbund and Random House will start a venture to produce electronic children's books to be read on personal computers.  [ 39. ]
Hundreds of women flooded lawyers with calls after Dow Corning announced a proposed settlement of implant lawsuits.  [ 7. ] Markets
Eager buyers moved back into stocks, erasing most of the week's previous losses.
The Dow industrials rose 32.14, to 3,621.63, and gained 12.30 points for the week.  [ 37. ]
Bond prices surged on news of sharply lower producer prices, nearly erasing Thursday's steep losses.  [ 46. ]
Bearish economic news sent prices falling for crude oil, gold and soybeans.
Oil fell to a three-year low.  [ 48. ]
The dollar rose against the Japanese yen but fell to a 14-week low against the German mark.  [ 48. ] International
Japan's Foreign Minister suggested that numerical targets for reducing Japan's trade surplus might be acceptable in Tokyo.
His remarks mirror a groundswell of opinion in favor of an idea that Japan has resisted for months.  [ 37. ]
Canary Wharf administrators agreed with bank lenders on a $1.7 billion financial rescue package for the London complex of office buildings, which fell victim to the British recession and contributed to the collapse of Olympia &amp; York.  [ 37. ]
Representative Bonior retreated from his plan to use the resources of his office, as House majority whip, against the North American Free Trade Agreement.  [ 7. ] Your Money
The Administration's health care plan would provide health coverage to all, but states could not carry out the changes until 1995 at the earliest.
In the interim, people who find themselves without insurance have several options.  [ 35. ]
Some financial advisers offer to buy and manage portfolios of no-load no-commission funds -- for a fee.
Investing.  [ 35. ]
Bill collectors sometime cross the line from aggressive tactics to harassment.
But consumers have weapons to fight back.  [ 36. ]


So How About the Braves as Neighbors?
The state of the game has been altered.
For the moment, the Mets have chosen denial as their response.
From top executives to the manager to the players, the Mets yesterday played down the significance of the looming realignment of the National League that would most likely place the Atlanta Braves in the East along with the Mets.
The Expos, another rising organization rich in young talent, and the Phillies, the likely N.L.
East champions this season, would also be in the same division as the Mets.


Walcott's 'Odyssey' In a Reading at the Y
The poet and playwright Derek Walcott, recipient of the 1992 Nobel Prize in Literature, and Gregory Doran, the British director, are to co-direct a reading of Mr.
Walcott's stage adaptation of Homer's "Odyssey" at the Unterberg Poetry Center of the 92d Street Y on Sept. 20 at 8 P.M.
The reading, in Kaufman Concert Hall, will be the work's North American premiere and will feature the actor Roscoe Lee Browne.
Mr.
Doran directed the current Royal Shakespeare production of the play in London.


What Is Your Body's Best Source for Calcium?
To the Editor:
In the "Eating Well" column by Densie Webb (Aug. 25) on fortified calcium-sweetened drinks versus other sources of calcium, an assistant adjunct professor of nutrition at Teachers College maintains that people who won't or don't drink milk should get their calcium from foods such as leafy greens and sardines, instead of relying on fortification or supplementation.


Officials Debate How to Handle Kevorkian Case
The authorities were trying today to figure out what to do with Dr.
Jack Kevorkian after he assisted in another suicide on Thursday night, eight hours after a judge ordered him to stand trial for violating Michigan's new law against the practice.
The Wayne County Prosecutor, John D. O'Hair, said this morning that he may try to jail Dr.
Kevorkian if a formal investigation determines that the physician did help Donald O'Keefe, a 73-year-old retired tool and die worker suffering from lung cancer, commit suicide.


The Surgeon General's Message
After a confirmation hearing that left her feeling, she said, like "ground beef," Dr.
Joycelyn Elders is now Surgeon General of the United States.
Forceful, blunt and articulate, she is well equipped to make that post the bully pulpit it can and should be.
Provided, that is, that Dr.
Elders's penchant for the quotable quote -- her remarks about the "celibate, male-dominated" Roman Catholic Church, for instance, and about kids being taught "what to do in the front seat of the car but not what to do in the back seat" -- does not distract Americans from her message.
Dr.
Elders's message is simple: that Americans must face the daunting facts of adolescent life.
Of the 56 million Americans with sexually transmitted diseases, for instance, nearly 17 percent are teen-agers.
Teen-agers also account for more than 350,000 abortions every year, and the teen-age birth rate, which dropped steadily through the 70's and early 80's, started rising again in 1986 and is still rising.
The figures are, on the whole, hardly surprising, given that more than half of America's adolescents have embarked on sexual intercourse by 17.


Olympique Marseilles Drops Its Lawsuit
BERNARD TAPIE, the owner of the Olympic Marseilles team, withdrew a lawsuit against European soccer authorities challenging his team's exclusion from the Champions Cup because of a bribery scandal.


Subway Worker in Bronx Kills Colleague and Himself
A subway employee apparently angry over a dispute of murky origins drew a revolver, shot and killed a co-worker, critically wounded a supervisor and shot himself to death yesterday in a power-distribution shack overlooking a sprawling, end-of-the line train yard outside Van Cortlandt Park in the Bronx.
The survivor told the authorities that a dispute had set off the shootings, but was too badly wounded to give details.
Neighbors of the gunman described him as a tall, gentle loner who shared his seaside Queens apartment with a pair of turtles and sometimes spoke of being taunted at work over a stuttering speech impediment.


SOMALIS FAULTED IN CIVILIAN DEATHS
American and United Nations officials today blamed Somali militia fighters who ambushed a United Nations convoy for scores of civilian casualties during Thursday's battle in Mogadishu.
In what military commanders called the fiercest fighting in the Somali capital since the United Nations assumed control in May, dozens of women and children were apparently caught in the crossfire between American-operated Cobra helicopter gunships and the Somali militia soldiers who opened fire on American and Pakistani troops in the United Nations force.


What Is Your Body's Best Source for Calcium?; Never a Fracture
To the Editor:
Regarding your Personal Health column: The benefits of calcium can be derived almost immediately.
For many years I have urged our children, nieces and nephews to drink milk and eat yogurt


Maradona Un-retires
DIEGO MARADONA ended his latest retirement by agreeing to play for the Argentine team Newell's Old Boys.
Maradona, 33, said on Wednesday he was eager to begin playing. (AP)


Drs. A. and M. Barker, Missionaries in Africa
Dr.
Anthony Barker, a surgeon, and Dr.
Maggie Barker, also a physician, a British husband-and-wife team of medical missionaries, were killed on Aug. 30 when their tandem bicycle was struck by a truck as they were riding in the English Lake District in northern England.
He was 72; she was 77.
The couple spent much of their professional careers in South Africa.
They had been celebrating their golden wedding anniversary in the area where they had spent their honeymoon.


Richard L. Berman, Publishing Consultant, 64
Richard L. Berman, president of Moseley Associates, publishing consultants, died on Sept. 5.
He was 64.
The cause was lung cancer, his family said.


INSIDE
Surprising News on Inflation
Producer price inflation was surprisingly low in August, helped by plunging tobacco prices.
The news propelled stock and bond prices.
Page 37.


Bridge
A young Dutch team, with an average age of 32, won the Bermuda Bowl title at the NEC World Championships here this afternoon.
At the start of the day they led Norway by 39 imps, and held on to win by 36.
The winners were Enri Leufkens, Berry Westra, Bauke Muller, Wubbo de Boer, Jan Westerhof and Piet Jansen.
The losing Norwegian team, only a little older, were Glenn Groetheim, Terje Aa, Arild Rasmussen, Geir Helgemo, Jon Sveindal and Tor Helness.


N.B.A. Appeals on Dudley
The National Basketball Association will not rest until Chris Dudley's new Portland contract is null and void.
The N.B.A.'s special master (a kind of league-union arbitrator) and an outside arbitrator have both upheld Dudley's deal, which includes a one-year termination clause that will allow the former Net to sign an astronomical contract next summer.
But the league today appealed their ruling to a Federal judge in New Jersey.


Morceli Fails to Break His Mark in the 1,500
Noureddine Morceli had hoped to finish the best season of his career by setting his second world record in less than a week.
It wasn't to be.
Hampered by cold weather and the absence of serious competition, Morceli finished more than two and a half seconds off of his own world record in today's 1,500-meter race at the I.A.A.F.
Mobil Grand Prix Final at Crystal Palace in London, but still won the race easily with a time of 3:31.60.


Corrections
The Investing column in Your Money on Aug. 28, about the problems of investing in art and other collectibles, referred incorrectly to the activities of Martin Sorrell, chief executive of WPP Group P.L.C.
Mr.
Sorrell does not invest in art.


Did You Know Reeves Can Juggle?
For a head coach, there is always a fine line between trying to develop younger talent and sticking with the veterans who can win games for you now.
Coach Dan Reeves of the Giants is walking on that balance beam, and so far, what he is doing seems to be working well.
At two key positions -- center and nose tackle -- Reeves gave younger, or less experienced, players a bunch of playing time in last week's opener against the Bears.
In fact, at nose tackle, he even started a second-year player, Stacy Dillard, over a talented veteran, Erik Howard, and he will do so again on Sunday against Tampa Bay.


Green Sees Consumers As His Base of Support
Three years ago, within an hour after being sworn in as Consumer Affairs Commissioner, Mark J. Green took on R. J. Reynolds, the giant tobacco company, saying that advertisements using a cartoon character of a camel were intended to appeal to young people.
He went on to win wide acclaim for taking on other social ills, from fraud at the gas pump to false claims by companies that said that their products were good for the environment.
Now, as he campaigns for the Democratic nomination for public advocate in Tuesday's primary, Mr.
Green is drawing on the goodwill those fights brought him.
Unlike his opponents, he refuses to define his strategy in terms of race, ethnicity or borough of residence.
Instead, he said, his electoral base consists of "consumers who vote."


The Hottest Ticket in Town: Only 2,500 Have Been Invited
As White House ceremonies go, this one is in a class by itself.
The signing of the Israeli-Palestinian peace agreement on the South Lawn on Monday morning is the hottest ticket since Egypt and Israel made peace in March 1979 -- at least for non-Presidents.
George Bush and Jimmy Carter will be there, but three other former Presidents will not.
Ronald Reagan and Gerald Ford said they had scheduling conflicts, and Richard Nixon declined.


Lenore Stoughton, 88, A Trademark Lawyer
Lenore Blanchard Stoughton, a New York City lawyer who specialized in trademark and copyright law for 65 years, died on Aug. 30 at a nursing home in Kingston, N.Y.
She was 88.
Her family said she had had a long illness.


Pop and Jazz in Review
John Patton The Knitting Factory
It's easy to understand why the composer and saxophonist John Zorn admires the work of John Patton, a relatively unknown organist.
Mr.
Patton, who performed with Mr.
Zorn on Thursday night as part of the monthlong Zorn festival at the Knitting Factory, has refined the be-bop and soul vocabulary down to a few gestures.


Religion Notes
Peace and Prayer
Liturgy, the language of prayer, is not something religious leaders like to write on deadline.
But with Rosh ha-Shanah, the Jewish New Year, just a few days away and events in Israel proceeding toward peace at lightning speed, rabbis are revising.
Yesterday, with the accord between Israel and the Palestine Liberation Organization freshly signed, the United Jewish Appeal added a prayer to the responsive reading it published several weeks ago for the holiday.


CLINTON OFFERING HEALTH PLAN WITH GUARANTEE OF COVERAGE AND CURB ON PRIVATE SPENDING
After seven months of secret deliberations, President Clinton has settled on a bold plan to guarantee health insurance for all Americans while vastly expanding Federal power to control private spending on medical care.
Lobbyists and lawmakers feasted on fresh details of the proposal today as they pried loose a bootleg copy of the closely guarded document on which Mr.
Clinton has staked his Presidency.
The document, which had been available for inspection only by key staff members on Capitol Hill, is an authoritative compilation of ideas embraced by the President and Hillary Rodham Clinton, who supervised development of the plan and has been selling it in Congress.  [ Major sections of the final draft are on page 8. ]


MIDEAST ACCORD: History; Years of Bloodletting Scar Israeli-P.L.O. Relations
Khalil al-Wazir's wife and 14-year-old daughter stood a few feet away, frozen in horror as Israeli commandos broke into their Tunis apartment in 1988 and turned their automatic weapons on Mr.
Wazir, Yasir Arafat's most trusted deputy.
As they watched, the Israelis sprayed Mr.
Wazir with so many bullets -- dozens and dozens of rounds -- that the P.L.O. leader's body was not even recognizable when the Israelis turned to leave.


What Is Your Body's Best Source for Calcium?; Dairy's Not the Answer
To the Editor:
Jane E. Brody's "Personal Health" column for Aug. 18 is right about the need to guard against osteoporosis.
But boosting dairy intake is not the answer.
Only 30 percent of the calcium in dairy products is absorbed.


The Strawberry Case
The woman who was said to have been struck by Dodgers outfielder DARRYL STRAWBERRY last weekend has said that she will not file charges, a spokesman for the Glendale (Calif.) Police Department said yesterday.
The woman informed the police on Thursday that "she is not going to pursue criminal charges" against Strawberry, said CHAHE KEUROGHELIAN, a police spokesman.
"We are going to present the case to the district attorney's office. It will be up to that office to decide whether or not charges will be filed."
Strawberry, 31, would be arraigned on Sept. 30 in Glendale Municipal Court if charges are filed.
Strawberry was arrested, the police said, for striking the 26-year-old woman above the right eye, causing a one-inch laceration.


N.C.A.A. Suspends Texas A&amp;M Players
The National Collegiate Athletic Association notified Texas A&amp;M yesterday that running back GREG HILL was suspended for five games and four other players received bans from two games to a year for accepting money for summer work they didn't perform.
Coach R. C. SLOCUM, his staff and the school itself were spared punishment but, the N.C.A.A. said, that investigation is ongoing.


Next: Steisel Versus Paul Shaffer?
The Dave, Roy and Eric show may not have been great politics, but it was good enough television to beat out Dave and Jay -- or at least give them a run for their ratings.
The New York City Democratic mayoral primary debate on WABC-TV Thursday night, featuring Mayor David N. Dinkins, Roy E. Innis and Eric Ruano-Melendez, led the field in its hourlong 11:35 time slot, according to overnight ratings compiled by Arbitron.


Best Laid Plans Sure Went Awry
White House officials have spent many hours trying to orchestrate the presentation of President Clinton's health care proposal to the nation.
But their plans to introduce the proposal in a speech to Congress on Sept. 22 were upended today when a long description of the proposal hit the streets of Washington, thanks to the efforts of a few Congressional aides and dozens of lobbyists.


Civil Court Choices: Merit and Mediocrity
This year's small crop of Civil Court races in New York City leaves defenders of the current system of judicial elections with a lot of explaining to do.
They oppose changing to a nonpartisan system of selection by merit and speak high-mindedly about the "democracy" of letting voters decide who gets to become a judge.
Yet of 17 Civil Court seats in contention in November, only 7 are being contested in next Tuesday's all-but-decisive Democratic primary election.
Capable judges do emerge from this sorry process, but it also elevates some real clunkers.


What Is Your Body's Best Source for Calcium?; Drugging of Cows
To the Editor:
Nowhere in your glowing Aug. 21 article about the amazing amounts of milk that fewer cows are producing in New York State do we read how those poor animals are forced to produce such large volumes.


RESULTS PLUS
GOLF  Long Shot Keeps Lead  The long shot, Steve Stricker, the surprise first-round leader in the Canadian Open, was clinging to a two-shot lead when darkness halted second-round play last night in Oakville, Ontario.
Stricker, whose starting time was backed up by two rain delays totaling 1 hour 41 minutes, had two holes to go when play was suspended on the Glen Abbey Golf Club course at 7:45 P.M.
The 26-year-old Stricker, a native of Edgerton, Wis., who plays most of his golf on the Canadian tour, was eight under for the tournament when play was stopped.
Brad Bryant, not yet a winner in his 16-year PGA Tour career, held the clubhouse lead at six-under 138 after a hard-fought 70 in a cold rain.
There was plenty of bad weather as winds gusted to 45 miles an hour.
In addition to the heavy rains that stopped play twice, intermittent showers fell most of the day and temperatures never got out of the 50's.
Brandel Chamblee, Dudley Hart and Phil Blackmar were at 140.
Three Share Lead: Despite bogeys on three of her last five holes, Tina Barrett shared the lead with Michelle Mackall and Brandie Burton at six-under-par 66 after the first round of the Ping-Cellular One Golf Championship in Portland, Ore.
Barrett had nine birdies in her round and was eight-under through 13 holes in the $450,000 event.
"It was almost a little bit scary," the 26-year-old Barrett said.
"Everything was just going really close to the hole for a while there. Through 13 holes, it was unbelievable. I mean, eight-under through 13 holes is amazing."


In the Final, It's Sukova (Surprise) Versus Graf (No Surprise)
Beneath a sky that refused to decide between a splatter of rain or a searing sun, the doubles partners Arantxa Sanchez Vicario and Helena Sukova arrived at a similar division of purpose in their United States Open singles semifinal yesterday on the Stadium Court.
In this unfriendly scenario, the shots they usually employ to complement each other -- the steady second-seeded Sanchez Vicario with her pulsing topspin, the towering Sukova with her overheads and volleys -- were used in an attempt to annihilate each other.
This proved to be an arduous process until, granted the gift of a weakly netted forehand from her opponent on her second match point, Sukova crafted her second major upset of the week and won 6-7 (7-9), 7-5, 6-2.
As the 12th-seeded player, Sukova became the Open's lowest-seeded finalist since 1978, when Chris Evert defeated 16th-seeded Pam Shriver in straight sets.


Random House Children's Books Headed for PC's
Broderbund Software Inc. and Random House Inc. agreed yesterday to start a joint venture to produce electronic children's books to be read on personal computers.
The new venture, called Living Books, is one of the first alliances between dominant companies in their respective fields.
It will permit Broderbund, a leading publisher of consumer software, to create electronic versions of the vast library of children's titles published by Random House, a New York-based publisher owned by the privately held Advance Publications.
Broderbund and Random House declined to discuss financial details.


MIDEAST ACCORD: The P.L.O.; Arafat Weighs U.S. Trip To Sign Pact With Israel
A senior member of the Palestine Liberation Organization executive committee tonight raised the possibility that Yasir Arafat may attend the Israeli-P.L.O. signing ceremony at the White House on Monday.
Yasir Abdel Rabbo, a key aide to Mr.
Arafat who was a party to secret negotiations with Israel in the last few months, said at a news conference here that a declaration of principles and a mutual recognition agreement between the P.L.O. and Israel, which have been initialed by Mr.
Arafat, had won the approval of 9 of the 12 members of the committee who voted tonight.


Executive Changes
AETNA LIFE AND CASUALTY CO., Hartford, named R. Brian Webb managing director of its research group.
MIDDLEBY CORP., Rosemont, Ill., a maker of food preparation and storage equipment, appointed John J. Hastings executive vice president and chief financial officer.


Accord on Implant Suit Brings Flood of Queries
Jane Leighton of Trabuco Canyon, Calif., received silicone breast implants in 1975 after her breast tissue was removed to treat fibrocystic breast disease.
She had the implants removed in 1990 because they leaked, and now she says she suffers from fibrocystitis, a connective tissue disease.
"I have bundles of this tissue that has hardened like balsa wood," she said yesterday.
"I am in constant pain."


Psychiatry Doesn't Cure Unhappiness
To the Editor:
Richard A. Friedman, a psychiatrist, states in "Unhappiness by Itself Doesn't Cause Suicide" (letter, Aug. 26) that suicide is a disease and that psychiatric interventions have proved their effectiveness.
Both contentions lack scientific substantiation.
Despite constant assertions by psychiatrists, there is no scientific evidence that depression is a biological or genetic disease.


U.N. to Suspend and Then Curtail Tours of Headquarters
Amid growing concern about terrorism, the United Nations tour, an institution for generations of schoolchildren, will be suspended for a few months, and when it is resumed, parts of the complex will be placed off limits.
Melissa Wells, Under Secretary General for administration and management, said the tour would be redesigned in one of several measures to improve security at the organization's headquarters.
She refused to say what parts of the tour had aroused security concerns or what areas would be off limits, but said it was unlikely that visits to the General Assembly would be resumed.


Salvaging a Big Office Project on London's Docks
The administrators of Canary Wharf, the landmark London office-building complex that was forced to seek protection from its creditors last year, said today that they had agreed with the project's bank lenders on a $1.7 billion financial rescue package.
The proposed deal is intended to revive the fortunes of the huge project, which fell victim to Britain's deep recession and contributed to the collapse of its developer, Olympia &amp; York Developments Ltd., the real estate empire controlled by the Reichmann family of Canada.


Vincent Goes to Work
FAY VINCENT, the commissioner of baseball for three years until he resigned a year ago, has joined Peter J. Solomon Company, a New York investment banking firm, as a senior adviser.
Vincent, 55, will advise clients in the entertainment and media industries.


Crown Heights Lawsuit Seeks Answers in Anti-Semitic Riots
To the Editor:
Contrary to "Wasting the Voters' Time" (editorial, Aug. 30), the deposition of the Jewish community of the Crown Heights section of Brooklyn was not "politically motivated," nor timed to embarrass Mayor David N. Dinkins in his re-election campaign.
The community announced its intention to bring this lawsuit when it sought to preserve 911 tapes, some of which were destroyed by the Police Department, despite a court order.
The city turned a deaf ear.
In response to the suit, it wasted six months by bringing a baseless motion for summary judgment, claiming there was no anti-Semitic riot in Crown Heights.
That motion was summarily denied.


CHRONICLE
Go east, former candidate: MICHAEL WOO lost the race for Mayor of Los Angeles to Richard Riordan in June, so now he will come to Harvard to teach about government.
The former two-term Los Angeles city councilman has accepted a fellowship for the fall semester at the John F. Kennedy School of Government, The Associated Press reported yesterday.
His primary responsibility will be to meet weekly with students in the school's Institute of Politics, and he may also audit some classes at Harvard.


Observer; A Slight Plague of Murder
In Miami Wednesday a visitor from Germany began his Florida vacation by being shot to death driving to his hotel.
It happened after a van rammed his car from the rear a few times, apparently as a signal for him to pull over and be robbed.
To Florida's credit, the visitor had been warned of this local custom.
While the ramming was going on, his wife was reading him instructions from an official pamphlet on how to save your valuables and possibly your life in this very situation.


Mirror Images Trying To Capture a Pennant
The other day, when Toronto Manager Cito Gaston was trying to dissect the reasons why his team and the Yankees were so, well, alike, he pointed to the pluses.
Then he pointed to the middle relief and the bullpen failures.
Gaston was bemoaning the inconsistency of a Toronto bullpen that was blowing one late-inning lead after another to a last-place club from the American League West, the Oakland Athletics.


Q &amp; A
Liens by Contractors
Q Can you explain what the term "mechanic's lien" means?
MARK SCHROEDER, Bronxville, N.Y.
A A mechanic's lien gives a contractor or subcontractor who has performed work on your home the right to collect a debt upon its sale.
The method of enforcing such a lien varies.
In some states, the contractor can force the property to be sold immediately to satisfy his claim; in others, collection cannot begin until the house is sold or used as collateral for a loan.


Excerpts From Final Draft of Health Care Overhaul Proposal
Following are sections of the final draft of a Clinton Administration proposal to guarantee health coverage for all Americans.
The plan, being circulated on Capitol Hill, is to be unveiled on Sept. 22 in a speech by the President.
The Administration's statement of the problem and its overview of the proposed American Health Security Act of 1993 appear in full below, with excerpts from the document's detail sections.
The Problem
All Americans, those who have health insurance and those who do not, understand that serious problems exist in the health care system:


Mets' No. 1 Pick Sees He Is Needed
Kirk Presley threw out the ceremonial first ball, and adjourned shortly thereafter to meet the New York media.
He was three questions into the session when the Cubs homered.
One question later, there was a double, and four runs scored before Presley was done with his answer.
The question of the moment thus became could Presley throw more than a ceremonial pitch?
And how soon?


Japan Seems to Ease Stand On Setting Trade Targets
Japan's Foreign Minister, in what appears to open the way to a loosening of this nation's stance, suggested today that it might be acceptable for Japan and the United States to discuss setting numerical targets for reducing Japan's overall trade surplus.
The minister, Tsutomu Hata, did not clearly call for such targets and his remarks were disavowed by some other officials, including Chief Cabinet Secretary Masayoshi Takemura, the official Government spokesman.


Parents Scramble for Day Care in Asbestos Delay
With New York City's public schools closed, the Stewart sisters -- Alexandria, 11,; Vanessa, 9, and Amber, 6 -- stayed home alone much of this week and will again next week while their working mother hustles off to the office.
Patricia Stewart couldn't afford a baby sitter, so her daughters have passed the last days of summer since camp ended by acting in make-believe plays on the stage of their Washington Heights living room, usually with only an imaginary audience to applaud them.
Their original production of "Two Princess Cats" typically opens with a frenzied dance of hopping, jerking and leg-flapping and unfolds with the sisters tumbling onto the green-carpeted floor like kittens.


Management Consolidated At Rhone
Rhone-Poulenc Rorer Inc., the French-controlled drug company formed three years ago when Rhone-Poulenc S.A. merged with Rorer Group Inc., has consolidated its top management after the departure of a leading executive.
The shifts follwed the decision of Randy H. Thurman to assume the new positions of chairman and chief executive of Metpath Inc., a subsidiary of the Corning Lab Services Group of Corning Inc.


Marcos Is Entombed in the Philippines


Review/Film; A Loving Pair of Spies Take Baby to Work
Because it relies so heavily on manners identified with either the James Bond or "Thin Man" movies, you might suspect that "Undercover Blues" would be a sort of hybrid rip-off.
The new film also uses New Orleans locations with the tenacity of a sightseer who won't rest until his feet bleed.
The movie was made a year ago, but opened in New York theaters only yesterday.
Bad signs, all.
Possibly because of those signs, or at least in part, "Undercover Blues" turns out to seem a most genial surprise, a comic update of cold war espionage movies that, because of the New Orleans location, has the enhanced charm of a stolen holiday.
It stars Kathleen Turner and Dennis Quaid, playing extremely well together, as Jane and Jeff Blue, who recall Nora and Nick Charles without making you wince.
Jane and Jeff are wise-cracking, loving, incredibly adept American spies on maternity leave in New Orleans with their baby daughter in constant tow.


Highlights of the Clinton Health Plan
All Americans and legal residents would be guaranteed a package of minimum benefits that would continue despite any illnesses or changes in employment.
UNIVERSAL COVERAGE
A range of services would be covered, including hospital care, emergency services, doctors and other health professionals, pregnancy-related services, hospice and home health care, ambulances, outpatient laboratory tests and prescription drugs.
The Administration describes the coverage as equal to that offered by the nation's largest companies.
A new long-term care program would be created for disabled people that would provide expanded home care services.
Coverage of dental, eye and mental health care would be initially limited, but be expanded in the year 2000.
Items considered not medically necessary, like cosmetic surgery, would not be covered.
Free preventive care, including periodic medical exams, immunizations and screening procedures like mammograms, pap smears and readings of cholesterol levels would be provided in accordance with a schedule set by the Government.
A Medicare benefit for prescription drugs would be created.
Beneficiaries would pay 25 percent of the program through their Part B premium, a $250 deductible and 20 percent of the costs beyond that to an annual maximum of $1,000.
A choice would be offered between enrollment in a traditional fee-for-service plan, a health maintenance organization or a plan that combines elements of each.
Employers would be allowed to provide benefits that are more generous than the standard package, although after the year 2000 the extra benefits would be treated as taxable income for employees.
Illegal immigrants would not be covered, although they would continue to be eligible for emergency and other services; institutions that serve many uncovered patients would continue to receive Federal reimbursement.
HOW IT WOULD WORK
Most Americans would be enrolled in regional entities called health alliances, which would negotiate the price of coverage with health plans, offer a range of plans to members and collect premiums from employers and individuals.
States would insure that alliances exist in areas where coverage would otherwise be insufficient.
Companies with more than 5,000 employees would have the option of providing care to their workers by creating a corporate alliance and contracting directly with a health-care provider.
People now enrolled in Medicare would continue in that program, but could later join the regional alliances.
States would have the option of integrating Medicare recipients into their alliances so long as their coverage is as good or better.
Medicaid recipients would be enrolled in regional alliances and receive the standared package of benefits, as well as supplementary services.
All Americans would be issued a national health identification card that would guarantee them access to needed services.
WHO WOULD PAY
The average premium for the standard package would be $1,800 a year for individuals and $4,200 for families.
Businesses would be required to pay 80 percent of the average premium.
Families and individuals would pay the difference between that amount and the full cost of the plan they select, meaning that those enrolled in cheaper plans would pay less, or more for plans more expensive than the average.
Employers would have the option of paying more than 80 percent.
The plan also suggests that a worker would be able to buy an average health policy for just $360 a year and a family policy for $840.
The employer would pay four times that much.
No business in a regional alliance would have to pay more than 7.9 percent of its payroll.
Companies with fewer than 50 employees and those with many low-wage workers would be eligible for Government subsidies and for caps ranging from 3.5 percent to 7.9 percent of payroll, depending on their average wages.
Families and individuals could pay their share of the premium directly or through withholding; alliances may require withholding to avoid bad debt.
The self-employed and unemployed would be responsible for the entire amount of the premium, unless they were eligible for assistance based on income.
Retired workers under 65 would be responsible for 20 percent of the premium.
Employers would pay for part-time workers on a pro-rated basis.
Out-of-pocket costs would depend on the kind of service chosen.
Alliances would be required to offer high-cost, low-cost and combination plans.
The terms appear to refer respectively to traditional fee-for-service coverage, HMO's, and preferred provider networks.
A high-cost plan would allow the use of any doctor but calls for deductibles of $200 an individual and $400 a family and 20 percent co-payment after that.
In a low cost plan, the patient would see only doctors approved by the plan, but pay no deductible besides a $10-a-visit fee for outpatient services.
In the combination plan, the patient would agree to pay 20 percent of the cost whenever using a doctor outside the plan.
Out-of-pocket expenses are capped annually at $1,500 for each person and $3,000 for a family under all three plans.
CONTROLLING COSTS
A National Health Board would be created to oversee the system and set a national health budget with the goal of limiting the rate of increase of health care spending to that of the general rate of inflation by 1999.
Health care expenses are now growing at more than twice the inflation rate.
If the competitive process does not reduce growth to that level, the board would impose mandatory limits on the growth of annual premiums, forcing health plans to spend less.
Upon introducing the plan, the President would urge all sectors of the health care industry to limit price and spending increases to a specific amount not yet disclosed.
Prices and spending would be monitored by the Secretary of Health and Human Services.
The National Health Board would make public declarations about the costs of new drugs and could investigate the costs of existing drugs it considers overpriced.
It would have no authority to set drug prices.
The rate of increase of Medicare and Medicaid would be reduced. WORKERS COMPENSATION
The separate insurance systems that now exist to cover the costs of injuries suffered at work or in automobile accidents would be continued.
But the care would be provided through the health alliances created under the plan through contracts between them and the insurers.
TAKING EFFECT
States could begin implementing the system by Jan. 1, 1995, and would be required to have it in place by Jan. 1, 1997.


Paying a Professional To Run No-Load Funds
JUST when you thought you fully understood the distinction between load and no-load mutual funds, another option looms larger.
More and more financial advisers are offering to buy and manage portfolios of no-load no-commission funds -- for a fee.
Often, these fees eliminate the very cost advantage that makes no-load funds more attractive in the first place.
But the planners say that in charging by the hour or portfolio size, they are aligning their interests with their customers'.


MIDEAST ACCORD: Settlers; Israelis in Territories Feel Cast Adrift in Angry Sea
When this startlingly verdant little patch of date palms, grapevines, onions, watermelon and zucchini was first dreamed up by Labor Party planners in 1977, it was to be part of a string of Jewish settlements along the Jordan River valley that would forever provide Israel with a defensible border.
Now, it's next-door neighbor, Jericho, is to become a prototype of a new Palestine.


Sports of The Times; Whitaker Deserves The Title
IT'S the title without a championship belt, the title without a sanction by one of boxing's alphabet-soup organizations.
But it's boxing's most revered title.
It's the title that Sugar Ray Robinson's smooth skills created nearly 50 years ago: pound for pound, the world's best boxer.
And now, strangely, this is the title that Julio Cesar Chavez and Pernell Whitaker now must share until their inevitable rematch after their 12-round draw at the Alamodome.


Corrections
The About New York column on Wednesday referred incorrectly to an incident at the Labor Day parade in Manhattan.
It was a member of the honor guard who had salty words for photographers; it was not Lane Kirkland, the A.F.L.-C.I.O. president.


Review/Dance; Ancient Traditions, Fresh Renditions
Two young dancers demonstrated the richness of Indian dance on Thursday night in a program at the Asia Society that was organized by Indrani Dancers and Musicians from India.
Leela Raja, a disciple of Indrani, a noted performer and teacher, was seen in examples of Bharata Natyam, a complex solo form for women.
Pasumarthy Vithal, who is both the son and a disciple of the guru Krishna Sarma, another distinguished teacher, appeared in solos in the male Kuchipudi style.


MIDEAST ACCORD: Egypt; Once Ostracized, Cairo Feels Vindicated by Accord
Nearly 16 years after Anwar el-Sadat boldly visited Jerusalem and became the first Arab leader to offer peace to Israel, Egypt is drawing great satisfaction from the agreement between Israel and the Palestine Liberation Organization.
Not only did Egypt play a role in helping to broker the deal, as the only Arab nation having relations with Israel, but also the agreement for limited Palestinian self-rule is seen as part of a process begun by President Sadat, who first pushed for some form of Palestinian autonomy at the Camp David talks with Israel in 1978.
Mr.
Sadat was assassinated by Islamic militants in 1981.


Yank Bullpen Wrecks 4-Run Comeback
The dramatic four-run rally was finished, and the Yankees were delirious.
Manager Buck Showalter had already placed the call to summon the reliever who would attempt to preserve the 5-4 lead in the bottom of the eighth inning.
Would it be Steve Farr or Bob Wickman?
Was this potential victory important enough to summon Lee Smith?
Try none of the above.
Showalter called Steve Howe, a left-hander, to oppose the right-handed Mike Macfarlane.
It was a surprise.
After two pitches, it was a mistake.
Howe yielded a homer to Macfarlane on a 1-0 pitch that tied the score in a game that the Royals eventually won, 6-5, when the batter Howe hit with a pitch also scored.
The events made the question of why Howe was even in the tight spot more pertinent.
What was Showalter thinking?


Men's Semifinalists Not Middling in Class
For all the talk about how today's United States Open men's semifinals could be mistaken for the adult program in Central Park, they do contain Pete Sampras, who will be No. 1 if he makes the final, and two other living, breathing seeded players.
So they happen to be No. 14 Aleksandr Volkov and No. 15 Cedric Pioline; does that necessarily make them bad seeds?
At 24, Pioline is considered by many inside the sport as a late bloomer who ought to be in the top 10 by this time next year.
And Volkov, a 26-year-old from Kaliningrad, Russia, is a deceptive left-hander who at times has been a difficult opponent for the highest-ranked players, including Sampras.


Candidates on Television
The Democratic Candidates for mayor, David N. Dinkins, Roy E. Innis and Eric Melendez, will appear in a half-hour debate tomorrow on Channel 4 at 11:30 A.M.
Their hourlong debate on Thursday night will be rebroadcast at 10 A.M. tomorrow on Channel 7.
The candidates for New York City comptroller, Elizabeth Holtzman, Alan G. Hevesi and Herman Badillo, will appear in a half-hour debate at noon tomorrow on Channel 4.


Corrections
An article in Business Day on Thursday about management changes at the Woolworth Corporation misstated the number of the company's variety stores in the United States.
It is 900.


Clinton's Roll Of the Dice
The Clinton Administration's health care plan is imposing, not just in its intricacy and command of detail but also in its political audacity, which history may judge as courageous, or reckless.
The program would stir up and reorganize the medical business and shake up imperfect but familiar relationships, from those in family doctors' waiting rooms to those in the corridors of Congress.
It would also promise security for individuals and deficit control for the country.
It would try to do all this when the public's trust in the Government is near a low point and when Congress is divided by partisanship.


Vincent Dethier, 78, Professor and Expert On Insects, Is Dead
Vincent G. Dethier, a biology professor at the University of Massachusetts and an expert on the behavior of insects, died on Wednesday at the Cooley Dickinson Hospital in Northampton.
He was 78.
The cause was apparently a heart attack, his family said.


No Headline
Not since Medicare was enacted in 1965 have the political constellations been so clearly in the right place for fundamental health reform. - SENATOR EDWARD M. KENNEDY.  [ 9:2. ]


Adrift in the Market for Health Insurance
Mary Alice Bissell, a divorced woman in her 50's who lives in Darien, Conn., recalls being in a "sheer panic" about losing her medical insurance when she was laid off as a graphic designer about a year and a half ago.
"I had high cholesterol and I was terrified I wouldn't get coverage on my own," she said.
Orr Kelly, who is 69 and retired, was also alarmed when his former employer notified him that medical coverage would no longer be provided to retirees after December 1992.
"I was worried about how much it would cost" to replace the company's supplemental Medicare policy, said Mr.
Kelly, who lives in Washington.


Leslie N. Gay Jr., 71, Indian Bureau Official
Leslie N. Gay Jr., a retired official of the Federal Bureau of Indian Affairs, died last Saturday while on vacation in Dalton, Mass.
He was 71 and lived in Baltimore.
The cause was a heart attack, said a son, George.


Producer Prices Post 0.6% Drop
In a report showing surprisingly low inflation, the Government said today that plunging tobacco prices drove the Producer Price Index down six-tenths of a percent in August, the fourth straight decline and the biggest drop in two and a half years.
In the latest 12 months, prices received by American producers have risen a scant 1 percent or less at all stages of processing, a performance that delights the Federal Reserve and other policy makers.
But it also raises concerns because sluggish business activity is largely responsible for the low inflation.


Issue of Fraud Raised in Loan To Holtzman
City investigators looking into New York City Comptroller Elizabeth Holtzman's receipt of a 1992 campaign loan from the Fleet Bank have referred a possible bank fraud case to the Manhattan United States Attorney, a source familiar with their report said early today.
The source refused to provide any names of persons who might be involved.


Lynn Redgrave Cancels
Because of vocal problems, Lynn Redgrave has canceled performances of her one-woman show, "Shakespeare for My Father," at the Helen Hayes Theater, 240 West 44th Street.
Performances will resume on Friday at 8 P.M.
The show, written by Miss Redgrave and produced and directed by John Clark, is in its sixth month at the Helen Hayes.


Nassau Race Spurs Debate On Hospital
In the Democratic primary race for Nassau County Executive, in which both candidates talk about lowering taxes and trimming the budget, one issue has emerged that may define the difference between the two: Should the county's only public hospital remain public?
While the outcome of the election Tuesday is not expected to turn on the question of the Nassau County Medical Center, the issue illuminates the contrasting political philosophies of the candidates: Richard M. Kessel, a traditional Democrat who describes himself as a progressive, and Benjamin L. Zwirn, a maverick politician who has attracted supporters of Ross Perot and is sometimes described as a "New Democrat."


CLINTON'S HEALTH PLAN: The Providers; Changes Would Transform Worlds Of Doctors, Hospitals and Insurers
If the health care proposals of the Clinton Administration become law, they would throw into fast forward trends that are already reshaping the fates of doctors, hospitals and the insurance companies that pay them.
Doctors would win a victory that leading medical organizations like the American Medical Association have long sought: guaranteed insurance coverage for tens of millions of the uninsured.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
2.94
2.99
3.07
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
2.95
2.97
2.91
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.05
3.07
2.93
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
4.87
4.94
5.86
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
5.87
5.96
7.29
TELEPHONE BONDS
6.85
6.88
8.44
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
5.43
5.46
6.24
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Canada Geese Hunted in New Jersey; Special Season Aims at Prolific Residents and Their Unwanted Suburban Greenery
Bob Kula and Anthony Davidson pulled into the Spruce Run Reservoir in drizzle and darkness at 4:30 this morning, loaded for geese.
They had camouflage uniforms and 12-gauge shotguns, a dozen plastic decoys and a black Labrador retriever, Lucius.
They set up their hunting blind near some mud flats and meadow in a cove at the northern tip of the reservoir.


Leon Liebgold, 83, Actor for 50 Years In Yiddish Theater
Leon Liebgold, a veteran actor who performed for 50 years on the Yiddish stage and starred in films during the golden age of Yiddish movie-making in the 1930's, died on Sept. 3 in New Hope, Pa.
He was 83.
Mr.
Liebgold starred as the ill-fated son in the 1937 Yiddish film classic, "The Dybbuk," and also played a leading role in the 1936 film "Yidl Mit'n Fidl," with Molly Picon.


Whitener Will Direct The Winnipeg Ballet
William Whitener has been named the artistic director of the Royal Winnipeg Ballet, effective Nov. 1.
He will succeed John Meehan, who is resigning.


Ms. Holtzman's Duty
No, says New York City's Comptroller, Elizabeth Holtzman, she will not authorize early release of a report about her handling of a campaign loan.
Because of a provision in the City Charter, she has that legal right.
But morally and ethically she has every obligation to do the opposite.
There is no justification for any elected official to withhold information from the public.
That is especially true of Ms.
Holtzman, who lays claim to unimpeachable integrity, and takes every opportunity to charge others -- particularly political opponents -- with failing to measure up to her high standards.


Israel Has Controlled Little of Palestine
To the Editor:
In "Palestinians Have Reason to Take Heart" (Op-Ed, Sept. 3), Rami G. Khouri writes that the Gaza-Jericho autonomy plan for the Arabs "represents the first . . . rollback of the 20th century's Zionist-Israeli domination of Palestine."


CHRONICLE
Former Defense Secretary ROBERT S. McNAMARA has signed with Times Books, a division of Random House, to write his memoirs, it was announced this week.
The book, which is scheduled for publication in 1996, will deal with his experiences as the president of the Ford Motor Company, president of the World Bank and chief of the Pentagon 1961 to 1968, the period of the American military build-up in Vietnam.
PETER OSNOS , who is publisher of Times Books and who will edit the memoirs, said yesterday: "It is his intention to make this a chronicle of the Vietnam decision-making that really stands the test of time. The book will answer some very difficult questions."


Pope, in Baltics, Faces Tangle of Ethnic Issues
He has been called God's politician, and no one who has followed him from Latin America to Africa or even, last month, to Denver would suggest that Pope John Paul II shies away from whatever passions consume the lands he visits -- be it AIDS or dictators, abortion or Islam.
But as he concluded a one-week tour of the Baltic republics formerly under Soviet rule today, the Pope has collided with one of the harsher realities of a 15-year-old papacy marked by his crusade against Communism: From the Black Sea to the Baltic, the battle has left an ambiguous legacy laced with ethnic and religious tangles that will not easily be unraveled.


Arbitration for Ferraro
The Islanders' RAY FERRARO plans to file for salary arbitration, but BENOIT HOGUE says he won't.
Ferraro is in his option year at $300,000.
Hogue is in his option year for $600,000.
Also eligible for arbitration: PIERRE TURGEON and TOM KURVERS.


Getting Rid of Anger
To the Editor:
Your Aug. 19 article about programs that teach schoolchildren self-control is encouraging, but the efforts overlook one important fact: controlling anger by recognizing it in yourself and understanding its cause doesn't get rid of it.
The anger stays in your body and leads to release later as rage or to suppression of feelings.


Salvador Journal; In Brazil, a City Has Its Own Harlem Renaissance
Welcoming patrons to his stylish new restaurant here, Elon Carneiro Coelho's eye was caught one recent evening by the bust of an ancient Greek healer brooding in a wall niche across a narrow cobblestone street.
"My father studied medicine there," he said, waving toward Brazil's first medical school, a decaying neoclassical landmark of Salvador's historic center, the Pelourinho.
"But my generation always avoided coming here. Despite the historic buildings, we always saw the Pelourinho as ugly, rundown, dangerous."


Municipal Bonds Aren't Without Risk
Municipal bond funds are the darlings of investors, and with good reason.
The new Federal income tax rates make municipal bond income, which is free of Federal taxes, more valuable than ever.
Most people consider municipal funds low risk.
But the highest-ranked funds for the last three years have risen to the top by taking on credit risk, or buying lower-quality issues.
Others have assumed interest rate risk, by buying issues that mature in 20 or more years.
When interest rates rise, prices of long-term issues decline more than prices of shorter-term issues.


Nora Kildare Copeland, Catholic Charities Volunteer
Nora Kildare Copeland, whose volunteer work for Catholic Charities spanned 25 years, died on Aug. 30 at her home in Sarasota, Fla.
Her family said she was in her late 80's.
Mrs.
Copeland was a resident of Manhattan before she moved to Sarasota in 1977.
She was born in Cygnet, Ohio.
Early in her life she appeared in National Stage Productions on Broadway, and left the stage to marry Abbot J. Copeland.


House Whip Relents on Using Office to Fight Nafta
Seeking to mend a rift among House Democrats, the majority whip retreated today from his plans to use all the resources of the whip's office against the North American Free Trade Agreement.
The lawmaker, Representative David E. Bonior of Michigan, the leading House opponent of the pact, said he would begin sharing the staff, computers and other resources of the whip's office with the pact's supporters.


NEWS SUMMARY
International 2-6  ISRAEL SEES WIDER PEACE  Signing a stiffly worded letter declaring recognition of the P.L.O., Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin of Israel said history had handed his country a chance for reconciliation with the rest of the Arab world, and not just the Palestinians.
C1  A landsman goes whale-watching.
C1  Poster art for collectors.
C1  Kasparov and Short draw in Game 2.
C21  For Children C23  Theater: Critic's Notebook C2  Film: "Samba Traore." C3  "True Romance." C5  "The Seventh Coin." C5  "Leon the Pig Farmer." C8  "Crush." C8  "The Real McCoy." C10  Restaurants C20  Art: Modern's director resigns.
C3  Self-portraits in prints and photographs.
C13  Movement monger's many moods.
C19  Arthur Murphy's Social Realism.
C25  Books: "A Tidewater Morning." C27  Television: TV Weekend D18  Sports B11-17  Baseball: Abbott can't enjoy his no-hitter.
B11  Owners approve realignment.
B11  Blue Jays lose another.
B12  Columns: Vecsey on U.S.
Open.
B11  Anderson on Chavez-Whitaker.
B17  Tennis: Pioline and Masur in semifinals.
B11  Obituaries B10  Helen O'Connell, big-band singer.
Editorials/Op-Ed A26-27  Editorials  Beyond the shock of recognition.
Judge Wachtler heads for prison.
A start on national service.
For City Council from Brooklyn.
Letters  A. M. Rosenthal: Bosnia -- empty promises.
Roger Harrison: Israel can live with the risks.
Joseph Nocera: Bulls, bears and us.
Bridge C21 Chronicle B4 Crossword C26


Corrections
A movie review on Wednesday about "The Joy Luck Club" referred incompletely to the previous credits of one star, France Nuyen.
She starred in "The World of Suzie Wong" on Broadway, not in the movie.
In the film, Suzie Wong was played by Nancy Kwan.


Israel and P.L.O. Seek To Build on New Ties; Jordan Accord Is Seen
As he signed a starchily worded letter declaring Israel's recognition of the Palestine Liberation Organization, Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin said today that history had handed Israel a chance for reconciliation with the rest of the Arab world and not just the Palestinians.
"I believe that there is a great opportunity of changing not only the relations between the Palestinians and Israel but to expand it to the solution of the conflict between Israel and other Arab countries and other Arab peoples," Mr.
Rabin said at a signing ceremony whose simplicity belied the seismic shift it represented in Middle East relationships.


COLLEGE FOOTBALL REPORT
The following is a look at today's top college football games with this season's won-lost record in parentheses and the result of last year's match, current visiting team first, or DNP (did not play).
East
Duke (0-1) vs.
Rutgers (1-0) at Giants Stadium.
DNP.
A defining evening for the Scarlet Knights.
Veteran Blue Devil team absorbed a 45-7 loss to Florida State.
Southern California (1-1) at Penn State (1-0) DNP.
Trojans trounced Houston after being trounced by North Carolina.
Nittany Lions gave up 478 yards passing to Minnesota, a Beaver Stadium record.
Virginia Tech (1-0) at Pittsburgh (1-0) DNP.
Big East rivals have never played before.
Tech has creditable quarterback in Maurice DeShazo.
Lehigh (0-1) at Fordham (0-0) 16-14.
Engineers surrendered 62 points and 609 yards to Delaware.
Rams are unknown quantities; likely no world beaters.
Hofstra (1-0) at Rhode Island (0-1) 28-18.
Flying Dutchmen continue run-and-shoot attack, good for 337 passing yards against Butler.
Rhodies lost opener, 31-10, to Boise State under new coach, Floyd Keith.
Holy Cross (0-0) at Massachusetts (0-0) 3-7.
Minutemen's victory last year ended Crusaders' 26-game unbeaten streak at home.
William and Mary (1-0) at Delaware (1-0) DNP.
Key match in newly expanded Yankee Conference.
New Hampshire (0-1) at Connecticut (0-1) 21-24.
Neither was imposing in opening defeats, Wildcats to William and Mary, 27-14; Huskies to Furman, 26-17.
Midwest
Notre Dame (1-0) at Michigan (1-0) 17-17.
If underdog Irish can win this one, then Coach Lou Holtz will have several last laughs.
Washington (1-0) at Ohio State (1-0) DNP.
Huskies on a mission of redemption.
Buckeyes had satisfying 34-7 opening victory over Rice and won't be easy.
Texas A&amp;M (1-0) at Oklahoma (1-0) DNP.
First meeting since 1951.
Aggies, with mild schedule, will not often be tested like this.
Sooners were formidable in 35-3 rout of T.C.U.
Iowa (1-0) at Iowa State (1-0) 21-7.
Hawkeyes usually win but maybe not this time.
South
Clemson (1-0) at Florida State (2-0) 20-24.
Tigers were unimpressive in 10-point triumph over Nevada-Las Vegas.
The Seminoles seem awesome.
Georgia (0-1) at Tennessee (1-0) 31-34.
Two of nation's best quarterbacks on display.
But Vols' Heath Shuler has stronger cast than Bulldogs' Eric Zeier.
Maryland (0-1) at North Carolina (2-0) 24-31.
Tar Heels imposing so far.
Terps seldom score faster or more often than their foes.
Alabama (1-0) at Vanderbilt (1-0) 25-8.
Commodores, who rushed for 431 yards against Wake Forest, may dent the resolute Bama defense.
But not enough.
Florida (1-0) at Kentucky (1-0) 35-19.
Gators broke in an impressive new quarterback, Terry Dean.
They merit everyone's attention.
West
San Diego State (1-0) at California (1-0) DNP.
Marshall Faulk may have trouble running through the Golden Bears.
Mismatches
Colgate (0-1) at Army (0-0) DNP.
Cadets will show a more diversified offense in this rehearsal.
Navy (0-0) at Virginia (1-0) 0-53.
The Middies will be stronger this season but won't come close to Cavaliers.
Texas Tech (1-0) at Nebraska (1-0) DNP. Another breeze for Cornhuskers.


Transactions
Baseball American League
BALTIMORE ORIOLES -- Recalled Brad Pennington, pitcher, and Paul Carey, infielder-outfielder, from Rochester of the International League.
MINNESOTA TWINS -- Recalled Denny Hocking, shortstop, from Nashville of the Southern League.
Purchased the contracts of Rich Becker, outfielder, and Scott Stahoviak, infielder, from Nashville.
National League
NL -- Announced that Jose Bautista, Chicago Cubs pitcher, withdrew his appeal of a three-game suspension and began serving it immediately.
ATLANTA BRAVES -- Recalled Pedro Borbon, pitcher; Ryan Klesko and Brian Hunter, first basemen-outfielders; and Chipper Jones, infielder, from Richmond of the International League.
Designated Hector Roa, infielder, for assignment.
CHICAGO CUBS -- Purchased the contract of Bill Brennan, pitcher, from Iowa of the American Association.
CINCINNATI REDS -- Placed Kevin Mitchell, outfielder, on the 60-day disabled list.
Received Hector Carrasco, pitcher, from the Florida Marlins to complete the March 27 trade for Chris Hammond.


Review/Television; On the Old Plantation, War Is All in the Family
The Civil War has begun and interrupts the squabblings of dashing headstrong Virginians at the Doyle plantation, Elysian Fields, where husband and wife, father and son, brother and brother, daughter-in-law and mother-in-law go at one another from sunup to sundown, leaving them little time to worry about racial and class unrest, much less about the North.
Attention centers particularly on dashing Jackson Doyle (Daniel Markel), who marries beautiful but lowborn but headstrong Rebecca Morgan (Tracy Griffith) and is told, "You have brought disgrace on the Doyle name."


Mideast Update
Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin of ISRAEL signed a letter in JERUSALEM declaring recognition of the Palestine Liberation Organization.
In TUNIS, a high-ranking member of the P.L.O., which has similarly recognized Israel, suggested that Yasir Arafat might attend the signing in WASHINGTON on Monday of a peace accord providing for limited Palestinian autonomy.
Before leaving WASHINGTON on a brief trip, President Clinton announced that the United States would resume communications with the P.L.O. after a three-year rift.


Review/Opera; Mystics, Draped in Jung, With Spiritual Quests
Just after the premiere of Sir Michael Tippett's "Midsummer Marriage" in London in 1955, one of the many critics of the work said that the composer's libretto was the worst in the history of music.
After attending the work's New York premiere by the New York City Opera on Thursday night, the first production here of any of Mr.
Tippett's operas, I found that assessment slightly inaccurate.
In that great expanse of time, there have indeed been operas as dull and silly as this one.
But not many.
Despite a first-class performance that was a tribute to the cast and to Christopher Keene, the company's music director; despite a production by Francesca Zambello that for all its faults displayed a strong dramatic intelligence, and despite the standing ovation offered the composer during curtain calls, this work defies current revisionist attempts to award it masterpiece status.


Clinton and Company Talk Jobs in Silicon Valley


CHRONICLE
This was the month to claim friendship with J. HOWARD (BUMPY) FRAZER.
He is the president of the United States Tennis Association, and it fell to him to decide who would get the coveted seats in the presidential box at the United States Open.
It also fell to him to gently persuade those male guests who turned up without the requisite coat and tie to wear the ones he loans.
The genial Mr.
Frazer struck out only once, with JACK NICHOLSON.
"He was great, but I had no luck getting him to wear a tie," Mr.
Frazer said yesterday.


Fulfilling a Dream While Paying Off Hefty Student Loans
Sharon Gass-Simpkins knew in college that she wanted to be a dentist, but decided after graduation to sample other fields first.
Starting with a short stint as a flight attendant, she earned a master's degeree in public administration and held a marketing position at the Xerox Corporation for nine years.


Cuomo Tells Baptists That Jobs Would Help Cure Nation's Ills
After wondering aloud whether American society still had the ability to define its guiding values, Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo told the National Baptist Convention yesterday that nothing would do more to solve the country's problems than providing jobs for everyone willing to work.
Mr.
Cuomo was the latest in a slew of political figures to address the convention, which has drawn almost 50,000 pastors and church members to a round of meetings and prayer services in Manhattan that began last Tuesday and will end tomorrow.


Daryn Abramson, David Grossman
Daryn Lisa Abramson, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Carl N. Abramson of Malvern, Pa., was married last evening to David William Grossman, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
Michael L. Grossman of New York.
Rabbi Robert Alper officiated at the Hotel Dupont in Wilmington, Del.
Mrs.
Grossman, 26, graduated cum laude from Tufts University and received a law degree from the Brooklyn Law School in June.
Her father is the associate vice provost for information systems and computing at the University of Pennsylvania in Philadelphia.
Her mother, Adrienne Abramson, is a consultant on computer software development, in Malvern.


THE DEVIL IN LONG ISLAND
This article is an example of the increasingly degenerative preoccupations of our most gifted journalists.
Its one redeeming quality is that it might make more people read Pynchon.
Ron Rosenbaum's eagerness to make use of tabloid headlines makes him little better than any other media hyena.
At least Joey Buttafuoco does something useful!
MICHAEL SZECHTER Lawrence, L.I.


Nerds Have Mothers, Too
To the Editor:
Your article failed to spell out how a person with the appropriate talent actually gets started in engineering.
The article does emphasize one important factor.
All of these women developed their interest in and drive for engineering as children.
But it takes more than that.


Israeli-Palestinian Plan Is Prudent and Bold; Camp David Fulfilled
To the Editor:
Once the proposed declaration of principles between Israel and the Palestinians was approved by the Israeli cabinet and by the main faction of the Palestine Liberation Organization (Fatah), progress toward further peace accords between Israel and its neighbors seemed inevitable.


An After-Hours Directory
IT'S 3 A.M., and you're standing outside your apartment listening to the cries of your cat, which hasn't been fed all day.
The problem is, your keys are locked inside.
You need a locksmith.
Now.
Or perhaps you're having some unpleasant plumbing problems that can't wait until morning.
Or your car died on the Queensboro Bridge.
Or you're craving a Spanish omelet at midnight.


POLES ARE LOOKING TO EX-COMMUNISTS
The gleaming new Pizza Hut restaurant in the heart of this city's booming financial center is crowded most evenings with women carrying briefcases, ambitious junior executives and affluent university students.
It is hardly the place opinion seekers would expect to find supporters of the former Communist Party.
But such is the state of politics in Poland and such is the apparent makeover of the Communists whose government collapsed four years ago that over the tacos and french fries and drumsticks it is easy to hear diners talk about bringing back the old guard.


Fugazi


Profile: Irving Wladawsky-Berger; Well, Somebody's Got to Reinvent the I.B.M. Mainframe
Irving Wladawsky-Berger tugs a silver handle on a black drawer that is somewhat bigger than a shoe box and is made of latticed steel.
Inside, colored wires and computer chips are attached to a couple of circuit boards.
Two little fans stand ready.
Each unassuming drawer, Mr.
Wladawsky-Berger explains, holds the innards of a computer work station, and the caged work stations are housed in tall racks.
It may not look like much, but it could be I.B.M.'s future, or a large part of it anyway.


A Wide Field Battles for a Weakened Office
THE RACE for public advocate took center stage when Andrew Stein, the current City Council President, dropped his mayoral campaign to seek re-election. (Shortly after, Mr. Stein decided to drop out of that race, too, and out of politics altogether.)
The public advocate is first in line to succeed the Mayor in an emergency or incapacity.
He serves as the city's ombudsman and has some responsibility for overseeing city agencies.
He can also introduce legislation to the City Council and break a tie vote.


Jennifer Johnson, Thomas Eddy Jr.
Jennifer Maria Johnson, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Dudley D. Johnson of Cazenovia, N.Y., was married yesterday to Thomas Phillips Eddy Jr., a son of Mrs.
Thomas P. Eddy of Pittsburgh and the late Mr.
Eddy.
The Rev.
Mary Cushman officiated at St.
James' Episcopal Church in New York.
Mrs.
Eddy is a vice president of Lehman Brothers in Boston.
She graduated from St.
Lawrence University.
Her father is the president of Young &amp; Franklin Inc., a maker of hydraulic valves in Syracuse.
Her mother, Dale Johnson, is a research associate at the Metropolitan Museum of Art.


Film Fast Enough To Catch a Serve
WORD spreads quickly about new photography products, especially when they break new ground.
And there's already a buzz about Fujicolor Super G 800 film, which Fuji Photo Film U.S.A. decided to release to press photographers at the United States Open last week.
It was the first time the film had been made available outside Japan.
The new film is twice the speed of Fuji's previous color-negative sports film, and can be pushed beyond 800, up to 3200 ISO.
Seasoned photographers were amazed at its ability to stop the action at such high speeds even in weak light without the usual tradeoff, which is a grainy image.


Luck Is the Residue of Yanks' Design
The Yankees have used up more lives than any cat has a right to claim.
But give them credit.
They always come back from near oblivion looking for more.
No matter how exasperating, no matter how maddening, no matter how consistent the Yankees are in some of their inconsistencies, one trait cannot be denied. the Yankees are incredibly lucky.


Denmark
To the Editor: My husband and I read with pleasure and recognition the article on "Storied Danish Manors" (Aug. 8) because we just returned from a magical 12-day tour, called Denmark in Depth, during which we lived like the lord and lady of several manor houses and castles.
We were part of a group of 16, led by a Yakima, Wash., lawyer, Richard Wiehl, who is married to a Dane.
On the island of Mon, mentioned in your story, Liselund Castle was our first night's stop.
We made our way down a steep trail to see the famous white chalk cliffs.
The climb back up gave us a good appetite for a dinner that included fresh fish and local new potatoes.


And This Was Just the Audience
The ninth Wigstock festival, Sept. 6 at Tompkins Square Park.


Diana MacLear, Peter Renehan
Diana Reynolds MacLear, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Frank R. MacLear of Watch Hill, R.I., was married there yesterday to Peter Lawrence Renehan, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Arthur Renehan of Southport, Conn.
The Rev.
Semour St.
John, an Episcopal priest, officiated at the Watch Hill Chapel.
He was assisted by the Rev.
Thomas Regan, a Roman Catholic priest.
Mrs.
Renehan, a graduate of Skidmore College, is a jewelry designer in New York.
Her father is the president of MacLear &amp; Harris, a naval architectural firm specializing in yacht designs in New York.
Her late maternal grandfather, Arthur Gardner, was United States Ambassador to Cuba in the Eisenhower Administration.


THE ANGUISHED POLITICS OF BREAST CANCER
Susan Ferraro captures the process through which so many women, diagnosed with breast cancer, become politicized ("The Anguished Politics of Breast Cancer," Aug. 15).
She understands how the vulnerability and fear that arise after such a diagnosis can evolve into the kind of anger that produces a fighting spirit.
And when these fighting spirits join together, the power to make change is unstoppable.
ALICE YAKER Executive Director, Share New York, N.Y.


In Defense of the A.D.R.
To the Editor:
Regarding your assessment of fees on American depository receipts in "New Shaker in the A.D.R. Business" (Aug. 1), let's compare investing directly through ordinary shares versus A.D.R.'s, using the example cited in your story -- Ashton Mining.
In October 1992, Ashton paid a 2.2-cent-per-share dividend.
For an investor holding 1,000 shares in the form of A.D.R.'s, Citibank's dividend fee was half a cent per share (18.5 percent) for a total fee of $5 before recovery of any of our processing costs.


Intertwined Lives
To the Editor:
Michael Kimmelman says more about himself than he intended when he dismisses my scholarship as an "obsessive focus on the sex lives of his subjects." On the contrary, I write about the art of Jasper Johns and Robert Rauschenberg, including how their intertwined lives and love for one another affected their work.
JONATHAN D. KATZ  San Francisco


A Kasparov Protege Shows His Mettle
SEVERAL years ago, Gary Kasparov spotted the enormous talent in a young fellow Soviet player, Vladimir Kramnik, and singled him out for special coaching.
In June 1992, Kasparov put him on the Russian team for the Manila Olympiad and Kramnik, still unknown abroad, turned in the highest score, 8 1/2- 1/2, an extraordinary contribution to the squad's victory.
Kramnik, now 18, continues to fulfill his mentor's prophecy of a brilliant career.
He became the youngest of the 10 to qualify for the International Chess Federation world title candidates matches by tying for second place in the Interzonal Tournament, which finished in early August in Biel, Switzerland.
He showed his skill in combination play against Bosko Abramovic of Yugoslavia in Round 2.


CONNECTICUT GUIDE
PERFORMING POETS
Poetry Slams, which began in Chicago almost a decade ago and spread to dozens of cities, are gaining popularity in Connecticut.
A state championship Grand Slam will be held today from 1 to 4 P.M. at the Charter Oak Cultural Center in Hartford.
Winners will represent Connecticut in the 1993 nationals to be held from Sept. 29 through Oct. 2 in San Francisco.
For those who are unfamiliar with poetry slams, they may be best described as performance art, in which the poets perform their own original poetry before judges who are randomly selected from the audience.


"Carlito's Way"
Brian De Palma and Al Pacino (right) might bring out the best in each other -- Brian will make Al tougher, and Al will make Brian kinder -- in this story of a drug lord who tries to reshape his life.
Opening on Nov. 12. (Louis Goldman/Universal Pictures)


Fortay Rallies Rutgers
After a sparkling first half tonight at Giants Stadium, Rutgers crashed to earth.
And hard.
But in the most improbable of comebacks, reserve quarterback Bryan Fortay brought the Scarlet Knights back, rallying them to 17 points in just over 9 minutes.
And when John Benestad's 38-yard field goal with 1 minute 1 second left in the game split the uprights and Duke's Tom Cochran missed for the third time wide left -- this one from 43 yards with 4 seconds remaining -- the Scarlet Knights had a wild 39-38 victory over the Blue Devils.


To Live and Shop By the L.I.R.R.
In addition to housing for 400 families, the Atlantic Center development, next to the Long Island Rail Road terminal at Atlantic and Flatbush Avenues, where subway lines and major roads meet, will have two big retail centers.
Construction is to begin in November, with the opening scheduled late next year.
Under the first phase of the project, the developers, Atlantic Center Associates, are building 160,000 square feet of retail space, to be leased to the Bradlee's discount department-store chain.
There will be parking for 366 cars.


Leetch Cleans Up His Act and Attitude
Brian Leetch started shaving the beard in June while on a trip to St.
Maarten.
It was symbolic in a way, his decision to erase the remnants of last season and start thinking fresh.
He removed the bushy reddish-blond hair section by section -- first Leetch went to mutton chops, then sideburns, then a goatee, then only a mustache -- until one morning he looked in the mirror and almost felt like himself.


Corrections
An article on Aug. 22 about a trend among pop music groups, using the letter "U" in their names, misspelled the name of the jazz pianist who in the early 1960's recorded an album with the title "US 3," now the name of a British acid-jazz group.
He is Horace Parlan.


THE ANGUISHED POLITICS OF BREAST CANCER
Ferraro justifiably calls attention to the lack of progress in the treatment of breast cancer and to the frustrating task of trying to persuade Government agencies to appropriate more funds for research.


A Temporary Alternative for the Elderly
WITH its pale mauve, rose and pastel blue floral bedspread and matching window valences, the room in which Caroline Keil received visitors could easily rival accommodations at one of the county's more attractive hotels.
Houseplants and pictures of family members rested on the contemporary dresser, where other personal knicknacks stood, and an armchair next to the bed completed the decor.
At the foot of the bed, a fluffy blue-and-green-plaid mohair blanket added a homey touch.


Park Users Ask To Banish Dogs
A feud has broken out between dog owners and neighbors who want to banish dogs from Clement Clarke Moore Park.
The Parks Department has begun a major renovation of the little park on the corner of 10th Avenue and 22d Street, which has become a haunt for homeless people, drug dealers -- and dogs.


Flag-Wavering
Just before my 22d birthday, while I was undergoing Peace Corps training in an African village of mud huts and pygmy goats, a volunteer twice my age told me, "You're doing what young men used to do when they joined the army back in the 19th century."
She was right, though I didn't know it until that moment.
My purpose in going to Africa was not to save anyone's life but to test myself, to have an adventure in the world, even, in a phrase so old-fashioned it makes me blush, to become a man.


2 Approaches to Transit for the Disabled
NASSAU and Suffolk Counties, under pressure to comply with a Federal law mandating that they create paratransit systems for the disabled, are taking the first steps to developing the systems.
But they are moving at different speeds.
Nassau, which operates 11 paratransit minibuses and expects to add 10 more by January, is nearly on schedule.
The Federal Transit Administration approved its plan under the 1990 Americans With Disabilities Act.


Fewer Tickets As Goal Shifts From Revenue
After climbing steadily for several years, the number of parking tickets issued by traffic agents in New York City plummeted to 6.6 million from 8.9 million, or by 26 percent, in the fiscal year that ended in June.
The unexpected drop has provoked and puzzled the city's budget officials, who are concerned about a significant loss of revenue at a time of severe economic pressure.


U.S. SEEKING CURBS ON CLINIC ATTACKS
With civil rights laws proving futile as a means of curbing violence at abortion clinics, Justice Department lawyers have begun examining the criminal statutes in the hope of finding tools to assert Federal authority in the emotional conflict.
The review comes at a time when the advocates of abortion rights concede that they are losing ground and that the availability of abortions is becoming a problem in some areas.


Neon: It's Chrysler-Lite
IF it's Tuesday, this must be Frankfurt.
Well, yes and no.
Where we are is 54th Street on Manhattan's West Side, and it is Tuesday last, but the Frankfurt Automobile Show is coming in live through a huge satellite dish parked out on the sidewalk.


To Get a Bit Precise About Inexactitude
To the Editor:
Re "To Be Precise" (editorial, Aug. 26), on the refinement of scientific measurement:
While teaching industrial design at the University of Illinois, I posted a sign in our modelmaking shop that read, "Measure Twice, Cut Once," in the optimistic belief of instilling confidence in our budding designers when it came time to build prototypes of their designs.
To no avail.
Their first cut on the table saw, bandsaw or with a handsaw would always include a bit more (the fudge factor) to make sure it would fit.


MAKING IT WORK: Guard and Guardian; In a Hard Place in the Bronx, Lenny Hicks Watches Over Tough Streets and Young Souls
A SNAPSHOT of seven impish 12-year-old boys in baggy basketball uniforms holds a special place at the top of the bulletin board in Lenny Hicks's office.
He takes it down, slowly looks over their smiling faces and calmly recounts what has happened to the Biddy League team he coached eight years ago.
"This guy is dead," he says.
"This kid was also shot and died two weeks later. This one had to move away because he was implicated in drugs. This one's in jail, and this one just got out of jail."


Turning to Curry for a Taste of the East
A PINCH of curry powder can do wonders for a dish.
But now chefs and serious cooks are going a step further and making their own pastes, powders and curry oils at home.
It takes only minutes and the results are enormously satisfying.
Eggplant, tomatoes, new potatoes and string beans are superb perked up with a dash of curry, and they go very well with meat or fish cooked on the grill.
The spices used in curry powder also make an excellent oil.
Philippe Chin, chef and owner of Chanterelles, a popular French restaurant in Philadelphia, recently galvanized guests at a Manhattan dinner party by serving gravlax seasoned with curry oil on blinis as an hors d'oeuvre.


Sukova? Who?
To the Sports Editor:
"An Old Rival Conspires Against Navratilova" (The Times, Sept. 7), the review of Martina Navratilova's loss to Helena Sukova in the fourth round, was illuminating in that of all of Navratilova's statements quoted by Robin Finn not one gave credit to her opponent.
It was all "I blew it," "I felt like I was playing golf," "I didn't make one lob."


LETTERS TO THE NEW JERSEY EDITOR
A recent article, "Battle Forming Over Teachers' Lifetime License," described three proposals to end New Jersey's practice of granting teachers lifetime certification and mentioned critics' charges that the proposals represent an indirect attack on the state's tenure law.
The article drew a number of letters to the editor, including these.
The current tenure law in New Jersey was never set into motion to protect incompetent teachers, as it has been applied, nor does this take place.
Yes, we have some incompetent teachers, but that's because of the lack of consistency of supervisory personnel.
New Jersey has some of the finest teachers.
Why should all be punished for the wrongs and politics of a few?


Rebuilding an Urban Treasure
The opening of a rebuilt zoo.
The construction of a new playground.
A campaign to control erosion: These are among major changes that will begin in Prospect Park this fall.
"This is all part of an effort to make it easy for people to spend time in the park and take advantage of all that it has to offer," said Tupper Thomas, Prospect Park's administrator, and the Prospect Park Alliance, which raises money for projects.


Editorial Notebook; Mr. Perot Attacks Nafta
Ross Perot's book attacking the North America Free Trade Agreement is an inept diatribe that misstates facts, misleads readers and misunderstands trade.
"Save Your Jobs, Save Our Country," written with economist Pat Choate, piles one tendentious assertion atop another.
Serious-minded people can disagree about the wisdom of Nafta, which would phase out trade barriers among the U.S., Mexico and Canada.
And those who like Nafta can disagree over President Clinton's efforts to muscle it through Congress when his health care reform hangs in the balance.
But Mr.
Perot's writing isn't a fair sifting of pros and cons.
He ominously asserts, by ignoring evidence to the contrary, that Nafta will "pit American and Mexican workers in a race to the bottom."


Jennifer Field, Derryl G. Lang
Jennifer Field and Derryl Gregory Lang, landmarks preservationists with the New York City Landmarks Preservation Commission, were married yesterday.
The Rev.
Robert McCann officiated at the Grace Episcopal Cathedral in San Francisco.
The bride, 30, graduated from New York University.
She and her husband received master's degrees in historic preservation from Columbia University.
She is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert C. Field of Oakland, Calif.


Rebuilding an Urban Treasure
The opening of a rebuilt zoo.
The construction of a new playground.
A campaign to control erosion: These are among major changes that will begin in Prospect Park this fall.
"This is all part of an effort to make it easy for people to spend time in the park and take advantage of all that it has to offer," said Tupper Thomas, Prospect Park's administrator, and the Prospect Park Alliance, which raises money for projects.


SEPT. 5-11: Civilian Casualties; Anxiety Over Somalia: Shots Fired in Mogadishu Are Heard in the Senate
After American helicopter forces inflicted heavy casualties in confronting a hostile crowd in Somalia last week, Congressional opinion about the American operation there went from wary to angry.
Lawmakers were already in a sour mood when they returned from their summer recess on Tuesday, grumbling that while they were off on vacation the Clinton Administration had expanded the military's mission from humanitarian aid to pacification and nation-building.


Frank A. Ashley, PaSean Wilson
PaSean Anne Wilson, a daughter of Charles and MayDell Wilson of Brooklyn, and Frank Anthony Ashley, a son of Patricia Ashley of Brooklyn and Frank Ashley of Paris, were married yesterday.
Viola Fulton, a women's division chief in the Soka Gakkai International Organization, performed the Buddhist ceremony at the country home of the bride's parents in Franklin, N.Y.
Mrs.
Ashley, 32, is an actress in New York.
She graduated from Howard University.
Her father teaches graphic arts at Junior High School 52 in New York.


Dinkins Safe in Primary, But Not in November
Mayor David N. Dinkins's certain victory in the Democratic primary on Tuesday reveals a paradox of black New Yorkers' political power: His race has helped him stave off any real challenge to renomination, but it remains one of his greatest vulnerabilities as he fights to avoid becoming the first black mayor of a major American city to be defeated in his quest for a second term.
The demographics of the city's Democratic primary electorate -- in which blacks account for about one-third of the vote and a candidate needs just 40 percent of the total vote to avoid a runoff -- drove away otherwise serious contenders, who could not hope to crack Mr.
Dinkins's base despite his rocky term.
He is left facing a negligible challenge from two political gadflies, one of whom happens to be black, the other Hispanic.


K. L. Sonnenberg, T. S. Zaubler
Katharine Lee Sonnenberg, the daughter of Drs.
Stephen and Dale Sonnenberg of Washington, was married there yesterday to Dr.
Thomas Scot Zaubler, a son of Leland and Lynn Zaubler of Riverdale, the Bronx.
Judge Jan E. DuBois, a Federal district judge in Philadelphia, performed the ceremony at the Carlton hotel.
Ms.
Sonnenberg, who is keeping her name, graduated magna cum laude from Princeton University and received a law degree from Columbia University.
She is to join the New York law firm of Friedman &amp; Kaplan as an associate in October.
Her father is a psychoanalyst and a clinical professor of psychiatry and behavioral sciences at George Washington University in Washington.
Her mother is an assistant professor of social work at Virginia Commonwealth University and director of its off-campus program in Falls Church, Va.


Blisters, Cracks and Other Problems of Flat Roofs
ROOF care is a priority as fall approaches.
Flat and low-sloped roofs require special attention.
Although they can provide years of trouble-free service when properly maintained, such roofs develop major problems if wear and minor damage are neglected.
Most flat and low-sloped roofs are built up with layers of roofing felt and asphalt or coal tar.
On some old houses the roof may be metal with an asphalt coating like that of built-up roofs, but without felts.


Indy-Car Owners Carry Competition Far From Roar of the Track
The last two weeks have provided evidence that winning an Indy-car race often involves competition that occurs far away from the track.
On Aug. 29 in Vancouver, Scott Goodyear, Bobby Rahal and Al Unser Jr. -- among other drivers -- suddenly found themselves a lot closer to winning than they have all season.
Meanwhile, Emerson Fittipaldi, Paul Tracy, Nigel Mansell and Mario Andretti, who had been dominating the series, were struggling.
One reason was that parts for the Lola chassis that were not previously available to every Lola customer suddenly were.


In Yorkville, an Assault on Trees
The green thieves are loose in the neighborhood, and the people of Yorkville are fighting back with locks and chains.
In the last few months, plants, trees and bushes have been uprooted from 79th Street to 87th.
Three buildings alone -- No. 235, 245 and 250 East 87th -- have lost over 100 costly plants.


NEW TACTICS URGED TO RAISE LITERACY
In reaction to a broad national study, educators, government officials and business leaders said improving the nation's low level of adult literacy would be a huge task that might require sweeping changes in education as well as the greater involvement of the business community.
The survey, released last week by the Education Department, found that nearly half of all Americans lacked enough skill in English to write a short letter of complaint about a billing error or to understand written instructions to jurors.


An Honest Man And His Gold Dollar
THE first United States gold dollar wasn't struck by the United States Mint.
It was produced in the hills of North Carolina in 1831 by an immigrant jeweler.
Just two years after Christopher Bechtler left Baden, in what is now Germany, he began producing $1, $2.50 and $5 gold pieces and did so until his death in 1842.
The Government did not mint its first gold dollar until 1849, although it had minted larger denominations since 1795.


Mideast Accord; World Bank Says West Bank and Gaza Need Aid
The West Bank and Gaza Strip could face a long economic slide, with political tensions continuing to fester, unless they receive large-scale foreign aid and adopt sound economic policies, the World Bank warns in a new report.
Describing a grim situation of low per-capita income, sewage in the streets, interruptions in electricity and a contaminated water supply, the World Bank said the West Bank and Gaza urgently need at least $3 billion in aid over the next decade to improve schools and other services.


Floating Bridge In Seattle Forges Last Link in I-90


IN SHORT: FICTION
HISTORICAL NOVEL THE PORCELAIN DOVE Or, Constancy's Reward.
By Delia Sherman.
Dutton, $22.


THE NATION: Adult Illiteracy; Better Programs Are Needed
As educators and business leaders commiserated last week about the bleak findings of a national study on adult literacy, there was widespread agreement that the tepid solutions now in place need expansion, improvement and more money.
That is no small order.
The Education Department's four-year study indicates nearly half of the nation's 191 million adults possess low reading comprehension and math skills.


There's Nothing So New About Asbestos in Schools
To the Editor:
You report that Public School 133 in Brooklyn is closed until the asbestos situation is taken care of.


Claudia Allen, Philip C. Stahl
Claudia Harri Allen, a senior associate at the New York law firm of Debevoise &amp; Plimpton, was married last evening to Philip Cornelius Stahl, the managing partner in Grippo &amp; Elden, a Chicago law firm.
Rabbi Ronald B. Sobel performed the ceremony at the Pratt Mansions in New York.
Ms.
Allen, who is keeping her name, graduated magna cum laude from Yale University and received a law degree from Columbia University.
She is a daughter of Melvin and Doris Allen of Tenafly, N.J.
The bride's father, who retired as a vice president of Oppenheimer &amp; Company in New York, is an abstract painter.
Her mother, also retired, was an administrator at Columbia University College of Physicians and Surgeons in New York.


Florida Weathers a Mean Season
Last week was a memorable one for Florida's $31-billion-a-year travel industry, but one the state would like to forget.
The trial of two white men accused of setting afire a black tourist from New York had barely ended in West Palm Beach when a German visitor arriving in Miami was shot and killed on the city's main expressway.
The slaying of Uwe-Wilhelm Rakebrand, 33, was the eighth of a foreign tourist in Florida in a year, and stirred calls for tougher law enforcement as well as new warnings abroad about traveling to Miami.


Police Training Against Pollution Crimes
THE driver pulled his tank truck into the deserted park, backed to the edge of the river and opened a spigot at the rear of the vehicle to unleash a stream of slimy green liquid.
Within minutes, state police officers converged on the truck by car and boat to arrest the driver for polluting the Delaware River with chemicals.
It all looked real enough, but in this case the officers were acting out a scene for a videotape that will be used to train the state's police officers to spot and respond to environmental crimes.


Linda Yang and Victor Chao
Linda Chuan-ling Yang, the daughter of Susan Hwa-jing Yang of Taipei, Taiwan, and Los Angeles and the late Peter Shih-shiang Yang, was married yesterday to Victor Tzu-ping Chao, the son of Daniel Pao-hsi Chao and Lydia Yui-cheng Chao of Mt.
Vernon, N.Y.
The Rev.
James C. Zwernemann officiated at the Village Lutheran Church in Bronxville, N.Y.
The bride, 26, is a freelance fashion designer in New York.
She graduated from the Otis Art Institute of the Parsons School of Design and the Ecole Superieure de la Couture in Paris.
Her father founded Enertek East Inc., an electronics importer and exporter whose headquarters were in Los Angeles.


Vladivostok, Russia's Wild Far East
VLADIVOSTOK HAS BEEN OPEN FOR TWO AND A HALF YEARS, BUT for anyone who visited or lived in the old Soviet Union, it is still unnerving to set foot in this naval port city on Russia's Far Eastern coast.
For almost five decades, the city was kept under such tight wraps that no foreigner was allowed to come near it, and even Russians needed special permission to visit a relative there.
Now, strolling nonchalantly by the huge gray battleships parked flank-to-flank in Golden Horn Bay, I find it hard not to muse on everything that has recently happened to the Soviet empire.
The "closed city" was a peculiarly Soviet institution: residents were conditioned to be extra vigilant to aid the K.G.B. in maintaining the obsessive secrecy that the State considered critical to its security.
Precautions were elaborate.
Though the city was the eastern terminus of the Trans-Siberian Railway, foreigners were made to disembark in Khabarovsk, 400 miles to the north, and to take a separate train to the civil port of Nakhodka, 55 miles to the southeast, if they were catching a ship to Japan.


In 'Age of Innocence,' Eternal Questions
Reading "The Age of Innocence," we can easily imagine why a director would be drawn to film Edith Wharton's great novel.
The book gives us a gaudy opulent world -- high society in the 1870's -- and sweeps us through it in panoramic scenes: evenings at the opera, archery contests on Newport lawns, lavish dances and dinners, lovers speeding in carriages through the snowy streets of Old New York.
Its tale of lost love and sacrificed happiness is enthralling and finally wrenching, no matter how distant we may feel from the stuffy era in which it's set -- an era already 50 years past when Edith Wharton wrote the novel in 1920; so the book was always a period piece and, paradoxically, timeless.
Martin Scorsese's film version of "The Age of Innocence" is being released by Columbia Pictures this month. (Originally scheduled to appear last autumn but postponed to enable Mr. Scorsese to complete it to his satisfaction, the film will open on Friday.) Much anticipation has focused on how the bloody-minded, paranoid jitter of Mr.
Scorsese's previous work ("Taxi Driver," "Raging Bull," "Goodfellas") would adjust to the statelier rhythms of an atmosphere so rarefied that a woman crossing a party to talk to a man could throw the whole gathering into social shock.
In fact, Mr.
Scorsese's film is so faithful to the novel that we find ourselves looking for reasons why this seemingly unlikely director was the obvious choice to do it.


Turning to Curry for a Taste of the East
A PINCH of curry powder can do wonders for a dish.
But now chefs and serious cooks are going a step further and making their own pastes, powders and curry oils at home.
It takes only minutes and the results are enormously satisfying.
Eggplant, tomatoes, new potatoes and string beans are superb perked up with a dash of curry, and they go very well with meat or fish cooked on the grill.
The spices used in curry powder also make an excellent oil.
Philippe Chin, chef and owner of Chanterelles, a popular French restaurant in Philadelphia, recently galvanized guests at a Manhattan dinner party by serving gravlax seasoned with curry oil on blinis as an hors d'oeuvre.


Getting the City to Listen
In January 1992, the people who live behind Pandora's Box, a lesbian bar on Grove Street in the West Village, began complaining about noise.
When bar patrons climbed onto the building's roof and got into fights, the residents became uneasy.
When a patron fired an unlicensed pistol into the bar's ceiling, they grew frightened.
But when the city did nothing to address the problem, they got mad.
That's when things started to change.


Ms. Ackerley, Mr. Bollinger
Margaret Lee Ackerley, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
James A. Ackerley of Floral Park, L.I., was married there yesterday to Mark Richard Bollinger, the son of the Rev. and Mrs.
James R. Bollinger of St.
Peter's, Mo.
The Rev.
Philip Gehres performed the ceremony at the Floral Park United Methodist Church.
Ms.
Ackerley, 28, is keeping her name.
She is an associate at the Washington law firm of Wilmer, Cutler &amp; Pickering.
She graduated summa cum laude from Harvard University, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa, and received a law degree from Yale University.


Why the Cars In Japan Look Just Like New
One of the first things an American motorist might notice about Japan is that the automobiles here all seem so shiny and new, without smashed headlights, dents, rust or even dirt.
The reason is only partly that Japanese fastidiousness extends to the maintenance of cars.
Rather, experts say, there really are relatively few old cars in Japan, because of an automobile inspection system that is so onerous and expensive that many people prefer to trade in a perfectly good three- or five-year-old car rather than spend hundreds or even thousands of dollars for the inspection.


Istanbul Carpets
To the Editor: "Istanbul, the Capital of Carpet Shops" (Aug. 22), by Chris Hedges, sharpened my own memories.
Except when I was there I didn't have time to shop.
I just bought on impulse, an impulse that, almost 10 years later, I'm still glad I indulged.
The shop we visited was just outside the Grand Bazaar.
I had absolutely no intention of buying a carpet, but the idea of a comfortable place to rest toward the end of a strenuous day was too inviting to turn down.


Two Long Passes Make It A Long Day for Fordham
Lehigh 24, Fordham 6
Scott Semtimphelter combined with Dave Cecchini on touchdown passes of 43 and 63 yards in the fourth quarter as Lehigh routed Fordham, 24-6, in the season-opening Patriot League game for both teams yesterday at Jack Coffey Field in the Bronx.


The View From Behind the Highway Cones
THERE hasn't been a day in his working life, Bill Daniels says, where he wasn't yelled at, cursed at or made the object of an obscene gesture.
Ever?
"Never," he said.
In Mr.
Daniels'sline of work it's as if Long Islanders were born with one finger permanently pointed skyward.
"There's a lot of hostility out there," he said, "and we represent the enemy." On car-dependent Long Island the enemy is road construction.
Mr.
Daniels and four of his sons are road-construction workers.
For 40 years the 62-year-old grandfather from Medford has been surveying Island highways.
"I worked in Alaska, too," he said.
"There we faced bears and freezing temperatures. Which gets you thinking, which is better? Long Island drivers or bears?  I pick the bears."


Wendy Harned, Michael Battey
Wendy Linwood Harned, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John C. Harned of Boston, was married yesterday to Michael Seeligson Battey, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
William R. Battey of Stonington, Conn.
The Rev.
Jack S. Miller, a Presbyterian minister, performed the ceremony at the First Congregational Church in Old Lyme, Conn.
Mrs.
Battey, a graduate of the University of Vermont, is the United States editorial director in New York for four French Conde Nast publications: Paris Vogue, French Glamour, Vogue Hommes and Vogue Homes International Mode.
Her father, formerly the chief financial officer of the Penn Central Corporation in New York, is a corporate financial consultant.


Britannia Rules the Foam
As far as many Europeans can tell, the only soft drinks Americans guzzle are made by Coke and Pepsi.
But several alternative American beverages are expected to appear on the grocery shelves and menus of Europe after the announcement last week that Cadbury Schweppes plans to acquire A &amp; W Brands -- giving the British soft-drink giant, among other things, dominance of the American root-beer market.


POSTINGS: New Use for a Warehouse; The Artist's Life -- in a Storage Cubicle
The mammoth Manhattan Mini Storage building at 161 Varick Street in SoHo is a purgatory for life's possessions.
Inside most of the 2,237 cramped, crypt-like storage units are the dusty crates, boxes, furniture and suitcases left by families moving to or from the city.
Life itself, however, occasionally emanates from a few of these units, as, for the last two years or so, a small group of space-starved artists and entrepreneurs have turned the spooky cubicles into studios and offices.


How Joe Pye Gave His Name to a Weed
AS the story goes, there once was an Indian medicine man named Joe Pye who used concoctions from a wild plant found growing in the nearby woods to cure typhoid fever.
His brew is said to have halted an epidemic that raged in Colonial Massachusetts.
Hence this local plant became forever known as joe-pye weed.
Here is another one about boneset.
Leaves of a particularly widespread wild flower appear to go right through the stem.
Botanists have a phrase for this and say that the leaves are perfoliate, "per" for through and "folium" for leaf.
Or as the noted plantsman Liberty Hyde Bailey once described this phenomenon as a "leaf surrounding the stem."


Award Winners Named
A 54-year-old Long Island internist, Dr.
GARY I. WADLER, has been named one of the two recipients of the International Olympic Committee President's Prize for 1993.
Wadler, whose office is in Manhasset, L.I., is the former internist for the United States Open tennis championships, a trustee of the American College of Sports Medicine and chairman of the Nassau County Sports Commission.


School Plan Threatens Stores
After hanging on for years despite hovering crime and surrounding economic decline, a group of merchants along Webster Avenue are facing a new threat: a plan to build a big new school to ease the painful overcrowding in the neighborhood's other schools.
The area has been populated by generations of immigrants, these days largely from Caribbean countries like the Dominican Republic.
Affordable space is in great demand, sometimes to the point that the new immigrants double up in the apartments of relatives who came a few years earlier.
Some of these new immigrants have school-age children.


NEWS SUMMARY
International 3-23  ARAFAT AND RABIN SIDE BY SIDE


Horse-Set Comfort
A classic Hampton-style casualness returned in force for last Sunday's $100,000 Crown Royal Grand Prix and the $25,000 Calvin Klein Show Jumping Derby at the Hampton Classic Horse Show in Bridgehampton, L.I.
In recent years, the appearance of movie stars and fashion designers threatened to eclipse the grand prix itself.
This year's larger-than-ever audience left its Ascot-style hats, high-heel shoes and couture dresses at home.
Instead, they wore one-piece silk dresses, both long and short, or pajama pants and sweaters.
Espadrilles replaced those spectator pumps that are notorious for sinking into the sod.
Even the lunches held in the two football-field-length tents surrounding the jumping ring were less formal and more rustic than usual in their decor.


No Headline
We're living in truly revolutionary times.
On Monday, Israel and the P.L.O. will come to the White House to sign a courageous and historic peace accord, the first step in replacing war with peace and giving the children of the Middle East a chance to grow up to a normal life.
PRESIDENT CLINTON.  [ 1:6. ]


Mideast Accord: Israel; Yitzhak Rabin: Pragmatist Leading Israelis From Isolation to New Peace
When he took over as Prime Minister last year, Yitzhak Rabin wasted no time proclaiming that the torch had been passed to a different generation of Israelis.
Not a new generation.
At the age of 71, Mr.
Rabin is only a few years younger than the man he replaced, Yitzhak Shamir.
But in outlook the two men are light years apart.


Pamela Yates and Paco de Onis
Pamela Yates, a documentary film director and president of Skylight Pictures in New York, was married yesterday to Paco de Onis, the founder and director of the annual Caribbean Music Festival in Cartagena, Colombia.
The Rev.
Robert Castle, an Episcopal priest, officiated at the , home of the bridegroom's mother, Marcia McCarthy, in Centerville, Mass.
Ms.
Yates, who is keeping her name, is a daughter of Robert and Mary D. Yates of Clarks Summit, Pa.
She is a magna cum laude graduate of the University of Massachusetts.
Her father is a partner in the Insurance Managament Group in Wilkes-Barre, Pa.


Corrections
A caption last Sunday with an article about the opening of school misidentified two people.
They were Myrna Ezersky, a guidance counselor at Syosset High School, and Jonathan Charen.


Interface: People and Technology; Look, Ma, No Hands!
HERB WOLLAWICK isn't the type to invite friends over and then make them watch his vacation slides.
But a videotape of his recent mountain-bike tour in Vail -- that's another matter.
"I'm not going to show them the whole hour and a half," said Dr.
Wollawick, a radiologist in Clearwater, Fla.
"You can fast-forward to the good parts."


Marion Brody, Edward Goodwin
Dr.
Marion B. Brody, a resident in internal medicine at Thomas Jefferson University Hospital, and Edward J. Goodwin, an architect for Architecture/Design Alliance, both in Philadelphia, were married there yesterday.
Judge Louis H. Pollak of Federal District Court in Philadelphia officiated at the Glen Foerd Estate.
The bride, 29, is a daughter of Judge Anita and Dr.
Jerome Brody of Bala Cynwyd, Pa.
She graduated magna cum laude from Brown University and received her M.D. from Jefferson Medical College.
Her father is a hematologist at the Medical College of Pennsylvania in Philadelphia.
Her mother is a Federal District Court judge there.


'An Actor For All Seasons'
To the Editor:
Let's remember and honor James Mason for two of his final roles: the lawyer full of dirty tricks that entrap Paul Newman in "The Verdict" and the aristocrat of grace and sympathy at odds with others of his class in "The Shooting Party." Mason was an actor for all seasons.
VIRGINIA PAUL  New York


Can't Just Do It
To the Sports Editor:
After reading Bill Keller's "Where Kids Don't Jump" (The Times, Aug. 28), my skepticism turned to dismay about the movement to introduce basketball as a model sport in South Africa's black townships.
Keller wrote that the former National Basketball Association star Bob McAdoo was there "pushing basketball as an engine of black excellence and pride."


Around Holland Tunnel, a Deadly Jam
The traffic congestion around the Holland Tunnel has grown dramatically over the last few years.
So has the area's pedestrian death toll.
Eight pedestrians have been killed in traffic along Kenmare and Broome Streets since 1986, when the toll for eastbound traffic on the Verrazano-Narrows Bridge was doubled and the toll westbound was eliminated.
Tractor-trailers intended for interstate expressways began clogging the narrow streets of SoHo and TriBeCa to take advantage of the free outbound ride in the tunnel.


Liana Toscanini and Richard Migot
Liana Toscanini, a daughter of Elaine and Walfredo Toscanini of New Rochelle, N.Y., was married there yesterday to Richard B. Migot, a son of Christa and Richard Migot Sr., also of New Rochelle.
Judge Richard Owen of the United States District Court for the Southern District of New York officiated at the home of Felicity Dell'Aquila, a friend of the bride's family.
Ms.
Toscanini, 32, is keeping her name.
She is the marketing manager at the Sure Fit Products Company, a manufacturer of furniture covers in New York.
She graduated from Washington University in St.
Louis.
Her father is a senior architect at the New York State Urban Development Corporation in New York.
Her mother is a pianist in New Rochelle.
The bride is a great-granddaughter of Arturo Toscanini, the conductor.


For Balletomanes And Diva Lovers
CAFE DES ARTISTES *** (212) 877-3500; 1 West 67th Street; $ [ c) all major credit cards


FLORAL PARK: City Fair, County Fair: Rural Pleasures of Queens
Corn huskers take note: at the 11th annual Queens County Fair, a corn-husking contest is one of the borough's many rites of fall.
There are also carnival rides, pie-eating contests, petting zoos, arts and crafts and, as befits a traditional county fair, plenty of livestock.
Make  your own scarecrow and eat too many candy apples.


COUP ANNIVERSARY IS MARKED IN CHILE
On Thursday, students began throwing rocks and Molotov cocktails and burning tires.
On Friday, hundreds of supporters of Gen.
Augusto Pinochet staged an all-night vigil outside his home.
Today, Socialists and Communists marched on the presidential palace and skirmished with the police; three bombs were deactivated at headquarters of right-wing political parties; two other bombs exploded at power pylons, and two McDonald's and one Kentucky Fried Chicken outlet -- symbols of American business presence here -- were targets of attempted bombings.
The police reported at least two deaths today, an elderly man who was struck by a police water-cannon vehicle and a young boy killed by a gunshot wound.


NEIGHBORHOOD REPORT: Upper West Side; Community Garden's Days Dwindle
The City Council voted last week for a plan to build 35 units of housing for the homeless on the site of a 15-year-old community garden on West 84th street.
But the Council's approval of the project had a string attached.
The New York City Housing Authority must move the garden from its current 9,000-square-foot site between Amsterdam and Columbus Avenues.
One proposal: a smaller site across the street in the yard of the Louis D. Brandeis High School.


Out of Africa
TAKE LEAVE AND GO By Karel Schoeman.  279 pp.
North Pomfret, Vt.: Sinclair-Stevenson/Trafalgar Square. $24.95.


Trash Fash
"I'M not what they call Florida white trash," says Alabama Whitman (Patricia Arquette) in the chillingly hip new movie "True Romance." She is sitting in front of a rooftop billboard, breaking the bad news to Clarence Worley (Christian Slater) that she is a call girl and that she was paid to have sex with him.
This is the first clue that Alabama is, in fact, the Hollywood personification of just what she declares not to be.
There are myriad others: Feathered blond bangs, dark roots.
Dangling plastic earrings.
Fake leopard fur coat; net stockings.
Red lipstick; red nails.
She wears short aqua blue plastic boots and a Daisy Mae off-the-shoulder polka-dot shirt.
She carries a vinyl purse of a color not normally found in nature.
She wears a candy necklace and eats it from the elastic.
Her boyfriend kills people -- in her honor, of course.


"The Kentucky Cycle"


Jeffries and His Racial Theories Return to Class, to City College's Discomfort
Leonard Jeffries, wearing blue and white African robes, stood in front of a class of 45 students in Black Studies 101 and pointed to two dozen books lined up on the chalkboard rail and on a table in front of him.
"I want all of you to go home and count the books that are yours," he told his students.
"Then I want you to invest in yourself and buy more books. At the end of the semester, when you take another inventory of the books in your home you will see how much you have grown."


In Yorkville, an Assault on Trees
The green thieves are loose in the neighborhood, and the people of Yorkville are fighting back with locks and chains.
In the last few months, plants, trees and bushes have been uprooted from 79th Street to 87th.
Three buildings alone -- No. 235, 245 and 250 East 87th -- have lost over 100 costly plants.


LONG ISLAND JOURNAL
Backstage Kneader
SHERI DAVIS doesn't remember whether John Denver had his clothes on or off when they first met.
"All I recall," she said, "is that he had a lot of neck tension." Not remembering whether Mr.
Denver lay nude before her is understandable, given that the singing Mr.
Denver was the first Jones Beach Theater star the massaging Ms.
Davis ever worked on.
A masseuse and chiropractor, Ms.
Davis lives in Long Beach, has a practice in Atlantic Beach and for the last several years has found herself at Jones Beach whenever older stars perform there.
It seems to be the more mature performers who avail themselves of her services.
Recently it was the Beach Boys.


Thailand Plans To Inspect Its High-Rises
Prompted by the collapse of a hotel in northeast Thailand last month that left more than 100 people dead, the Thai Government has announced plans to inspect all high-rise buildings, including hotels, for design flaws.
But no one seems sure it will do much good.
Government building inspectors in Thailand are so overwhelmed with work that new buildings are not properly inspected, let alone the ones that have been around for years.


Smith May Sit Out Year
It would be a $4 million gamble, but running back EMMITT SMITH, who has already missed one game in a contract dispute with the Dallas Cowboys, says he might sit out the entire season and take his chances in the restricted free-agent market again next year.
Smith, who has rejected a front-loaded four-year $11 million offer that would pay him $4 million this season, told The Dallas Morning News that he might forego football, and a paycheck, altogether this year.


How Joe Pye Gave His Name to a Weed
AS the story goes, there once was an Indian medicine man named Joe Pye who used concoctions from a wild plant found growing in the nearby woods to cure typhoid fever.
His brew is said to have halted an epidemic that raged in Colonial Massachusetts.
Hence this local plant became forever known as joe-pye weed.
Here is another one about boneset.
Leaves of a particularly widespread wild flower appear to go right through the stem.
Botanists have a phrase for this and say that the leaves are perfoliate, "per" for through and "folium" for leaf.
Or as the noted plantsman Liberty Hyde Bailey once described this phenomenon as a "leaf surrounding the stem."


A New 10-Year Plan to Prevent Water Pollution
New York City will spend $750 million in the next 10 years to protect its reservoirs from pollution, Mayor David N. Dinkins has announced, as the city seeks to avoid a Federal requirement for a water filtration plant that would cost $5 billion.
Mr.
Dinkins last week promised strict enforcement of new pollution rules for the 2,000-square-mile region upstate where the city gathers its water.


Monique A. Sullivan, Ian T. Lowitt
Monique Alissa Sullivan, the daughter of Daniel J. Sullivan of Sharon, Conn., and Victoria Sullivan of New York, was married last evening to Ian Theo Lowitt, the son of Herman and Dea Lowitt of Johannesburg.
Rabbi Chaim Stern performed the ceremony at the home of the bride' father.
Mrs.
Lowitt, 32, is a senior manager in strategic planning at the American Express Travel Related Services Company in New York.
She graduated from Harvard University and received an M.B.A. from the University of Pennsylvania.
Her father is a partner in Christy &amp; Viener, a New York law firm.
Her mother is a professor of English literature at St.
Peter's College in Jersey City.


The World Capital of Whatever
AS I was driving along Route 5 in central New York State, my eye was caught by a sign outside Geneva: "Lake Trout Capital of the World."
"Write it down," I called to my wife.
And another city was added to the growing list of world capitals I have visited or heard about.


San Gennaro Festival Once Again Brightens Up Little Italy


Her Year of Living Dangerously
Hanna Suchocka was born a pharmacist's daughter in a tiny provincial town in western Poland, but the slightly flattened vowels in her speech are the only remaining hint of her roots.
A tall woman, she strides into a vast office decorated in the masculine fashion common to Central European state buildings -- with epic paintings and massive oak furniture.
Given her brisk manner, close-cropped hair and sensible beige business suits, she is frequently compared with another woman who rose from the petite bourgeoisie to power, Margaret Thatcher of Britain.
But she is no Iron Lady.
On this wintry afternoon, Poland's first female Prime Minister is clinging to office by her fingertips, and she knows it.
Her shaky, seven-party coalition routinely loses votes in Parliament, and she has just defused a huge coal strike with a mix of wage concessions and promises that worry her economic advisers.


ENDPAPER/Life and Times; Seductive Smallness
If you write about art you can collect it, at least to the limits of your wallet.
If you are a music critic you are assumed to have an ample supply of CD's.
A book critic accumulates a serious library.
But an architecture critic?
There is architectural drawing, but it has always seemed so much art manque.
That's why I began to collect tiny toy buildings -- what other way short of investing in real estate is there to build a collection of architecture?
That's the story I would tell an interviewer if I were the sort of person who gets interviewed.
The truth is that the whole thing never had so considered a purpose.
It was born of necessity.
A while ago I lived in a small apartment that had an odd little niche in the wall, and lying around on my desk was one of those cheap, eight-inch-high miniatures of the Empire State Building that you can buy in any souvenir shop.
Better a toy Empire State Building than a vase of dried flowers, I said to myself, and into the niche it went.
That was to be the end of that, until a neighbor saw it and said he had a souvenir World Trade Center that he would like to give me, and then somebody else said you can't have an Empire State Building without a Statue of Liberty, and not too long after that I got married and a friend from California gave us his miniature lead Woolworth Building and then my wife was browsing in an antiques shop and found an RCA Building in the form of an ashtray and it was all over.
The RCA Building cost a lot of money -- $85 -- and it meant that there was no turning back.


In All the Right Circles
A retrospective of Alexander Liberman's paintings opened at the Gagosian Gallery on Madison Ave., Sept. 8


Shopping Zeitgeist, Defined
"Land of Desire: Merchants, Power, and the Rise of a New American Culture" by William Leach (Pantheon, $30) is not about the how of shopping, but the why.
Mr.
Leach's narrative traces the transformation of American culture after 1890 into one whose primary features were "acquisition and consumption as the means of achieving happiness; the cult of the new; the democratization of desire, and money value as the predominant measure of all value in society."


Martha Graham Dance Company


Q and A
The Trains Down Under
Q.
I will be visiting Australia in October and I would like to know if there are any cross-country trains there and if tickets for them can be bought in the United States. -- Nino Giaco, Howard Beach, Queens.


Animals As Adornment
To the Editor:
"Wearing" living animals like the snakes and iguanas pictured in your recent On the Street feature ("Unfeathered Boas," Aug. 15) is neither hip nor liberated; it is just another form of exploitation.


Reclaiming A Park For Play
UNTIL a few weeks ago, you wouldn't have known so many children lived on the bedraggled block of East 12th Street between Avenues A and B.
There wasn't the perpetual sound of children's laughter, and young sidewalk-chalk Picassos had no quiet place to draw their masterpieces.
There was no luxuriant green lawn or soothing sprinkler spray or even a place where a new mother could sit with an infant on her lap and just daydream for a while without feeling afraid.


Running Time: Army Tramples Colgate
Crushed by Rutgers, 68-6, a week ago, Colgate got back into its own league, figuratively speaking, today by playing Army.
But while Colgate, a Division I-AA school, was beaten again by a Division I-A team, at least this game was competitive for more than a half before the Red Raiders fell to the Cadets, 30-0, before a crowd of 26,398 at Michie Stadium.
Army threw only one pass while relying on its strong and quick running game in beating Colgate for the third time in a row.
Army has thrived on Division I-AA opponents in recent years.
Of the Cadets' 31 victories since the start of the 1988 season, 16 have been against Division I-AA teams.


To Montreal, the Restful Way
TO choose to travel by train instead of by plane is like writing a letter instead of making a long-distance phone call.
You have to want the slower pace, the scenery, the rhythm of wheel on rail.
Specifically, on Amtrak's overnight train from Montreal to New York, a passenger can dine while gazing out the window as the sun sets behind the Green Mountains in rural Vermont -- and first-class passengers can have room-service breakfast in their private compartments the next morning.


LETTERS TO THE NEW JERSEY EDITOR
A recent article, "Battle Forming Over Teachers' Lifetime License," described three proposals to end New Jersey's practice of granting teachers lifetime certification and mentioned critics' charges that the proposals represent an indirect attack on the state's tenure law.
The article drew a number of letters to the editor, including these.
It has always been my belief that teachers ought to be required to keep up with the newest available research in the field of education.
I agree that there should be some sort of required in-service program to enhance teacher effectiveness.


John C. Hancock and Jane D. Gilbert
Jane Drake Gilbert, a mezzo-soprano, and John Cottrell Hancock, a baritone, were married yesterday.
The opera singers are based in New York.
The Rev.
John Burroughs Luce performed the ceremony at the Church of the Good Shepherd in Rosemont, Pa.
The bride, 28, graduated from the Julliard School.
She is the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Robert P. Gilbert of Wynnewwood, Pa.
Her father, a retired internist with the Thomas Jefferson Hospital in Philadelphia, was also the director of student and employee health at Thomas Jefferson University there.
Her mother, Brenda Gilbert, is a real estate agent with the Emlen Wheeler Real Estate Company in Haverford, Pa.


"Packaging the New: Design and the American Consumer, 1925-1975"


NEIGHBORHOOD REPORT: Upper West Side; Shakespeare &amp; Co. Is Fighting Back
How is Shakespeare &amp; Company, the old-style Upper West Side bookstore, weathering the arrival of the Barnes &amp; Noble superstore a block to the north?
Sales have suffered since Barnes &amp; Noble -- with three floors of books and a stylish cafe -- opened at 82d and Broadway in April, says Shakespeare's head buyer, Linda Marotta, though she notes that sales have been slow all over the city.


This Week's Numbers
Last
Consensus
Period
Estimates
(I.D.E.A. Inc.)
Tuesday
Consumer prices, August, percent change
0.1
0.2
Retail sales, August, percent change
0.1
0.2
Auto sales, early Sept., millions, annual rate
6.7
6.9
Wednesday
Business inventories, July, percent change
0.2
0
Business sales, July, percent change
0.4
-1.1
Thursday
Industrial production, August, pct. change
0.4
0.2
Capacity utilization, August, percent
81.5
81.5
Jobless claims, weekly, thousands
316
320
Monday: Japan to unveil economic package  Tuesday: Big Three-U.A.W. contracts expire at midnight


THE DEVIL IN LONG ISLAND
Satin might live out here on the Island, but when I lived in the city some years back, an irate neighbor once painted the sidewalk in front of his driveway in iridescent yellow letters: NO POCKEN!
You New Yorkers have your share of Amys and Joeys, too, only they are creative types known as Woody and Soon-Yi, and, as I recall, you've had some troubles with a Joel of your own -- Joel Steinberg.


Privileged Life And Elitism
To the Editor:
I read with horror Jill Nelson's aggrandized view of upper-class black life on Martha's Vineyard ("At Home on an Island," Aug. 22).
"No one ever chants, 'I am somebody,' " she wrote.
"That goes without saying. If you weren't, you couldn't hang."
As she glorified a privileged life, Jill Nelson spoke volumes about separatism and elitism, two of the most insidious forces against progress in any society.
BURROUGHS YORK Jr.
New York


Provence: Romans vs Celts
AH, PROVENCE!
PROVENCE OF THE BRILLIANT VAN GOGH SUNshine, the lavender essences, the rose wines!
What better time to see it than in autumn, when the sun will no longer fry an egg in the shade, when the autoroutes are no longer clogged with broiling hunks of metal, when the olives cassees and the local sheep cheeses, and eventually the truffles, are in season?
On the other hand, what remains to be said about it in this post-Mayle age?
I refer, of course, to Peter Mayle's book "A Year in Provence," which had such widespread success, especially in England, that you can scarcely whisper the word Provence in certain circles without inducing the symptoms of salmonella poisoning.
But you want to go there anyway -- who doesn't?
So the task before you is to slip in, enjoy yourself in all ways including the standard rose-wine ones, and then emerge with some weighty, nonfashionable, jeer-deflecting explanation for why you have been there.
This is no light feat.


Business Diary/September 5-10
THE ECONOMY Sending the Government Bureaucracy to Weight Watchers


Just a Breeze: Graf Calmly Wins a Third Open
First she ordered out for blueberry pastries, then she strolled onto the wind-whipped Stadium Court wearing her favorite harlequin striped skirt and, in regatta weather, captured her third consecutive Grand Slam championship for 1993.
In contrast to her Slam-less challenger, she was a cool, calm customer.
After making a hobby of collecting Grand Slam titles -- she now has 14 -- Steffi Graf was far from anxious as she went about the business of defeating 12th-seeded Helena Sukova, 6-3, 6-3, in their lopsided United States Open final yesterday.


Celebrate, Don't Reject
To the Editor:
Dvorak should not be accused of cultural appropriation.
Of Bohemian peasant stock, he wrote in the idiom of his own folk music and, yes, with a political agenda as well, to assert that Czech culture had as legitimate a claim to his art as Austro-German, despite the latter's masquerade as universal.
Rather than rejecting this manifestation of Czech nationalism, it deserves celebration as one of many possible humane and constructive expressions of nationalism that, not incidentally, values a nation's history and traditions.


Wordsmiths Test Their Words' Worth
THINK of it this way: poetry reading as Olympic event.
There are amateurs, scorecards and cheers for the home competitor.


Lisa A. Bailey, Bradley A. Hittle
Lisa Ann Bailey, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Ralph E. Bailey of Greenwich, Conn., was married yesterday to Bradley Arthur Hittle, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard H. Hittle of Old Greenwich, Conn.
The Rev.
Hal Miller, a Congregational minister, performed the ceremony at the United Church of Christ in Dorset, Vt.
Mrs.
Hittle is a market research consultant in Westport, Conn., and the founder and coach of the Fairfield University equestrian team in Fairfield, Conn.
She graduated from Sarah Lawrence College.


THE DEVIL IN LONG ISLAND
From a former Guylander: Ron, it's all true, and brilliantly observed, but did you have to have so much fun telling everybody?
WILLIAM VERNICK New York, N.Y.


There's Good, And There's Bad
To the Editor:
While I agree with some of Richard Taruskin's criticism of nationalism in music, particularly as it was applied by Dvorak, I think he goes too far in claiming that "nationalism, in music as elsewhere in the 20th century, has been a straitjacket and a curse." It seems more than a little stretch to compare, as he does, the results of nationalism in Somalia and Bosnia to the results of nationalism in music.
As far as I know, the "New World" Symphony has never hurt anyone.


LETTERS TO THE NEW JERSEY EDITOR
A recent article, "Battle Forming Over Teachers' Lifetime License," described three proposals to end New Jersey's practice of granting teachers lifetime certification and mentioned critics' charges that the proposals represent an indirect attack on the state's tenure law.
The article drew a number of letters to the editor, including these.
Tenure is a concept that has seen its time.
Change is necessary, but the concept of teacher protection must be addressed.
Teachers, like other professionals, should be required to continue their education and give time to the craft they so caringly pursue.


Prominent Backer of Aristide Is Slain After Mass
A prominent supporter of the Rev.
Jean-Bertrand Aristide, the exiled President, was killed today when armed men cornered him in a church after a service, dragged him outside and shot him in the head.
One other person, who was not immediately identified, was killed in the attack at Sacre Coeur Church in Port-au-Prince.


'Theirs Was the Kingdom'
To the Editor:
Although DeWitt Wallace was stridently anti-Communist and vigorously promoted right-wing values, he was equally supportive of his writers no matter what their personal views.
He well knew that I had been a district leader for Vito Marcantonio, the most radical member of the United States House of Representatives, but Wally never batted an eye in our talks or in his article assignments.


State Approves the Brooklyn Navy Yard Incinerator
New York State will issue permits for construction of a garbage incinerator at the Brooklyn Navy Yard, removing the last major hurdle to a project that has stirred strong opposition from environmental groups and neighbors of the Navy Yard, the State Commissioner for Environmental Conservation has announced.
"In the more than seven years since the start of the review process for this facility, the solid waste crisis in New York City has heightened steadily," the Commissioner, Thomas C. Jorling, said in explaining his decision, which was announced on Thursday.


The Fine May Be Higher, But the Car Stays Put
To the Editor:
When I came upon the scene at Second Avenue and 56th Street, a woman in shorts and T-shirt and her young child were standing by the open driver-side door of their weather-beaten car, and both of them were weeping.
It was about 6:30 P.M. of an August Thursday.
The car had New Jersey license plates, and its front end was hanging a foot in the air from the cable of a Department of Transportation tow truck.


On Wheels: American at 10 M.P.H.; Sad Triumph in Journey's Final Miles
The last leg of my bicycle journey was spurred by thoughts of home, of completing a task, of being welcomed back.
It was a brisk final chapter, both exciting and sad, as endings tend to be.
The ride itself was a stirring drop through the sluice between the Catskill Mountains and the Hudson River.
It was Labor Day weekend.
The warm air had taken on an autumn clarity, the motels were filled with last-minute vacationers, and the whole region smelled like a barbecue.
Dozens of signs proclaimed yard sales, lawn sales, garage sales, barn sales.
All of upstate New York seemed to be unloading extra baggage, streamlining itself for winter.


Data Bank/September 12, 1993


Zegna's Shorts
WHAT: Men's boxer shorts by Ermenegildo Zegna.
White Sea Island cotton with an elastic waistband (Sea Island cotton being the free-range chicken of the natural-fiber world).
One pair is $60 at the Zegna store on Fifth Avenue in Manhattan, $52.50 at Louis, Boston.
WHY: Read your Veblen.
INCONSPICUOUS REASONS: Giving the shorts a road test, an experienced wearer of boxers who normally orders the $9.50 model from the Lands' End catalogue called them silky, light, luxurious, feathery, well constructed and indulgent.
Skip Cuddy, the director of marketing programs at Louis, Boston, the clothier, which advertised the Zegna shorts in a recent issue of The New Yorker, has worn them himself.
"You just have to slide into them," Mr.
Cuddy said.
"What else could I tell you? There are not too many bells and whistles on this particular product."


Reborn Brownstones: Phase I
The first stage of the Bradhurst redevelopment plan, one of the largest neighborhood-renewal projects ever undertaken by the city, is nearing completion.
Starting this week, people with low and moderate incomes may request applications for the 236 apartments in renovated brownstones on Frederick Douglass Boulevard between 145th and 147th Streets and east along 145th Street.
The renovations, which also include 60 apartments for people being displaced by the construction and five for superintendents, are part of a comprehensive plan to rehabilitate a troubled area that stretches from 139th Street to 155th Street and from St.
Nicholas Avenue to Adam Clayton Powell Jr.
Boulevard.
It is planned that by the year 2000, the city will construct or renovate more than 80 buildings, housing a total of 2,200 families.
The project, being developed by a consortium of political, business and spiritual leaders, is being overseen by the Housing Preservation and Development Department.


Fewer Apples Likely After a Dry Summer
The apple harvest started in New York State this week, with all indications pointing to a small crop because of this summer's drought.
If the estimates prove to be accurate, New York will drop from second to third place among the apple-producing states of the United States.


In Role of Seller, Some Co-op Boards Get Insiders to Buy
WHY bother buying the apartment, Norman and Ileen Schoenfeld asked themselves last year.
It was not the first sales offer they had received from a sponsor, although it was the best since their building converted to a co-op in 1987.
Nevertheless, it would bring about a $900-a-month out-of-pocket rise in housing costs, the difference between their stabilized rent and the monthly maintenance charge payable to the co-op by the unit owner.
They had lived as renters in the 72-unit building, at 320 West 76th Street, for 29 years.


Naming Names
To the Editor:
Robert Plunket, reviewing Mark Childress's novel "Crazy in Alabama" (Aug. 22), claims to be "something of an authority on what makes Southerners tick." In that connection, he states flatly that he has never in his life come across anyone with a double nickname.


Turning to Curry for a Taste of the East
A PINCH of curry powder can do wonders for a dish.
But now chefs and serious cooks are going a step further and making their own pastes, powders and curry oils at home.
It takes only minutes and the results are enormously satisfying.
Eggplant, tomatoes, new potatoes and string beans are superb perked up with a dash of curry, and they go very well with meat or fish cooked on the grill.
The spices used in curry powder also make an excellent oil.
Philippe Chin, chef and owner of Chanterelles, a popular French restaurant in Philadelphia, recently galvanized guests at a Manhattan dinner party by serving gravlax seasoned with curry oil on blinis as an hors d'oeuvre.


1993 Metaphor
To the Sports Editor:
Daily life at the United States Open is a metaphor for life in New York these days.
Mayor Dinkins is there, along with thousands of unruly fans and dozens of complaining participants.
Many of your reporters, most notably Harvey Araton, appear to place most of the blame on the gladiators with racquets who do nothing but whine about the food, the noise, the schedules, the traffic jams and the line calls while they battle it out for inflated cash rewards.


Phoenix Has Clark and Beuerlein And Hearst, and an 0-1 Record
Gary Clark returns to Washington with his new team today, but it will hardly be Old Home Week.
During his first eight years in the National Football League, Clark was a four-time Pro Bowl wide receiver for the Redskins, a terror on deep routes.
But he complained too much, especially when quarterback Mark Rypien was passing badly, so there were few tears in Washington when Clark signed in March with the Phoenix Cardinals.


Miss Redlinger And Mr. Daniels
Kimberly Ann Redlinger and David William Tod Daniels, both law students at the University of Chicago, were married yesterday in Bay Head, N.J.
The Rev.
C.
John McCloskey officiated at Sacred Heart Roman Catholic Church.
Mrs.
Daniels, 25, and her husband, 26, graduated from Princeton University.
She is the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Donald J. Redlinger of Mantoloking, N.J.
Her father is the senior vice president for human resources at Allied-Signal Inc., the diversified manufacturer in Morristown, N.J.


Corrections
An answer in the Q &amp; A column on Aug. 22 about crossing the Andes by rail incorrectly described the line from Buenos Aires to Mendoza, Argentina.
Service on that route was suspended in March.
An alternative way to cross the Andes is from Arica, Chile, to La Paz, Bolivia, to Villazon, Bolivia, on the Argentine border.


LETTERS TO THE NEW JERSEY EDITOR
A recent article, "Battle Forming Over Teachers' Lifetime License," described three proposals to end New Jersey's practice of granting teachers lifetime certification and mentioned critics' charges that the proposals represent an indirect attack on the state's tenure law.
The article drew a number of letters to the editor, including these.
The current tenure law in New Jersey was never set into motion to protect incompetent teachers, as it has been applied, nor does this take place.
Yes, we have some incompetent teachers, but that's because of the lack of consistency of supervisory personnel.
New Jersey has some of the finest teachers.
Why should all be punished for the wrongs and politics of a few?


The Executive Computer; Quick! Translate 2s/1p/1g, win3.1, .28 dpi, N/I SVGA.
WHEN carbon-based life forms and silicon-based machines meet, the potential for miscommunication is enormous.
As Edward Stephens, former dean of the S. I. Newhouse School of Public Communications at Syracuse University, recounted in these pages last week, when he went shopping for a new computer, he thought he heard the salesman touting a "zis wheel on the bias that produces several maggots of surge amplification when snollicked to a seedy ram."
The good news is that computers are beginning to have rudimentary speech and handwriting recognition skills, so it may soon be possible to bypass computer salespeople and their palaver altogether.
Based on recent experiences, however, computers may not turn out to be much of an improvement.


Mideast Accord: New Calculations; For Arab Lands, a Raft of Questions
For decades, the Palestinian cause has been the most sacred in Arab politics, even if the relations between Arab countries and those Palestinians who sought refugee inside their borders were often strained and even violent.
In the 1970's, Palestinians became embroiled in rebellion and civil war in Jordan and later in Lebanon.
More recently, Palestinian workers were the target of reprisal and expulsion in Kuwait and other Persian Gulf nations as a result of suspicions that they had conspired with Iraq in the 1991 gulf war.
Today, fewer than 150,000 of a prewar population of about 400,000 Palestinians remain in Kuwait.


Florida State Leaves Clemson in Awe
After today's 57-0 mauling of Clemson, the Florida State Seminoles left observers wondering just how good they are.
A definitive answer may not be forthcoming for a while, with Miami, Notre Dame and Florida still to be faced.
But Clemson clearly needs no more convincing.


Science Fiction
Is William Gibson mellowing?
The initiator of cyberpunk, who brought a new stylistic bite to science fiction with his 1984 novel "Neuromancer," has not quite turned into a futuristic Pollyanna.
But compared to his earlier work, VIRTUAL LIGHT (Bantam, $21.95) offers more likable characters, a more subdued style, a less claustrophobic setting and a more upbeat ending.
Cyberspace -- Mr.
Gibson's term for that amorphous computer-generated realm where information becomes geography -- plays a relatively minor role in his new novel.
Instead of focusing on hackers obsessed with surfing the binary waves, he places at the center of his story two young people in a near-future San Francisco, a bike messenger named Chevette and a security guard named Rydell, who may actually have a flesh-and-blood future of their own, together.


Commercial Property/Analyzing Trends; The Only Thing That's Clear Is the Lack of Clarity
"COMMERCIAL real estate activity continues to improve." -- Julien J. Studley.
"Office market shows signs of revitalization as leasing activity picks up." -- Newmark Real Estate.


IN SHORT: FICTION
LOVE IN THE AGE OF AIDS SUCH TIMES By Christopher Coe. Harcourt Brace, $22.95.


In America; On Spelling Kat
So now we find that a whole lot of us can't spell kat, or read a bus map, or add two and two on a kalculator.
Apparently there are even people who don't read newspaper columns.


NEW YORKERS &amp; CO
Caldor Comes to Brooklyn In Macy's Old Store
Bathing suits, lipstick and blenders may again fill the vacated Macy's store on Flatbush Avenue in Brooklyn, which was closed last year.


Dr. Webster And Dr. Mayer
Dr.
Elizabeth Alcott Webster, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert D. Webster of New York, was married yesterday to Dr.
Stephan Anthony Mayer, a son of Mrs.
Walter Ludewig of Averill Park, N.Y., and Roman H. Mayer of Old Greenwich, Conn.
The Rev.
Rodney Rice, an Episcopal priest, officiated at the Grassy Hill Congregational Church in Lyme, Conn.
Dr.
Webster is keeping her name.
She is a second-year resident in internal medicine at the Columbia-Presbyterian Medical Center in New York, where her husband is a fellow in neurology.
The bride graduated magna cum laude from Yale University and received an M.D. from Columbia University.


New York State Canal Vacations
Americans flock to France and England each year to enjoy the serene pleasures of barge vacations on those countries' canals.
But many who make the trip might not be aware of a bucolic waterway network closer to home: the 524-mile New York State Canal System.
Stretching from the Hudson River to the Great Lakes, through some of New York's prettiest countryside, the system offers cruises and canal boat rentals, with towpaths for biking or hiking.
Along the canals are parks, picnic areas, restaurants, inns, museums and historic sites.


"The Gold of Meroe"


Health Care: A Historic Journey
Humane.
Visionary.
Complex.
Overreaching.
Those are just a few of the adjectives that leap to mind when plowing through President Clinton's 250-page health care plan that was leaked to the press by members of Congress a week before the President was to unveil its contents.
There will be plenty of time over the next few weeks to scrutinize the details.
But this is the moment to savor the noble ambitions of this plan and to ponder the politics and history of the moment.
The Administration's overriding goal is that no American will ever go to bed at night fearing that medical catastrophe will lead to financial ruin.
Every Republican and Democrat in Congress ought to reflect on the need for a bipartisan commitment to this goal.
If President Truman's plan for universal care or President Nixon's effort to create national health insurance had passed, the country would almost certainly be healthier today, both physically and economically.


Nancy Selbst, Gino Thomas
Nancy Renee Selbst, a lawyer, and Gino Russell Thomas, a doctoral student in astronomy at Columbia University, were married yesterday in the Dabney Gardens at the California Institute of Technology in Pasadena, Calif.
Judge Stephen V. Wilson of Federal District Court in Los Angeles officiated.
Mrs.
Thomas, a daughter of Barry and Lynne Selbst of Simi Valley, Calif., graduated cum laude from Princeton University and received a law degree from the University of Chicago.
She is to become an associate next month at the New York law firm of Morrison &amp; Foerster.


Why Wait for November? You Can Vote Now
SO YOU won't get to pick a mayor -- yet.
So David N. Dinkins seems assured of victory, and the Democratic primary is not the usual be-all and end-all, because a Republican named Rudolph W. Giuliani is waiting in the wings for Nov. 2.
There are still plenty of good reasons to vote on Tuesday.
To begin with, you will be able to determine if your polling place has been changed, and with that you'll also know where to vote in November.


Residential Resales
In the following reports, the "listed at" price is the asking price when negotiations began that ended in the sale.
Time on market is from most recent listing to contract.
Manhattan
CHELSEA  $207,000
313 West 22d Street  1-bedroom, 1-bath, 815-sq.-ft. condo in postwar building; part-time doorman, terrace; common charge $388, taxes $4,092, listed at $235,000, 12 weeks on market (Broker: Herbert H. Kliegerman &amp; Associates)  UPPER EAST SIDE  $2.1 million
219 East 61st Street  3 bedroom, 4 1/2-bath, one-family 4 1/2-story town house; dining room, library, double-height studio room; roof deck, 5 fireplaces; taxes $19,500, listed at $2.45 million, 12 weeks On market (Brokers: H.F. International Ltd.; Brown-Harris-Stevens)  UPPER EAST SIDE  $425,000
860 Fifth Avenue (67th St.)  2-bedroom, 2-bath, 1,250-sq.-ft. postwar co-op; 24-hr. doorman, manned elevator; maintenance $1,399, 45% tax-deductible; listed at $495,000, 8 weeks on market (Broker: Jean Marc LeVet &amp; Partners)  WEST VILLAGE  $335,000
2 Charlton Street  2-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 1,200-sq.-ft. duplex penthouse co-op in postwar building; 24-hr. doorman, 15- by 12-ft. terrace, 3 exposures; maintenance $1,014, 50% tax-deductible; listed at $399,000, 16 weeks on market (Broker: Bellmarc Realty)
BRONX
CITY ISLAND  $200,000
99 Bay Street  2 one-family cottages and a 2-car-garage on a 75- by 100-ft. lot; 2 bedrooms in rear cottage; 1 bedroom in other; 1 bath, front porch in each; garage to be converted into owner's residence; taxes $1,200, listed at $200,000, 3 weeks on market (Broker: Jacqueline Kyle Kall)
RIVERDALE  $255,000
4455 Douglas Avenue  (Hayden)  2-bedroom, 2-bath, 1,628-sq.-ft. postwar condo; terrace; common charge $392, taxes $2,620, listed at $295,000, 16 weeks on market (Broker: Marilyn &amp; Morris B. Sopher)  Brooklyn
COBBLE HILL  $168,000
174 Pacific Street 1-bedroom, 1-bath, 1,500-sq.-ft. co-op in converted prewar school; loft living room, fireplace; maintenance $453, 40% tax-deductible, listed at $185,000, 4 weeks on market (Broker: Harborview Realty)  KENSINGTON  $140,000
322 East Second Street  4-bedroom, 1-bath, one-family attached brick house; dining room, eat-in kitchen, full basement; taxes $960, listed at $159,000, 13 weeks on market (Broker: Homes R' Beautiful)  MIDWOOD  $305,000
705 Avenue L  2-family detached house; 2 bedrooms, 1 bath, dining area, eat-in kitchens in each unit; taxes $2,000, listed at $374,999, 12 weeks on market (Broker: Maryl Realty)  Queens
FOREST HILLS GARDENS  $640,000
68 Dartmouth Street  5-bedroom, 4 1/2-bath, brick center-hall colonial; breakfast room, 2 libraries, c/a, marble floors, stained-glass windows, 1-car garage; taxes $3,300, listed at $649,000, 12 weeks on market (Broker: F.H. Realty Executives)  JACKSON HEIGHTS  $195,000
24-33 81st Street  2-family detached brick house; 3 bedrooms, 2 baths in each unit; 2-car garage; taxes $1,800, listed at $219,900, 6 weeks on market (Kremer Realty) Staten Island
SUNNYSIDE  $142,500
88 Labau Avenue  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, one-family semi-attached frame house; dining area, finished basement; taxes $1,500, listed at $149,000, 6 weeks on market (Broker: Key Realty)  WOODROW  $315,000
260 Alverson Avenue  2-family detached brick and aluminum-sided house; 3 bedrooms, 2 baths, dining room in primary unit; 1 bedroom, 1 bath in other; eat-in kitchen in both; full basement; taxes $600, listed at $325,000, 20 weeks on market (Broker: Linda Nasta Realtor Ltd.)  New Jersey  ALLENTOWN  $194,000  106 South Main Street  5-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 130-year-old renovated Victorian; deck; taxes $3,154, listed at $199,900, 5 weeks on market (Broker: Weichert Realtors)  MAHWAH  $299,900
8 Greene Street  4-bedroom, 2-bath, 11-year-old renovated colonial; pool; taxes 3,760, listed at $299,900, 1 week on market (Broker: Weichert Realtors)
PRINCETON TOWNSHIP  $1.3 million
24 Oakridge Drive  5-bedroom, 5 1/2-bath, 2-year-old contemporary; pool, skylights; taxes $22,086, listed at $1.6 million, 48 weeks on market (Brokers: R.A. Weidel Realtors; J.T. Henderson Realtors) Long Island  EAST ISLIP  $310,000
2 Deer Run  5-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, new colonial; dining room, eat-in kitchen, den, 2 fireplaces, patio; taxes $9,000, listed at $349,000, 20 weeks on market (Broker: Prudential Long Island Realty)  FLORAL PARK  $175,000
66 Sycamore Avenue  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 60-year-old colonial; den, breakfast room, attic, 1-car garage; taxes $3,200, listed at $205,000, 11 weeks on market (Brokers: Gaffney Realtors; Atanas Realty Corp.)  GLENWOOD LANDING  $225,000
8 Glen Lane  3-bedroom, 1-bath, 30-year-old high ranch; dining room, eat-in kitchen, family room, 2-car garage; taxes $3,600, listed at $269,000, 23 weeks on market (Broker: Coldwell Banker Sammis, Northern Properties)  SEA CLIFF  $350,000
25 Laurel Avenue  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 100-year-old Victorian; dining room, eat-in kitchen, fireplace, barn; taxes $2,800, listed at $379,000, 14 weeks on market (Broker: Harmonious Homes) Connecticut
GREENWICH  $675,000
28 Field Road  4-bedroom, 3-bath, 39-year-old stone-front Cape Cod; dining room, den, solarium, eat-in kitchen, c/a, 2 fireplaces, terrace; taxes $5,199, listed at $695,000, 20 weeks on market (Brokers: Preferred Properties; Prudential Connecticut Realty)  FAIRFIELD  $201,000
325 Romanock Road  4-bedroom, 1-bath, 40-year-old, detached, stone-front Cape Cod; eat-in kitchen, 3-zone heat, semi-finished basement, h/w floors, 0.50-acre lot; taxes $2,392, listed at $219,900, 11 weeks on market (Broker: Century 21/Coastal Realty)  STAMFORD  $445,000
7 Barnes Road West  (Heatherwood)  3-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 2,776-sq.-ft. town-house condo in a 5-year-old building; 3-story vaulted entry, family room, 2 fireplaces, screened porch; spa bath in master bedroom suite; common charges $450, taxes $6,400; list price $463,900, 3 weeks on MArket (Brokers: Preferred Properties; William Pitt Real Estate) Westchester
MOUNT VERNON  $250,000
20 North Villa Street  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 39-year-old ranch; den, wet bar; taxes $7,076, listed at $287,50, 65 weeks on market (Broker: Muldoon Realty)  YONKERS  $310,000
1 Birch Brook Road  4-bedroom, 3 1/2-bath, 64-year-old Tudor; sunken den, terrace, fireplace, 2-car garage; taxes $6,525, listed at $344,900, 7 weeks on market (Brokers: Lindsey Real Estate; Prudential Ragette)


Blisters, Cracks and Other Problems of Flat Roofs
ROOF care is a priority as fall approaches.
Flat and low-sloped roofs require special attention.
Although they can provide years of trouble-free service when properly maintained, such roofs develop major problems if wear and minor damage are neglected.
Most flat and low-sloped roofs are built up with layers of roofing felt and asphalt or coal tar.
On some old houses the roof may be metal with an asphalt coating like that of built-up roofs, but without felts.


There's Nothing So New About Asbestos in Schools
To the Editor:
You report that Public School 133 in Brooklyn is closed until the asbestos situation is taken care of.


Corrections
Because of a computer processing error, the World Stock Markets chart last Sunday carried week-old figures.
A corrected version, with results through Sept. 3, appears today on page 35.


New &amp; Noteworthy Paperbacks
BERNARD SHAW: The Concluding Volume.
The Lure of Fantasy, 1918-1950, and The Last Laugh: An Epilogue, 1950-1991.
By Michael Holroyd.
Vintage, $18.
The author examines the last third of Shaw's life, when he wrote such plays as "Heartbreak House" and "Saint Joan" while also flirting with both Fascism and Communism.
In 1991 our reviewer, Claude Rawson, praised Mr.
Holroyd for a "sympathy and sense of humor that are never patronizing or reductive."


MAKING IT WORK: Guard and Guardian; In a Hard Place in the Bronx, Lenny Hicks Watches Over Tough Streets and Young Souls
A SNAPSHOT of seven impish 12-year-old boys in baggy basketball uniforms holds a special place at the top of the bulletin board in Lenny Hicks's office.
He takes it down, slowly looks over their smiling faces and calmly recounts what has happened to the Biddy League team he coached eight years ago.
"This guy is dead," he says.
"This kid was also shot and died two weeks later. This one had to move away because he was implicated in drugs. This one's in jail, and this one just got out of jail."


Bravo, McEnroe
To the Sports Editor:
I have been looking at tennis events on television for more than 30 years.
John McEnroe has turned out to be the best commentator ever.
Not only his professional and knowledgeable comments, but his psychological analysis of each player and the background of their action is also just delightful to listen to.
TURAN M. ITIL  Tarrytown, N.Y.


A Different Turn
Bill T. Jones, the dancer and choreographer, is to direct a play, Derek Walcott's "Dream on Monkey Mountain," at the Guthrie Theater in Minneapolis in February.
"It's a tremendous challenge," he said.
"The purity of movement is supreme on my stage. Here, this incredible text written by a poet is what must be served."
Mr.
Jones described the play as a "post-colonial hallucination" about a little old man who sells charcoal, he said.
"He's visited by a white goddess who tells him, 'You are a great king and must go back and lead your people.' "


Rotate Holders Of Public Office
Reflecting on my unsuccessful 1992 Republican primary bid for State Assembly against a 22-year incumbent, I was pleased to read "Push For Term Limitations Gains Strength"  [ Aug. 22 ] .
Unlike Nassau County, Suffolk residents are fortunate that they will have the ability this November to alter their political landscape for years to come.
Locally, I am convinced term limitations is a way of diffusing the egregious and far-reaching powers enjoyed by the Democratic and Republican Parties on Long Island.
For instance, this issue will in part deal with the concomitant problem of patronage and self-appointment politics, which continues to hinder good government both in Nassau and Suffolk Counties.
Yet, I feel compelled to answer some critics on this issue.
Brookhaven Town Councilmembers Joseph Macchia and Patricia Strebel, both Republicans, feel that once term limits are imposed the citizenry would lose "very talented and effective legislators." This argument is completely disingenuous, since it has been a common view promulgated by politicians who seemingly feel they are politically indispensable.
Secondly, Secretary of State Gail S. Shaffer, a Democrat, sees the import of "experienced" legislators.
The word "experience" in politics is probably the most overrated and overused concept, but nevertheless impacts on the mind of the voter.
For any politician touting his experience during re-election time it is often a win-win scenario.
Here is a clear example of an institutional problem which could only be rectified by mandating limits on legislative tenure.
So called "experience" politicians, like 10-year incumbent Mario M. Cuomo, have failed miserably in reaching budget decisions, improving transportation, providing decent education, or deterring crime.
Ms.
Shaffer fails to understand what historian Daniel Boorstein poignantly understood; legislators must be kept to the "amateur spirit."
Term limitations, or as Jefferson called it, "rotation of public service," has three advantages.
First, rotation provides an opportunity for a greater number of individuals to serve in government.
Second, it serves as a check on tyranny and selfish political power.
But most importantly the Founding Fathers believed that rotation both facilitates and affirms the experimental connection that must exist between the representatives and represented.
Perhaps term limits is a movement of emotion and simplicity, as Professor Cover suggests.
But what politicians and academicians fail to understand is that simplicity and common sense can indeed yield profound political, social, and economic change.
THOMAS R. MULLEN Nassau Citizens for Term Limits Massapequa


Istanbul Carpets
To the Editor: On purchasing carpets in Istanbul, let buyers beware of being misled by tour leaders.
My wife and I visited Turkey a year and a half ago with a group organized and supervised by Grand Circle Tours in Boston.
They took our group to a fancy carpet outlet in the countryside and assured us that this was a place where we would get good value.
Wwe were mesmerized by their very smooth presentation and the opulence of the carpets under their bright overhead lights.
Reassured by the English-born guide, we purchased a moderate-size carpet for a supposedly fair price.
As the guide put it, "We bring so much business to this place, they wouldn't risk cheating one of our clients." Our carpet was shipped to our home with a written guarantee that it was a genuine Turkish handmade work.


"Evidence: Richard Avedon"


Somalia: From Bad to Worse
The news from Somalia isn't getting better, and neither are Washington's explanations why U.S. and U.N. forces are killing so many Somalis.
The Senate has now asked the Clinton Administration to report on Somali operations by Oct. 15 and to get formal Congressional approval for any U.S. military role beyond Nov. 15.
That's a good move but it may not be enough.
If this mission can't be redirected from war-making back to peacemaking by the November deadline, U.S. forces should be withdrawn.


David A. Williams, Dana E. Baker
Dana Elizabeth Baker, a daughter of Dorothy W. Baker of Darien, Conn., and Wilder D. Baker of New York, was married yesterday to David Andrew Williams, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Neville G. Williams of St.
Michaels, Md.
The Rev.
Lee A. Moore, a Congregational minister, officiated at the home of the bridegroom's parents.
The bride, a graduate of Kenyon College, is a freelance magazine writer and editor in New York.
Her father is the chairman and chief executive of Warwick Baker &amp; Fiore, a New York advertising agency.
Her mother is a family relations consultant to the Connecticut Superior Court in Stamford, Conn.


An Exhibition of the Hudson and Other Bodies of Water
IN the Encyclopedia Britanica's World Atlas, Mount Marcy is listed as the highest point in New York State.
But there is not a word about its improbably named lake, Tear of the Clouds, much less a hint that of the myriad bodies of water in the Adirondacks, this is the source of the Hudson River (by way of the Opalescent River).
Joseph Squillante, however, is a photographer who has studied the state's major artery for 15 years, and some of the results are included in a show of mostly black and white prints on display at the Ossining Public Library here.


Cleverly Written Drama Returns to Thrill Anew
THE surprising thing about Frederick Knott's thriller "Wait Until Dark" is that the old chestnut is still so effective and scary.
After all, not only was the play a Broadway hit in 1966 with Lee Remick and Robert Duvall, but it was also a highly successful movie starring Audrey Hepburn and Alan Arkin.
With its history of stars and its stage and screen successes, the question is whether anyone could possibly still be shocked by the play's twists and turns.
Not only is this material extremely familiar, but the plot, which depends so heavily on the telephone, has also been technically outdated by things like redial buttons and cellular telephones.


50th Season for Hartford Symphony
LAST May the Hartford Symphony extended Michael Lankester's contract through 1995-96, so the music director has a firm mandate as he ushers the orchestra into its 50th birthday season.
"Looking back on the great music we have made together and the new projects we have launched," Mr.
Lankester said at the time, "I can say without equivocation that I am proud of the work we have done here. But it is not yet complete. I want to make sure the celebration continues far beyond this coming season. Our continuing objectives will be to present the classic orchestral repertoire at the highest performance level, to find ways to connect the orchestra with the people of Connecticut, and to make this orchestra a vital, contributing force in the future of the art form."


Bette Midler


Eileen R. Danoff, Steven L. Kaufman
Mr. and Mrs.
Gerald Danoff of Baltimore have announced the engagement of their daughter, Eileen Rochelle Danoff, to Steven Lee Kaufman, the son of Maxine D. Colen of New York and the late Robert H. Kaufman.
An April wedding is planned.
Miss Danoff, 26, is a fund-raiser in Baltimore for the Arthritis Foundation.
She is a graduate of Dickinson College.
Her father is the senior partner in Danoff &amp; King, a Baltimore law firm.


The Tom and Gerry Show
To the Editor:
My college-age son asked me if my search assignment fees were also $200,000 per client.
Mr.
Neff and Mr.
Roche are a vaudevillian sideshow that represents the search industry as much as the related comedy played out in their client's boardrooms represents efficient business.
Thank God for clients in the $15 million to $500 million range and out of the spotlight.
I can't retire on every single fee.
But it's serious search for growing businesses.
STANLEY HERZ Somers, N.Y., Aug. 23





Introducing 'The City'


"Schindler's List"
Steven Spielberg is an unlikely person to make the most serious film of the season, but he has spoken in passionate terms about this true story: Liam Neeson (center) plays Schindler, a German businessman who saved 1,300 Jews from Auschwitz.
Opening on Dec. 15. (Universal Pictures)


High School Football Report
P.S.A.L.
MANY HAPPY RETURNS: Peter Clarke, of KENNEDY (1-0) scored two touchdowns, including a kickoff return for 98 yards early in the fourth quarter to help seal a 28-14 victory over ADAMS (0-1).
Clarke (5 carries for 104 yards) scored his other touchdown in the second quarter on a 73-yard scamper.
Edgar Santana and Andre Wyatt (12 carries for 92 yards) were the Knights' other scorers, with Wyatt setting up his 1-yard touchdown with a 42-yard run.
Santana (interception), Gary Miller (fumble recovery) and David Gibson (interception) were Kennedy's standouts on defense.
THEY MEET AGAIN: Henry Renelus kicked a 42-yard field goal and Keon Russell returned a punt 27 yards for a score to lead MIDWOOD (1-0) over ERASMUS (0-1), 10-0, as the two teams renewed a rivalry that dates from 1947.
The victory improved the Hornets overall record against Erasmus to 20-14-3.
Fullback Patrick Champagne (11 carries for 72 yards) and tailback Mackise London (11 rushes for 63 yards) were Midwood's leading ground gainers, while Franklin Barnes (21 carries for 67 yards) led Erasmus' rushing attack.
C.H.S.F.L.
WINNING COMBINATION: Quarterback David Rodriguez (6 of 11 for 79 yards) threw two touchdown passes to tight end Michael Baptiste (4 catches for 114 yards) and ran for another to catapult CARDINAL SPELLMAN (1-0), over FORDHAM PREP (0-1), 18-14.
Rodriguez rushed for 61 yards on 13 carries and threw scoring strikes of 11 yards and 27 yards to Baptiste.
Rodriguez's counterpart, Brendan Higgins (8 of 19 for 158 yards, 2 touchdowns, 1 interception), drew first blood on Fordham's second possession of the game, hitting Cliff Dealy (4 catches for 114 yards, 2 touchdowns) with a 47-yard touchdown toss.
However, Fordham's lead was short-lived, as Spellman stormed back with three unanswered touchdowns, including a score on their next series.
That score, an 11-yard Rodriquez touchdown run, capped off a 80-yard drive in the first quarter.
Spellman's second touchdown resulted from an interception from linebacker Chris Williams, which he returned 14 yards to Fordham's 27-yard line.
On the next play, Rodriguez hit Baptiste with 27-yard touchdown pass.
Fordham narrowed the gap with 25 second left when Higgins threw his second touchdown to Dealy, from 10 yards out.
Williams, who rushed for 81 yards on 11 carries for Spellman, led the way defensively from the linebacker position along with Abebe Lawrence, a defensive tackle, and Daniel Carr, a cornerback.
WHAT'S GOOD FOR THE GOOSE EGG: John Benazzi pulled down two of CHAMINADE'S five interceptions and Chris Caso rushed for 101 yards on 14 carries as Chaminade blanked LAFAYETTE, 21-0.


Along Arkansas's Pristine Waterway
AROUND 1979, the slogan on Arkansas license plates changed from "The Land of Opportunity" to "The Natural State," in a tribute to Arkansas's beautiful scenery and unsullied backwoods.
During the 1970's, Arkansans themselves seemed to be awakening to the native splendor of their state.
There were a number of good reasons for raised consciousness; possibly the best of them was the establishment of the Buffalo National River in 1972.
The Buffalo is a 132-mile free-flowing waterway that drains the 2,500-foot-high Ozark Mountains in the northwest portion of the state.
As a result of a highly publicized alliance between Justice William O. Douglas and local preservationists, the Buffalo became the first river in the country to be proclaimed a National River.


The Fine May Be Higher, But the Car Stays Put
To the Editor:
When I came upon the scene at Second Avenue and 56th Street, a woman in shorts and T-shirt and her young child were standing by the open driver-side door of their weather-beaten car, and both of them were weeping.
It was about 6:30 P.M. of an August Thursday.
The car had New Jersey license plates, and its front end was hanging a foot in the air from the cable of a Department of Transportation tow truck.


Corrections
An article on Aug. 22 about the tour of New York that commemorated Mae West's 100th birthday, misstated locations of two theaters where she performed.
Daly's Theater was across the street from the current West Side Y.M.C.A., at 22 West 63d Street, not on the site of the Y. The Columbia Theater was on the northeast corner of 47th Street and Broadway, not on the current site of the Roxy Deli, which is on the opposite corner, at 1567 Broadway.


Wall Street; The Gray Family's Rewarding I.P.O.
EVEN when good family-run companies go public, investors frequently pay a price for Mom and Dad's tendency to indulge the kids and one another.
St.
John Knits Inc., a designer and marketer of women's clothing sold at stores like Saks, Neiman-Marcus and Nordstrom, is by no means the only family-run outfit taking good care of the clan.
But it's a recent example of how the family factor can affect the bottom line.
St.
John went public on March 10 at $17 a share.
For members of the Gray family, which dominates the management team, certain terms of the offering added up to a dandy deal.
But the offering was less than a winner for shareholders, who watched the stock drop to $13.50 by April 29 -- a 21 percent decline in a period when the Standard &amp; Poor's 500 gained 2.3 percent.


THE ANGUISHED POLITICS OF BREAST CANCER
Your Aug. 15 cover was the most powerful I have seen on any magazine.
I applaud you for your courage and commitment to issues that affect us all.
BARBARA GIPS Larchmont, N.Y.


A la Carte; Where Are Those Little Neighborhood Ethnic Cafes?
ALTHOUGH Long Island has more diverse, even exotic, restaurants than ever, it continues to lack an abundance of little neighborhood ethnic cafes and bistros of the sort that proliferate in big cities.
That is why a place like Kenny's Cafe in Bethpage, which serves hearty portions of Irish specialties at thrifty prices to its largely local following, is so welcome.
In fact, the 11-year-old Kenny's comes from New York City.
It is owned by the same family that operates Patrick's Pub in Little Neck and Harp and Mandolin in Bayside.


Balance of Power Hasn't Shifted Yet
THERE is at least one conclusion to be drawn from the recent NEC World Team Championships in Santiago, Chile: the bridge strength of Europe and North America is quantitatively and qualitatively well ahead of the rest of the world's.
Europe has more than half the world's registered players, and seven of its eight teams survived the qualifying stage.
The United States and Canada combined have about a quarter of the world's players, and all five of their teams reached the playoff stage, although one was within a hairbreadth of defeat.
The numerical picture is confused by the fact that China has a big bridge population but its exact size is unknown.


CURRENCY
Last
Prior
Year
Week
Week
Ago
Japanese Yen
106.10
104.68
124.30
per Dollar
German Mark
1.5960
1.6215
1.4495
per Dollar
Canadian Dollar
1.3141
1.3271
1.2173
per U.S. Dollar
British Pound
1.5520
1.5275
1.9210
U.S. Dollar per British Pound
Gold
$350.00
$364.50
$340.90
Republic National Bank
Currency: Friday NY Close


Windjammers
To the Editor: In early May I began my vacation planning.
I responded to a Travel section ad for windjammer cruises, mainly because I wasn't sure what they were.
As the brochures arrived, I examined length of trip, cost and availability.
The whole idea of sailing on a windjammer sounded like lots of fun, but then I had to make a decision -- not easy since one ship sounded as nice as the next.
That's when Betsy Wade's article "By Windjammer Around Penobscot Bay," about the Victory Chimes, appeared on May 23.
Ms.
Wade persuaded me to try the Victory Chimes.


Taking On the Roosevelt Ave. Peddlers
After years of fighting to rid Roosevelt Avenue of street peddlers, store owners and some residents in Jackson Heights have taken their complaints to the city's Department of Consumer Affairs.


Savoring the Joys of Market Day
"NICE, fresh octopus, live octopus!" cries the fishmonger from his display in a corner of the Saturday market in Monopoli, a little fishing port south of Bari, north of Brindisi, on Italy's Apulian coast.
"I've got octopus!" he sings.
The octopus, its pale, opalescent arms stretched seductively over a bed of crushed ice, does indeed look fresh, but the fishmonger mis interprets my hesitation.
"Non le vuole, signora?" he pretends to plead. "Don't you want any?"


IT ALL COMES OUT IN THE WASH
Helping my mother hang out the wash as a boy, I learned early that the "right way" was to pin sheets, towels, underwear, socks, etc. together on the line in their respective groups (Hers: "It All Comes Out in the Wash," Aug. 22).
It made sense when it came time to fold and sort the dry laundry.
In Southern Illinois in the 1930's, a neighbor's comment that "she puts out a good wash" was one of the highest compliments a housewife could receive.
ROBERT J. SIMONDS  Pittsburgh


Corrections
The Wall Street column on Aug. 22, about Skylink America Inc. and its director Tilman J. Falgout 3d, misidentified the Falgout family member who was controlling shareholder of a company penalized by Louisiana regulators for having paid fees to an aide of Louisiana's Governor.
The controlling shareholder was T. J. Falgout Jr., father of Mr.
Falgout 3d.


Israeli-Palestinian Plan Is Prudent and Bold; Hamas in the Wings
To the Editor:
The reported agreement between Israel and the Palestine Liberation Organization calls for immediate actions by the Israelis.
They will pass control over Gaza and parts of Judea and Samaria to the Palestinians.
The agreement calls only for good intentions from the Palestinians.


David G. Cogan, 85, Researcher Into Radiation's Effect on the Eye
David G. Cogan, an international leader in ophthalmology who discovered radiation-induced cataracts in the survivors of the atomic bombing of Japan, died on Thursday at a hospital in Wayne, Mich., while on a trip.
He was 85 and lived in Chevy Chase, Md.
The cause was a heart attack, his family said.


More to Copland Than Americana
To the Editor:
Richard Taruskin cites Aaron Copland as an American composer who "successfully traded on  [ nationalism ]  the way Dvorak did." Mr.
Taruskin totally ignores most of Mr.
Copland's music that has nothing at all to do with Americana.
Surely Mr.
Taruskin has been around the music world long enough to have heard about Copland's "Piano Variations" and his many other abstract pieces.


A New Twist: Screening the Car Renter
AN unfunny thing happened on the way to a car rental. I was turned down as a bad risk.
Although I rent cars regularly, I had not rented in New York for many years.
Last month, I went with a friend to Budget Rent a Car at the Westchester County Airport to be a second driver on a trip to the Catskills.
After she agreed to pay $5 for an extra driver, I gave my license to the clerk, who worked his computer, then quickly told me my application was denied because of an accident in 1991 involving injury to a passenger but no charges.
Four years must elapse -- two more from this Labor Day -- before this accident leaves my record, as far as Budget is concerned.
Going to the Catskills, I was a passenger.


Viewpoints; O.K., Don't Read This. Break My Heart.
I FIRST ran into the Guilt Sell when my husband and I went crib shopping.
We knew exactly what we wanted: a safe, simple, no-nonsense crib that complied with Consumer Product Safety Commission standards.
We stated our intentions to the saleswoman.
In no time we were looking at handcrafted masterpieces, appropriate for an infant whose caregivers are called Cook and Nanny.


THE DEVIL IN LONG ISLAND
There is a problem with the lead anecdote in Ron Rosenbaum's article.
It isn't true.


Yankee Batboy Who Made It on His Own
MATT McGOUGH, a batboy for the New York Yankees, concedes that he is eager to start his freshman year at Williams College this fall.
But with the Yankees contending for first place in the Eastern Division of the American League, the North Tarrytown resident is not about to completely relinquish his once-in-a-lifetime job -- a baseball fan's dream.
For the remaining weekend games of the season at Yankee Stadium, his academic workload permitting, Mr.
McGough will travel back to the Bronx from his college in northwestern Massachusetts to don again the pinstripe Yankee uniform and resume his duties as batboy.


Miss Schmitt, Mr. Learnard
Catherine Carter Schmitt, an executive assistant at the National Gallery of Art, and Matthew Douglas-Willan Learnard, the director of research and communications for the Democratic Governors' Association, were married yesterday in Washington, where they both work.
The Rev.
Anne G. Amy, an Episcopal priest, performed the ceremony at St.
John's Church in Lafayette Square.
Mrs.
Learnard, who is know as Carter, is a daughter of Mrs.
David R. Megerlin of Locust Valley, L.I., and Alfred J. Schmitt Jr. of Syosset, L.I.
The bride graduated from Rollins College.


But Was She Happy?
A DANGEROUS LIAISON One Woman's Journey Into a World of Aristocracy, Depravity, and Obsessive Love.
By Baroness Sheri de Borchgrave.
Illustrated. 295 pp.
New York:  Dutton. $22.


How the G-Men Measure Up Now
THE FBI Inside the World's Most Powerful Law Enforcement Agency.
By Ronald Kessler.
Illustrated. 492 pp.
New York: Pocket Books. $22.


How Joe Pye Gave His Name to a Weed
AS the story goes, there once was an Indian medicine man named Joe Pye who used concoctions from a wild plant found growing in the nearby woods to cure typhoid fever.
His brew is said to have halted an epidemic that raged in Colonial Massachusetts.
Hence this local plant became forever known as joe-pye weed.
Here is another one about boneset.
Leaves of a particularly widespread wild flower appear to go right through the stem.
Botanists have a phrase for this and say that the leaves are perfoliate, "per" for through and "folium" for leaf.
Or as the noted plantsman Liberty Hyde Bailey once described this phenomenon as a "leaf surrounding the stem."


A Heritage To Be Proud Of
To the Editor:
As a consultant to the recent Dvorak celebration in Spillville, Iowa, and the director of a concurrent scholarly event, the Iowa Dvorak Centennial Symposium, I cannot allow Richard Taruskin's essay " 'Nationalism': Colonialism in Disguise?"  [ Aug. 22 ]  to go unanswered.


LOS ANGELES ASKS: IS SUBWAY SAFE?
Just when Angelenos were getting used to the idea of a subway in this car-crazed city, questions have been raised about whether the system's first leg can withstand the region's most dreaded natural calamity, a major earthquake.
The fears have been stoked by recent disclosures that parts of the walls lining the 4.4-mile Metro Red Line, which opened in January, are thinner than the 12 inches called for in the design contract to protect passengers in a big earthquake.
In some places, the walls were suspected of being only 6 to 8 inches thick, according to a consulting firm hired last year to inspect the tunnel.


Landlord Access Is Law
IN a crowded and edgy environment like New York City, apartment dwellers are hesitant to provide an outsider with access.
They understandably want to protect their privacy and themselves.
But under certain circumstances they may have no choice -- whether they live in a co-op, condominium or rental.


Sitka, Alaska
THERE ARE NO PIZZA vendors inside the Sitka Municipal Airport, a short runway and cozy shelter that cling to a crust of island rock in the Alexander Archipelago of southeast Alaska.
Nor is there neon art on the walls, and espresso, the ubiquitous drink of the Pacific Coast, is not available.
But if you walk inside the small, one-story air terminal you quickly come face-to-snout with its signature charms: the wall mounts of chinook salmon, moose, brown bears, goats and other creatures from this bountiful part of the world.
The salmon are true trophy class; all four weigh more than 60 pounds.
They were caught in nearby Sitka Sound and offer an immediate hint of why people come to the Last Frontier state.


Conversations/Douglas A. Fraser; He Always Gets Restless When the Union Is Bargaining
"THEY have no sense of strategy!" thunders Douglas A. Fraser, former president of the United Automobile Workers and a skilled negotiator, watching the Big Three negotiate new three-year labor contracts with auto workers in this country and Canada.
The immediate object of his ire is his longtime employer, the Chrysler Corporation, which, he argues, frittered away a precious bargaining chip by announcing before negotiations began that it would expand a plant in Canada.


TODAY'S SECTIONS
Special Today: The Sophisticated Traveler/Magazine Part 2
Arts and Leisure/Section 2
The New Season in the Arts: A reborn 'Carousel.' An Edith Wharton classic via Martin Scorsese.
Miro at the Modern.
Marilyn Monroe as operatic heroine.
Plus, New York Times critics survey the cultural year ahead.


South Africa Sanctions May Have Worked, at a Price
IN the arsenal of diplomacy, economic sanctions are crude weapons, slow-acting and unpredictable.
When they work, innocents suffer.
The bad guys, after all, are usually the ones with the bunkers and gas masks -- or, in this case, the power and cash -- to endure a war of attrition.
But as the use of real force has become less politically palatable, the world has increasingly turned to the trade embargo, the investment ban, the credit blockade or the assets freeze as a way of punishing a misbehaving state.
The United States now monitors official sanctions of one kind or another against a dozen countries.
Do they work?


'Beauty' Was Big, but Make Way for 'Aladdin'
No one is sure how many copies of "Aladdin" will be sold when the Disney film is released on videocassette on Oct. 1.
All the industry knows is that the title looks like the biggest ever -- and by so much that it won't even be close.
Always at the top of the exploding video sales market, each Disney title regularly seems to outsell the previous one by several million copies or more -- "Little Mermaid" (1990), 10 million; "Fantasia" (1991), 14 million; "Beauty and the Beast" (1992), the current record holder, an estimated 20 million.
For "Aladdin," industry analysts say, take that 20 million and add another 10 million.


In the Region: Connecticut; Lego Blocks Keep Building a Growing Enfield
WHILE much of the economy languishes, parents still buy toys for their children at a phenomenal rate, and in this country they buy more than anywhere else in the world.
The toy industry estimates that the United States accounts for 25 percent of worldwide spending on toys.
Few companies take toys more seriously than Lego Systems, the Enfield subsidiary of the Lego Group, a Danish company.
From its opening in 1975 until last year the company has expanded its manufacturing plant six times, the last time to 525,000 square feet.


Streetscapes/The 1931 Whitney Museum; 'Rebels on Eighth Street' Redux
OVER the last generation the 1931 Whitney Museum of American Art, at 8 West Eighth Street, has slowly sunk from raffish bohemianism to a neglected decay.
But now the New York Studio School of Drawing, Painting and Sculpture, which owns the building, is making the first repairs in a multiyear restoration project that will sand down, but not off, the rough edges of one of New York's art monuments.


Getting the City to Listen
In January 1992, the people who live behind Pandora's Box, a lesbian bar on Grove Street in the West Village, began complaining about noise.
When bar patrons climbed onto the building's roof and got into fights, the residents became uneasy.
When a patron fired an unlicensed pistol into the bar's ceiling, they grew frightened.
But when the city did nothing to address the problem, they got mad.
That's when things started to change.


Looming on the Hudson, a Skeleton of Steel
There is no plaque or sign on the cathedral-like frame of steel pipes and girders at 125th Street and the Hudson River.
For drivers on the Henry Hudson Parkway, who speed past its upper reaches, and for those who walk along the boardwalk in its shadows, the structure is a quiet mystery.
"I don't know what it is," said Paula Dobbs who fishes from the park two or three times a week.
"Sometimes my son climbs on it, but otherwise I haven't found much use for it."


My Bum Bill, My Secret Sharer of the Streets
WHEN I moved to the block, my bum Bill owned the beauty salon's corner.
He never begged; he mooched off smaller, older bums who sat against a whitewashed brick wall and read paperbacks while Bill smoked and paced and harangued them.
"Reality," he would shout through the prematurely white beard that covered his lips, "what do you know about reality? You're bums."
He yelled at me for strolling through his sidewalk seminar.
I didn't catch the words, but the tone was pure outrage at my rude invasion of his space.
He was in the middle of a lecture on the worthlessness of four readers snoozing in the morning sun, and he seemed to be quoting from a book in his hand that had no cover.
Because he was so big, broad as well as tall, I couldn't let him intimidate me or I'd be crossing three streets instead of one to get my paper.
I glared at him and growled like a dog.
He wearily shook his head and rolled his bright blue eyes and waved me through.


Sonny Rollins


Olmsted Fails As Sound Bite
One addition to the meadows and graceful woods of Prospect Park are 20 towering yellow sign-sculptures featuring quotes from one of the park's designers, Frederick Law Olmsted.
The signs stand 16 to 20 feet tall on thin black legs of iron, and the quotes, in Olmsted's austere, abstract and proper English, are intended to help visitors envision the park as he did during its design.


Humpty-Dumpty, a Childhood Companion?
IS it strange that the head of the training institute of the National Psychological Association for Psychoanalysis, a writer of scholarly articles about the undoing of unhealthy, unequal power relationships between therapist and patient, has come to East Hampton to find Humpty Dumpty, "the lost companion of his childhood"?
Or is it the most natural thing in the world?


Pretoria Drops Need for Visas
United States citizens with valid passports no longer need visas to visit South Africa on vacation or business, or if they are passing through the country in transit.
The relaxed policy also applies to passport holders in other countries, including Canada and members of the European Community.
For more information, contact one of the South African Embassy or Consulate offices: in New York, (212) 213-4880; Washington, (202) 966-1650; Los Angeles, (310) 657-9200, or Chicago, (312) 939-7929.


Ms. Trimmer And Mr. Sgro
Kimberly Ann Trimmer, a senior auditor for the accounting firm Arthur Andersen &amp; Company, was married yesterday to Charles Joseph Sgro, a special assistant to the Deputy Attorney General in the Justice Department.
Both work in Washington.
The Rev.
Dennis Cocozza performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at Notre Dame Church in North Caldwell, N.J.


Love Among the Lobsters
BLUE MOON By Luanne Rice. 305 pp. New York: Viking. $21.


"Korean Arts of the 18th Century"


Sealy Hathaway, Mark Hopkinson
Sealy Hathaway, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
E.
Phillips Hathaway of Owings Mills, Md., was married yesterday to Mark Hopkinson, a son of Rachel Hopkinson of Gladwyne, Pa., and the late Francis Hopkinson.
The Rev.
George Sinkinson performed the Episcopal ceremony at the chapel of the Garrison Forest School in Garrison, Md.
Mrs.
Hopkinson is an assistant vice president in business development at Sotheby's, the auction house in New York.
She graduated from the University of Virginia.
Her father, now retired, was an investment banker in Baltimore at Investment Counselors of Maryland.
The bride's maternal grandfather, the late Clifford D. Mallory, was the president of C. D. Mallory &amp; Company in New York, a shipping concern.
The bride's previous marriage ended in divorce.


Mideast Accord: The P.L.O.; Finally, After Several of His Nine Lives, Arafat Is Going to the White House
It has been a long voyage to the White House for Yasir Arafat.
Several times, the Palestinian leader was counted out in Middle East politics, but each time he has shown extraordinary resilience.
In the Arab world, they call him the "cat with nine lives." No leading Arab figure has survived more setbacks than Mr.
Arafat, whose latest exploit has been to strike a deal with Israel that has revived his bankrupt, nearly defunct Palestine Liberation Organization.


Ms. Knowlton, Mr. Rosenblum
Mr. and Mrs.
Keith L. Knowlton of Brooklyn, Conn., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Gretchen Ann Knowlton, to James Adam Rosenblum, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
William I. Rosenblum of Richmond.
A November wedding is planned.
Ms.
Knowlton, 27, and her fiance, 26, graduated from Brandeis University, he cum laude.
She is a stage manager for the Forestburg (N.Y.) Playhouse, a summer theater.
Her father is the vice president of Fiberoptics Technology Inc., a manufacturer of fiber-optic devices in Pomfret, Conn.


THE DEVIL IN LONG ISLAND
As a teacher, I find the only event about Long Island worth discussing in class is the weather -- beach erosion, Long Island's cause celebre.


Jennifer Hellman, Neal Pomroy
Jennifer Reid Hellman, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Michael M. Hellman of Lloyd Harbor, L.I., was married yesterday to Robert Neal Pomroy, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert A. Pomroy of Frederick, Md.
The Rev.
Carlton T. Lee, an Episcopal priest, officiated at St.
John's Church in Cold Spring Harbor, L.I.
Mrs.
Pomroy, 28, is an account executive at Liz Claiborne Inc. in New York.
She graduated from Dartmouth College.
Her father is a financial consultant in Manhasset, L.I., with Merrill Lynch &amp; Company.
Her paternal grandfather, the late Dr.
Louis M. Hellman, was the Deputy Assistant Secretary for Population Affairs and the administrator of the Health Services Administration in the Department of Health, Education and Welfare, under Presidents Richard M. Nixon and Gerald R. Ford.


Deirdre DeBlasio, Todd H. Engels
Deirdre Noel DeBlasio, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Michael P. DeBlasio of Rye, N.Y., was married yesterday to Todd Henry Engels, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Henry J. Engels of Wilmington, N.C.
The Rev.
Kimberly Bosley, a United Methodist minister, officiated at the Manhattanville College Chapel in Purchase, N.Y.
The Rev.
Peter O'Brien, a Roman Catholic priest, took part in the ceremony.
Mrs.
Engels, 27, is a sales manager for the A. C. Nielsen Company in New York, the television and radio ratings concern.
She graduated from Dickinson College, as did her husband, and she received an M.B.A. from Fordham University.
Her father is the chief financial officer of the Loral Corporation, the defense electronics manufacturer in New York.


The Tom and Gerry Show
To the Editor:
Your article raises a question: "What are the management credentials of these king makers?"


Graceann Gerut, Fred K. Foulkes
Graceann Elizabeth Gerut, a daughter of Mary Gerut of Forest Park, Ill., and John Gerut of Chicago, was married yesterday to Fred K. Foulkes, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Clarence R. Foulkes of New London, N.H.
The Rev.
John Wall performed the ceremony at the Kearsarge Community Presbyterian Church in New London.
Mrs.
Gerut Foulkes, a graduate of the University of Illinois, is studying for an M.B.A. at Boston University.


Catherine Strong, Peter Mitchell
Catherine Burke Strong, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
William L. Strong 3d of Rumson, N.J., was married there yesterday to Peter Gilfoil Mitchell, a son of Irene G. Mitchell of Boston and the late Paul E. Mitchell Sr.
The Rev.
George J. Willis Jr., an Episcopal priest, and the Rev.
Donald A. MacMillan, a Roman Catholic priest, officiated at St.
George's-by-the-River Episcopal Church.
Mrs.
Mitchell is a national sales representative in Boston for Troy Mills, a textile manufacturer.
She and her husband, both 27, are graduates of Ohio Wesleyan University.
Her father is a senior vice president of Fiduciary Trust Company International in New York.


Mideast Accord: The Protests; Soldiers Slay 2 Palestinians in West Bank Town
Israeli soldiers killed two Palestinian youths today, firing into a stone-throwing crowd that was protesting the peace accord between Israel and the Palestine Liberation Organization.
At least 14 other people, including a foreign journalist, were wounded in the worst outbreak of violence here since the announcement of the agreement on limited Palestinian self-rule in the West Bank and Gaza Strip.


President Appeals for Trust From Bastion of Skepticism
Traveling to an area where many voters have been skeptical of some of his Administration's more ambitious initiatives, President Clinton told Texas officials today that his plan to streamline Government would be the first step in persuading Americans that he can be trusted to expand North American trade, overhaul health care and even promote peace in the Middle East.
The theme of impending grand challenges was a constant today, in the President's weekly radio address and in his appearance with Vice President Al Gore at a state surplus property warehouse, where the two leaders talked about how Government can be made more customer-friendly and trustworthy.


Music of Many Lands at Grace Church's 'Noonday Getaway'
THIRTY years ago, chamber music was the province of the listening elite.
Record companies and presenters avoided it because it didn't sell and classical radio stations reserved it for late evening hours when it wouldn't drive away most of their audience.
All of that has changed, thanks in part to the pioneering work of groups like the Chamber Music Society of Lincoln Center, to the high cost of presenting larger ensembles and to sundry other considerations that would make an interesting doctoral thesis.
Whatever the causes, chamber music today occupies an important and much-loved segment of our musical awareness.


Dinkins Invited To Signing
The Clinton Administration has not been able to give Mayor David N. Dinkins much in the way of Federal aid to help his re-election effort, but it has now offered something more precious than gold: One of the 2,500 invitations to the photo opportunity of the decade, at the Mideast peace-signing ceremony at the White House tomorrow.


The Faculty Is Not United On CUNY Reorganization
To the Editor:
The report on the City University of New York ("Faculty Leaders at CUNY Vote to Condemn Chancellor," July 28) leaves the impression that CUNY faculty are united in opposition to Chancellor W. Ann Reynolds's efforts to consolidate CUNY's academic programs.
The faculty is not at all united.


City May Buy Covenant Site
In the face of two major obstacles, asbestos and a hostile community, the Dinkins administration has signed a one-year option to buy Covenant House's buildings in Chelsea for use as an assessment center for homeless families.
The signing comes five years after Mayor David N. Dinkins's predecessor, Edward I. Koch, tried but failed to keep Covenant House from buying two buildings that were the former National Maritime Union headquarters at Ninth Avenue and 17th Street.
Under the terms of an option that runs until July 31, 1994, the financially strugglingh Covenant House, which once operated the nation's largest shelter network for young people, would sell the buildings for $13,750,000, said James J. Harnett, executive vice president of the charitable organization.


Taking New York Home, Bric by Brac
RALPH SARWARI can tell when the economy is turning sour in Germany or Japan, perking up in Brazil or taking off in Taiwan.
He can tell when the French franc is falling and the Swiss franc is soaring.
And he can do all of this without leaving his place beneath the fluorescent lights of Xanadu.
Not Kubla Khan's domed domain, not the too-opulent-for-words mansion in "Citizen Kane," but the casbah of kitsch, the Monte Carlo of mementos, the Shangri-La of souvenirs: a store at 1528 Broadway, at the northern edge of Times Square, that, under Mr.
Sarwari's management, sells everything from Statuettes of Liberty to "I NY" cigarette lighters, "I NY" pencils and "I
NY" T-shirts. Not to mention the $899 denim jackets with lower Manhattan hand-painted on the back under a sky of glittery spangles. One day, a Japanese man bought 12.


'Mind Games' Ends Westport Season
AND now to conclude the Westport Country Playhouse summer season: a one-man show with two assistants and a supporting cast of 707.
Actually "Master of the Imagination" with James Mapes, public speaker and hypnotherapist, is, more accurately, providing the coda to a four-play, two-musical season that would have wound up with "Nunsense II" last night.
But a revue in which daffy nuns sing dopey songs and tell off-color stories is hardly a classy way to call it a summer.
Let Mr.
Mapes try it, in a black Armani suit, with black mock turtleneck sweater and silver belt buckle, all purchased for the occasion.
"Master of the Imagination" will have five performances Thursday through next Sunday (the box office number is 227-4177).


No Wonder We Need Health Care Reform
To the Editor:
In "Healing Itself?" (letter, Aug. 29) Henry Morgan describes the high cost of a single cataract operation.
He was billed $8,000.
If he is covered by Medicare, as the vast majority of cataract patients are, by law less than $3,000 will be paid.
Since Medicare pays less than the cost of modern high tech care, costs are shifted to the few non-Medicare patients to assure everyone the best care.


Linda Wells, C. K. Thompson
Linda Wells, the editor in chief of Allure magazine in New York, plans to wed Charles King Thompson, a vice president in New York of Banque Paribas, the French bank.
A November wedding is planned.
Miss Wells is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Wayne Wells of St.
Louis.
Mr.
Thompson is the son of Mrs.
Samuel F. Beach Jr. of Washington and Charles O. Thompson of Oyster Bay, L.I.


On the Way: An Unwelcome Moving Day


Jennifer Dalsimer, Glenn Archer 3d
Jennifer Sara Dalsimer, the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
James S. Dalsimer of Brookline, Mass., was married there yesterday to Glenn LeRoy Archer 3d, a son of Judge Archer Jr. of Alexandria, Va., and Vera P. Archer of Falls Church, Va.
Judge Thomas A. Wiseman of Federal District Court in Nashville, an uncle of the bridegroom, performed the ceremony at Lars Anderson Park.
Mrs.
Archer, 29, is the director of programs for the National Park Foundation in Washington.
She graduated from Yale University.
Her father is a psychoanalyst in Brookline.
Her mother, Dr.
Adele M. Dalsimer, is a co-director of the Irish studies program and a professor of Irish literature at Boston College in Chestnut Hill, Mass.


Wives, Critics And Reputations
To the Editor:
In Michael Kimmelman's comments about my biography of Elaine and Willem de Kooning, "Elaine and Bill: Portrait of a Marriage," in his essay "The Peephole Approach to Artist Couples"  [ Aug. 15 ] , he asserts that I concentrated on "sex, booze and scandal, the cliches of Abstract Expressionist myth -- landing for only the briefest moments on art."


Jody Danforth, Timothy S. Root
Johanna Claggett Danforth, a daughter of Senator and Mrs.
John C. Danforth of Newburg, Mo., and Washington, was married yesterday to Timothy Stuart Root, a son of Stuart D. Root of Bronxville, N.Y., and Jeanne D. Root of Princeton, N.J.
The Rev.
Francis Wade performed the ceremony at St.
Alban's Episcopal Church in Washington, assisted by the Rev.
Frank Strassburger.
Mrs.
Root, 24, is known as Jody.
She graduated cum laude from Princeton University, and in June she received a master's degree in nursing from Yale University.
Her father, a Republican, is serving his third term as a Senator from Missouri.
The bride is a granddaughter of the late Donald Danforth, the chief executive of the Ralston Purina Company in St.
Louis, the food and animal feed company that was founded by his father, the late William H. Danforth.


A Wide Field Battles for a Weakened Office
THE RACE for public advocate took center stage when Andrew Stein, the current City Council President, dropped his mayoral campaign to seek re-election. (Shortly after, Mr. Stein decided to drop out of that race, too, and out of politics altogether.)
The public advocate is first in line to succeed the Mayor in an emergency or incapacity.
He serves as the city's ombudsman and has some responsibility for overseeing city agencies.
He can also introduce legislation to the City Council and break a tie vote.


Habitats/Hotel des Artistes; Rare Sale for a Tall Triplex
WHEN Fannie Hurst moved into the towering triplex aerie at the Hotel des Artistes in 1932, the novelist wrote that this daunting, cavernous place nonetheless had a small oak-paneled Gothic chapel that would become her workroom.
Overlooking the 60-foot terrace, the little room had "a hush built into it."
When the painter Valerie Markwood moved in 44 years later, she, too, found the 6,000-square-foot space a bit terrifying -- but at least she had enormous kaleidoscopic canvases to fill it up.


Reborn Brownstones: Phase I
The first stage of the Bradhurst redevelopment plan, one of the largest neighborhood-renewal projects ever undertaken by the city, is nearing completion.
Starting this week, people with low and moderate incomes may request applications for the 236 apartments in renovated brownstones on Frederick Douglass Boulevard between 145th and 147th Streets and east along 145th Street.
The renovations, which also include 60 apartments for people being displaced by the construction and five for superintendents, are part of a comprehensive plan to rehabilitate a troubled area that stretches from 139th Street to 155th Street and from St.
Nicholas Avenue to Adam Clayton Powell Jr.
Boulevard.
It is planned that by the year 2000, the city will construct or renovate more than 80 buildings, housing a total of 2,200 families.
The project, being developed by a consortium of political, business and spiritual leaders, is being overseen by the Housing Preservation and Development Department.


Mention Collins and Receivers Quiver
He is one of the top receivers in the National Football League.
He has been called unstoppable by some, one of the best ever by others.
He is fearless, gritty, fluid.
And when he was asked about Giants cornerback Mark Collins, this usually chatty wide receiver fell silent.
If he were Superman, the name Mark Collins was like kryptonite.
"I don't want you to use my name, because I don't want him to know I'm the one saying this stuff," the receiver said.
"You never want a guy to know you think about him."


Dance Theater of Harlem


BEST SELLERS: September 12, 1993
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Fiction
1
2
57
THE BRIDGES OF MADISON COUNTY, by Robert James Waller. (Warner, $16.95.) A photographer and a lonely farmer's wife in Iowa.
2
1
3
WITHOUT REMORSE, by Tom Clancy. (Putnam, $24.95.) John Kelly becomes involved in a Pentagon project to rescue prisoners held in North Vietnam.
3
3
5
VANISHED, by Danielle Steel. (Delacorte, $23.95.) The abduction of their young son creates a crisis for a New York man and woman and for the woman's first lover.
4
5
22
LIKE WATER FOR CHOCOLATE, by Laura Esquivel. (Doubleday, $17.50.) Frustration, love, hope -- and recipes -- sampled by a woman on a Mexican ranch.
5
6
26
THE CLIENT, by John Grisham. (Doubleday, $23.50.) A deadly secret, revealed by a lawyer just before he kills himself, presents problems for an 11-year-old boy.
6
4
6
STREETS OF LAREDO, by Larry McMurtry. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $25.) A Texas bounty hunter goes south of the border in pursuit of a train robber and killer.
7
1
THE GOLDEN MEAN, by Nick Bantock. (Chronicle Books, $17.95.) Concluding the "Griffin &amp; Sabine" trilogy, about an artist and his secret admirer.
8
7
9
THE NIGHT MANAGER, by John le Carre. (Knopf, $24.) A Zurich hotelman's life in the world of arms dealers, dope smugglers and international terrorists.
9
9
12
PIGS IN HEAVEN, by Barbara Kingsolver. (HarperCollins, $22.) The stresses and strains that befall a mother and her adopted Cherokee daughter.
10
1
STRIP TEASE, by Carl Hiaasen. (Knopf, $21.) The problems, political and sexual, of a Florida Congressman.
11*
8
4
THE SHINING ONES, by David Eddings. (Del Rey/Ballantine, $22.) The second volume of "The Tamuli," a fantasy saga.
12
1
THE DEATH AND LIFE OF SUPERMAN, by Roger Stern. (Spectra/Bantam, $19.95.) A novel about the comic-book hero, including his rebirth in the near future.
13*
10
7
A CASE OF NEED, by Michael Crichton writing as Jeffery Hudson. (Dutton, $18.95.) A 1968 novel about the mysterious death of a surgeon's daughter.
14
11
15
PLEADING GUILTY, by Scott Turow. (Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux, $24.) A lawyer in pursuit of his firm's missing partner and a multimillion-dollar fund.
15
14
12
CRUEL &amp; UNUSUAL, by Patricia D. Cornwell. (Scribners, $21.) Dr.
Kay Scarpetta investigates mysteries involving a man executed for murder.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Nonfiction
1
1
18
EMBRACED BY THE LIGHT, by Betty J. Eadie with Curtis Taylor. (Gold Leaf Press, $14.95.) A woman's near-death experience.
2
1
SEINLANGUAGE, by Jerry Seinfeld. (Bantam, $19.95.) Observations on life's pleasures and ordeals by the star of the television show "Seinfeld."
3
2
4
MAYBE (MAYBE NOT), by Robert Fulghum. (Villard, $19.) Essays suggesting that inspiration can be found in most unexpected ways and places.
4
3
57
WOMEN WHO RUN WITH THE WOLVES, by Clarissa Pinkola Estes. (Ballantine, $23.) How myths and folk tales can enable women to understand their psyches.
5
4
9
LISTENING TO PROZAC, by Peter D. Kramer. (Viking, $23.) A psychiatrist discusses mood-changing medications and their effects on a person's self.
6
7
3
THE HIDDEN LIFE OF DOGS, by Elizabeth Marshall Thomas. (Davison/Houghton Mifflin, $18.95.) An analysis of canine behavior.
7
5
14
REENGINEERING THE CORPORATION, by Michael Hammer and James Champy. (Harper Business, $25.) A manifesto for business innovation.
8
6
52
THE WAY THINGS OUGHT TO BE, by Rush H. Limbaugh 3d. (Pocket, $22.) Anecdotes and opinions offered by the talk-show host.
9
9
13
THE FIFTIES, by David Halberstam. (Villard, $27.50.) A journalist's social, political, economic and cultural history of the 1950's.
10
8
39
CARE OF THE SOUL, by Thomas Moore. (HarperCollins, $22.50.) A psychotherapist's discussion of spirituality and everyday life.
11
11
14
MAMA MAKES UP HER MIND, by Bailey White. (Addison-Wesley, $17.95.) Life in a tiny Georgia town; by a first-grade teacher and radio commentator.
12
10
9
GIRL, INTERRUPTED, by Susanna Kaysen. (Turtle Bay/Random House, $17.) An account of a young woman's mental illness.
13
13
12
DAYS OF GRACE, by Arthur Ashe and Arnold Rampersad. (Knopf, $24.) The memoirs of the late tennis star.
14
12
30
HEALING AND THE MIND, by Bill Moyers. (Doubleday, $25.) Conversations with physicians and others about the relationship of sickness to thoughts and emotions.
15
14
15
SECRET CEREMONIES, by Deborah Laake. (Morrow, $20.) The unhappy marriages of a woman raised as a Mormon.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous
1
1
7
AGELESS BODY, TIMELESS MIND, by Deepak Chopra. (Harmony, $22.) A physician's advice about aging.
2
3
17
MEN ARE FROM MARS, WOMEN ARE FROM VENUS, by John Gray. (HarperCollins, $20.) Ways to improve communication and relationships between the sexes.
3
2
11
EAT MORE, WEIGH LESS, by Dean Ornish. (HarperCollins, $22.50.) Counsel about diet.
4
4
2
FOOD -- YOUR MIRACLE MEDICINE, by Jean Carper. (HarperCollins, $25.) Ways to prevent and treat many illnesses and complaints.
Rankings reflect sales figures, for the week ending Aug. 28, at 3,050 bookstores plus wholesalers serving 28,000 other retailers (gift shops, department stores, newsstands, supermarkets), statistically weighted to represent sales in all such outlets nationwide.
An asterisk indicates that a book's sales are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
CRAZY IN ALABAMA, by Mark Childress. (Putnam, $22.95.) Southern American humor yet again, but in a novel that pounds every convention of the genre into submission; not even the dead bodies interfere with the funniness.
"DADDY'S GONE TO WAR": The Second World War in the Lives of America's Children, by William M. Tuttle Jr. (Oxford University, $30.) A historian finds that some "home front children" still feel indoctrinated in fright and hate, while others believe the war enhanced their understanding of this country and its culture.
EPSTEIN: Artist Against the Establishment, by Stephen Gardiner. (Viking, $35.) This polemical book defends at every point a major artist who all his life defied bourgeois conformity yet managed to die the proprietor of a knighthood.
HENRY JAMES' MIDNIGHT SONG, by Carol De Chellis Hill. (Poseidon/Simon &amp; Schuster, $23.) A grand, ebullient novel, set chiefly in 1890's Vienna, where James, Freud, Jung and Edith Wharton are up to some naughty conduct.
THE KOMMANDANT'S MISTRESS, by Sherri Szeman. (HarperCollins, $17.50.) A powerful novel, forged from refractory materials: the personal narratives of a death camp commander and the Jewish woman he chose as his mistress.
LET THE SEA MAKE A NOISE . . . : A History of the North Pacific From Magellan to MacArthur, by Walter A. McDougall. (Basic Books, $30.) Lively narrative, bold analysis and prodigious research adorn this popular history of a vast sea surrounded by mutually mistrustful peoples.
NEW YORK DAYS, by Willie Morris. (Little, Brown, $24.95.) Mr.
Morris's memoir of his star-crossed romance with Harper's Magazine, where he became editor in chief in 1967, just in time for the weirdest part of the 60's, and held on till 1971.
SADE: A Biography, by Maurice Lever. (Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux, $35.) A life of the French aristocrat and novelist (1740-1814) so wicked they renamed wickedness in his honor, so to speak.
SECOND SIGHT, by Robert V. Hine. (University of California, $20.) A splendid, highly literate personal account by the fortunate recipient of a miracle, a distinguished historian who slowly lost his eyesight and suddenly got it back.
SIGNS OF DEVOTION: Stories, by Maxine Chernoff. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $19.) Smart, antic short stories in which people understand new experiences by recalling old ones, and the trivial is examined until its importance transpires.
SLEEPING BEAUTIES, by Susanna Moore. (Knopf, $22.) This eloquent, disturbing novel, concerned with personal and historical identity, squeezes its heroine between outdated notions of femininity and repulsive exemplars of womanhood.
THEIRS WAS THE KINGDOM: Lila and DeWitt Wallace and the Story of the Reader's Digest, by John Heidenry. (Norton, $29.95.) A hugely detailed, engagingly written history of a single bright idea and the preacher's kids who ran that idea into a multibillion-dollar global enterprise.


New Man at Helm of the 115th
In the last few weeks, Arnold Dansky has moved single-mindedly through the clogged streets of Jackson Heights, past shops selling Indian trinkets and spices, clubs serving immigrants from Colombia and South Korea, and newsstands hawking papers from as far off as Quito, Ecuador.
He is the newest commander of the Police Department's 115th Precinct, with more than 150 officers, but he rambles about like some small-town constable, glad-handing residents and merchants along the way.


Corrections
An article on Aug. 15 about the future of the Bayreuth Festival in Germany included an erroneous reference to Winifred Wagner, the widow of Richard Wagner's son, Siegfried.
She is not alive; her death occurred in 1980.


It Was More Than Rough Sex
To the Editor:
Isn't it time we shelve that old chestnut "sodomy"?
In her review of Maurice Lever's "Sade," Lynn Hunt uses the word five times in describing the amorous lives of 18th-century French Jesuits and the Marquis's own erotic tastes.
When discussing sex, why not call a spade a spade instead of couching it in antiquated euphemisms?
Such terminology is not only loaded with religious overtones, it fosters the impression that such behavior is somehow different from so-called normal sex.
While it may be, according to the Supreme Court, criminal, no one can seriously claim nowadays that oral or anal sex is exotic.


Maxie Goes Down
Strong safety BRETT MAXIE of the New Orleans Saints was lost for the season when he tore the anterior cruciate ligaments in his right knee in a collision with running back DERRICK NED during passing drills on Thursday.


An Abrams Ally Jockeys for His Newly Open Job
Assemblyman G. Oliver Koppell was strolling into his Bronx political club on Wednesday night when his wife greeted him with some stunning, but welcome, news: his friend, Attorney General Robert Abrams, had just announced his intention to resign on Dec. 31.
Within minutes, Mr.
Koppell and friends were working the phones, calling reporters, colleagues and Democratic leaders.
"I'm so excited," Mr.
Koppell, a Democrat, told several people in separate conversations.
"Absolutely, I'm a candidate."


Ancient History in the Making
AT the Costume Institute of the Metropolitan Museum of Art on Wednesday night, in plain view of the patrons, critics, curators, designers and reporters attending the opening of "Versailles 1973: American Fashion on the World Stage," Stephen Sprouse, the fashion designer, stuck his chewing gum on the wall.
It was the sort of thing you might catch someone doing in a remote corner of a bus station or, with some discretion, at a fast-food place.
But perhaps it wasn't totally inappropriate.
The Court of Versailles was, after all, a place where the most refined and most vulgar impulses mixed and mingled.


Liberte, Egalite, Sororite
BLOOD SISTERS The French Revolution in Women's Memory.
By Marilyn Yalom.
Illustrated. 308 pp.
New York: Basic Books.


Managers' Profiles; Lawrence Auriana and Hans Utsch
Fund: Kaufmann Fund, $775 million in assets.
Co-managers since 1987 inception. (Sponsor: The Edgemont Asset Management Corporation, New York City).
Born: Mr.
Auriana -- Jan. 1, 1944, New York City.
Mr.
Utsch -- July 3, 1936, New York City.


Honolulu
THERE ARE NOT many airports in this world where the traveler can order a custom-made lei of plumeria blossoms, munch on Korean barbecue, meditate in a Japanese garden or take a dip in the Pacific Ocean.
No matter where you come from, the mainland United States or Asia, you arrive at Honolulu International Airport after having endured some 5 to 10 hours of leg-numbing flight.
In the open-air terminal, Hawaii's fragrant and humid climate quickly envelopes you; it is inviting, comfortable, easy.


Israeli-Palestinian Plan Is Prudent and Bold
To the Editor:
I am disappointed by "Peace in Our Time?" (Op-Ed, Sept. 5), Benjamin Netanyahu's criticism of the Israel-Palestine Liberation Organization peace plan as comparable to Neville Chamberlain's appeasement of Hitler over Czechoslovakia.
During the Menachem Begin-Yitzhak Shamir years, Mr.
Netanyahu's Likud Party was the most ardent promoter of the unwritten rule that American Jews who disagreed with Israeli governmental policy should voice their disagreements in Israel, not in United States forums.
Now Mr.
Netanyahu seeks to make a political end run on the Labor Party by contravening the spirit of that rule.


Wide-Screen Sets Define The Shape of the Future
LONG AWAITED AND MUCH delayed, the first wide-screen video sets are making their belated debut.
Scheduled to arrive a year ago, they hit major snags along the way.
For a while it seemed that they just couldn't make the jump from laboratory showpiece to market item.
The trouble was that the electron beams, which literally paint the picture, smeared colors at the edges of the elongated screen.
But that problem has now been solved, and wide-screen video is available at last.


Holtzman Firmly Blocks Release of Report on Loan to Campaign
Comptroller Elizabeth Holtzman of New York City yesterday steadfastly refused to allow the release of a city investigative report about a bank loan made to her 1992 Senate campaign, even as city investigators have recommended to Federal authorities that they examine evidence that her campaign may have lied to get the money.
Ms.
Holtzman's decision, three days before Primary Day, came as she wrestled with how to control the damage that could keep her from winning the 40 percent necessary to avoid a runoff in her pursuit of re-election.
Ms.
Holtzman, a political figure for more than two decades in the city who has been heavily favored to win the primary, has been under heavy pressure from her opponents, Alan G. Hevesi and Herman Badillo, to waive her right of confidentiality and allow the city's Conflicts of Interest Board to release the report by the city's Department of Investigation.
Met With Fleet Executives
As their attacks continued yesterday, Ms.
Holtzman said for the first time that she had met in person with executives of Fleet Securities in June 1992, two months before her campaign obtained a $450,000 loan from Fleet Bank, which is part of the same Rhode Island banking company.
The city investigations department is looking at why seven months later, in March, Ms.
Holtzman's office recommended Fleet Securities to be an underwriter for city bonds.


Notre Dame Throws The Book At Michigan
The Gipper never had to answer questions about steroids.
Rockne never faced complaints that he grabbed players by the face mask, because they weren't wearing face masks.
Lou Holtz's role in the recent history of Notre Dame football remains subject to praise, criticism, distrust and debate.
But even as consciousnesses are raised and the system's workings are scrutinized, a link to the past somehow endures.
The coach of the Fighting Irish went for a brief ride today after Notre Dame's surprisingly complete 27-23 victory over Michigan, a game in which quarterback Kevin McDougal, in just his second start, displayed a sense of poise and elusiveness that frustrated both the Wolverines and the crowd of 106,851, the largest to see a regular-season game in National Collegiate Athletic Association history.


The Look of the Nineties
Dressed in their Sunday finery, they arrived at the Orpheum Theater in downtown Omaha to participate in a fashion experiment: Could the best of the new fall clothes transcend age, hype and circumstance?
To our models, mostly nonagenarians, it all seemed a little goofy.
The clothes reminded them of fashions long gone by.
But being the hearty, good-natured Midwesterners they are, they exchanged their pastel pants suits for black deconstructed dresses, their lightweight blazers for leather jackets.
And just as we expected, Omaha's oldest never looked better.


A Pocket Full of Music
What do Akio Morita, Lolita, Dick Tracy and Charlie the Star-Kist tuna all have in common?
The answer is hardly of epic proportions -- pocket-sized, in fact.
But discovering the tenuous pop-cultural connections of its dramatis personae is part of the wifty charm of MADE IN JAPAN: Transistor Radios of the 1950s and 1960s (Chronicle, paper, $16.95).
Whether you tucked it into an elegant leather handbag, a la Grace Kelly, or, taking a cue from Brandon de Wilde in "Hud," let it poke out of a denim jacket, the transistor radio may not have been, as the authors playfully insist, "integral . . . to the issues of defiance, sex, freedom, music and mobility." But it certainly made them more fun.


Palestinians, In the End, Go It Alone
In a landscape that shimmers with memory, hubris and hatred, a people emerged from the wilderness of its own history this week.
The Palestinians, unaccompanied by their Arab brethren, strode into a new era alongside their old enemy, the Israelis.


Vienna Debates Its New Look
Aboldly irregular eight-story office building with a glass-enclosed cafe on top, diagonally opposite the 600-year-old Cathedral of St.
Stephen in the very heart of Vienna, is still stirring up hot debate three years after its completion.
Many Viennese will tell you that the new Haas House -- named after a company that once had its headquarters here -- is an "outrage," an "insult" to the venerable Gothic church that, with its soaring steeple, is the prime landmark and symbol of the Austrian capital.
But local intellectuals and young people applaud the post-modern structure, designed by Hans Hollein, one of the country's leading architects.
The Haas House "carries on a dialogue with the ancient cathedral," said Dr.
Brigitte Timmermann, a historian, lecturer and author who is writing a book about imperial tombs.


A Tennis Club (And Magnet) Risks Oblivion
Seated on a red-brick terrace overlooking the small red-clay tennis empire he spent 12 years building, Richard Northern pondered two questions: "Why can't we stay? And why can't they build around us?"
His South Oxford Health and Racquet Club is the city's only black-owned tennis club.
It is also a popular neighborhood center of social and political activity.
Come November, though, the four outdoor tennis courts and the three-story neo-Georgian building on the fringe of the Fort Greene Historic District are to be demolished to make room for moderate- to middle-income housing, part of Atlantic Center, a commercial- and residential-development plan.


Visions of the Past Are Competing for Votes in Poland
IF the opinion polls are correct, Poland, the Eastern European country that has made the longest strides toward a market economy, may well vote the former Communist party -- renamed and repackaged -- back into at least a share of power next Sunday.
Few of the voters likely to turn to this party, the Democratic Left Alliance, desire or expect a throwback to totalitarian rule.
But they do hanker for elements of the recent past, a time they recall as having more certainty, when life seemed fairer and unemployment was not 15 percent.


Songs of a Wired 'Cave'
The plastic tap of a computer key, amplified through two loudspeakers, reverberates in the darkness of a New York apartment.
Synchronized to the broken pattern of the strokes, luminous slugs of type flash across and down five video monitors arrayed against a wall.
The emerging words -- in English, French, German and Hebrew -- are from Genesis 16: "Now Sarai Abram's wife bore him no children/and she had a handmaid/ an Egyptian and her name was Hagar."
As this aboriginal story unfolds line by line -- of barren Sarah's giving Abraham the servant girl Hagar to bear him a child -- the rhythms on the soundtrack gradually intensify.
A pair of hands start to clap, then another in countercadence; the beating of a clave, then a second; finally, a kick drum, low and warlike, also doubled.
The finger on the computer key maintains its precise, relentless typing, a continuo played on an instrument that also generates the video text.
The percussion climaxes as Hagar's birth of Ishmael brings forth from the angel of the Lord the prophecy of a violent fate: "And he will be a man of the wild; his hand against all, and the hand of all against him./And in the presence of all his brothers shall he dwell."


Wall Street; Profits Are Up, So Securities Firm Hiring Is Up
AFTER two consecutive years of earning record profits, securities firms are again adding to their staffs.
While employment remains below the 1987 peak of 262,000, the business is growing too fast to be handled merely by squeezing more productivity out of existing workers.


A Manhattan Express to Moscow
Very few people in Moscow go to Red Square for night life. But that's this week.
Opening next Sunday, a new club, styled in the spirit of hip late-night New York hot spots, may just become a required destination for fashionable young Muscovites looking to party.


At Pier 62, Start of Plan For Riverfront
It doesn't look like much: a bleak stretch of asphalt with volleyball and basketball courts, picnic tables and an information kiosk.
But the new playground on Pier 62 at 23d Street is the first sign that after two decades of controversy, including the killing of Westway, plans to revitalize this section of the Hudson River waterfront are moving closer to reality.
The Hudson River Park Conservancy, which will eventually manage the redeveloped waterfront from the Battery to 59th Street, installed the playground.
And as limited as it is, it still attracts residents of the area, people who work nearby and summer campers from the local Y.


Whitman Calls a Florio Plan 'Right-Wing'
It is as though the two major candidates for governor followed Alice down the rabbit hole.
Even by the frequently wild swings of New Jersey politics, the first week of all-out campaigning by Gov.
Jim Florio and Christine Todd Whitman was topsy-turvy.
It began with the candidates clashing over guns, legal threats and the First Amendment.
It ended with an angry debate over welfare that presented a curious role reversal: Mrs.
Whitman, a Republican, accused Mr.
Florio of "extreme right-wing radicalism" and Mr.
Florio, a Democrat, staunchly defended sweeping new regulations on welfare recipients.


Workshop for Men To Stop Being Abusive
I'm writing to underscore an important point in "Domestic Violence Victims Find Understanding"  [ Aug. 29 ] .
As the director of a program for men who are abusive to their female partners, I can confirm that the economic climate of the last several years has led to increasing numbers of incidents of violence in the home.
Unemployment, reduced income and business reverses, have added to the pressures of family living.
The problem exists in all age groups, all occupations and all economic groups.
Many men are not equipped to cope with stress and do not readily seek help.


A South African Mall That Black Know-How Built
The Masakhane Mall, opening next month on a dusty lot at the edge of this black settlement, is at first glance just an African roadside curiosity: a shopping center and motel complex in a shantytown.
Ingeniously, Vuyasile Pottie's self-service supermarket, Ben Bosakwe's bakery, Max Gcuwa's dry cleaners, Eunice Luke's pool hall, the liquor store and shoe repair and photo studio and hair salon and all the other shops will be housed in converted shipping containers.


Photos at a Church and a Painting Show
AHN BEHRENS, a writer, and Peter Bill, an artist, have produced two exhibitions here.
One is at the Cathedral Arts Gallery, where they are in-house curators, and the other at the Cooper Gallery, where they are guests.
The first, a photographic anthology titled "Focus '93," must compete with its setting --a formidable task since this is none other than Grace Church Van Vorst.
The Gothic Revival building, at the junction of Erie and Second Streets, was erected in 1852 by a Danish-born architect, Detlef Lienau.
It has an interior that is in mint condition -- a rafter roof, two rows of columns supporting the Gothic arches of a clerestory and pale pink walls relieved by foliate and geometric ornament painted in green and blue around the lancet windows.


In Chinatown, A Food Fight
The Silver Palace, which in 1981 became Chinatown's first unionized restaurant, is writing another new chapter in its labor relations.
It has locked out the union and is being picketed.
The popular restaurant, which opened in 1976 as New York's first Hong Kong-style dim sum mega-parlor and banquet hall, says it must cut costs because of the recession and new competition from banquet halls.


LETTERS TO THE NEW JERSEY EDITOR
A recent article, "Battle Forming Over Teachers' Lifetime License," described three proposals to end New Jersey's practice of granting teachers lifetime certification and mentioned critics' charges that the proposals represent an indirect attack on the state's tenure law.
The article drew a number of letters to the editor, including these.
Tenure is a concept that has seen its time.
Change is necessary, but the concept of teacher protection must be addressed.
Teachers, like other professionals, should be required to continue their education and give time to the craft they so caringly pursue.


Missing Out on a Glittering Market
LES MUSIAL assumed that Malaysians lived in "straw huts or something" when the Chrysler Corporation dispatched him to Southeast Asia last year to help open its first manufacturing operation in the region in more than a decade.
Chrysler made him feel no more comfortable about the assignment when a company doctor presented him with 10 pounds of medicines -- "for malaria, for tropical diseases" -- apparently in the belief that local supplies might be lacking.


LETTERS TO THE NEW JERSEY EDITOR
A recent article, "Battle Forming Over Teachers' Lifetime License," described three proposals to end New Jersey's practice of granting teachers lifetime certification and mentioned critics' charges that the proposals represent an indirect attack on the state's tenure law.
The article drew a number of letters to the editor, including these.
I am a firm believer that teachers need to be regulated somehow by an outside agency rather than the school board and administrators.
Safeguards for teachers who give 110 percent of themselves are a must.
In a field where respect is almost a nonexistent word, teachers who walk the extra mile must be given a sense of security.


6 Candidates Contend for a Chance to Define the Retitled Position of Public Advocate
The campaign for public advocate has been unusual and striking not only because of the wide number of candidates it has attracted, but because those candidates have sought to redefine a position whose title has changed and whose powers have significantly diminished.
More than a dozen people initially expressed interest in being the city's first public advocate, the position formerly known as City Council president.
Through either change of heart -- such as that undergone by the incumbent, Andrew J. Stein -- or lack of enough signatures to be placed on the ballot, the field has been narrowed to six in the Democratic primary on Tuesday.


Making a Beeline Uptown
For its gala opening on Sept. 7, Barneys New York on Madison Avenue lured a full house for an extravaganza that spilled into the Pierre Hotel next door.


Where the Quail and the Wallaby Roam


Paris
THE FRENCH ARE A demanding lot.
They want things to look good and be efficient.
And when it comes to airport terminals, they expect the best for themselves.
Who cares if Orly Sud often resembles a noisy marketplace?
Does it really matter that Terminal 1 at Roissy-Charles de Gaulle Airport can be horribly overcrowded with foreign tourists?
After all, the French -- who naturally prefer Air France -- have Terminal 2 at Charles de Gaulle to calm their frayed nerves.
Actually, Terminal 2 consists of four self-contained units -- 2A, 2B, 2C and 2D.
As a result, each is of a manageable size, with the departure gate never more than 100 yards away.
The shops are more like boutiques than supermarkets.
Yet, with their understated marble, steel and glass design, they all feel spacious.
And it helps that long delays seem to be rare these days.
In Terminal 2, at least, I don't ever recall the dismal sight of travelers sitting on their suitcases or asleep on the floor.


Sex Harassment On the Job Now Easier to Prove
FOR Theresa Lehmann, work at Toys "R" Us in Rochelle Park had become anything but fun.
Her supervisor repeatedly made offensive sexual remarks to her and once, she said, lifted her shirt, exposing her bra.
When her complaints to management did no good, she quit in 1987 and sued, charging that the company had subjected her to a hostile work environment.
A trial court ruled against Ms.
Lehmann, declaring that her supervisor's conduct was not "sufficiently outrageous," just nothing worse than "annoying." An appeals court reversed the ruling, and the case went to the State Supreme Court.


'Theirs Was the Kingdom'
To the Editor:
I trust that I was not the only one to be struck by the irony of having a digest in the form of Richard Lingeman's thoughtful review of "Theirs Was the Kingdom," by John Heidenry (Aug. 22), to save us the trouble of reading a 701-page account of Lila and DeWitt Wallace and Reader's Digest.
CARL GERSUNY  Peace Dale, R.I.


Turning to Curry for a Taste of the East
A PINCH of curry powder can do wonders for a dish.
But now chefs and serious cooks are going a step further and making their own pastes, powders and curry oils at home.
It takes only minutes and the results are enormously satisfying.
Eggplant, tomatoes, new potatoes and string beans are superb perked up with a dash of curry, and they go very well with meat or fish cooked on the grill.
The spices used in curry powder also make an excellent oil.
Philippe Chin, chef and owner of Chanterelles, a popular French restaurant in Philadelphia, recently galvanized guests at a Manhattan dinner party by serving gravlax seasoned with curry oil on blinis as an hors d'oeuvre.


Joan Lanigan, Michael Strauss
Joan Marian Lanigan, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Eugene D. Lanigan of Maplewood, N.J., was married yesterday to Dr.
Michael Tunick Strauss, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Harry L. Strauss Jr. of Tucson, Ariz.
Judge William Cuozzi of the Municipal Court of West Orange, N.J., officiated at the Essex County Country Club in West Orange.
Mrs.
Strauss is a senior product manager at the Repligen Corporation, a biotechnology company in Cambridge, Mass.
She graduated cum laude from Boston College and received an M.B.A. from Simmons College.
Her father, now retired, was a sales executive in Iselin, N.J., at the Seimens Corporation, the industrial conglomerate.


Higher Grazing Fees Have Ranchers Running Scared
WITH a cattle ranch 10 times the size of Manhattan, Rob Hendry might be expected to make a comfortable living.
Instead, he worries about going broke, even though he often works from early morning until dark, seven days a week.
His future, he says, depends not on his own labor, but on Washington, where the Clinton Administration and Congress are reshaping Federal land policies that have long fueled the West's economy.
Last month the new Administration moved to more than double grazing fees on Federal land, while imposing new environmental restrictions on its use.


To Live and Shop By the L.I.R.R.
In addition to housing for 400 families, the Atlantic Center development, next to the Long Island Rail Road terminal at Atlantic and Flatbush Avenues, where subway lines and major roads meet, will have two big retail centers.
Construction is to begin in November, with the opening scheduled late next year.
Under the first phase of the project, the developers, Atlantic Center Associates, are building 160,000 square feet of retail space, to be leased to the Bradlee's discount department-store chain.
There will be parking for 366 cars.


Races By Borough
MANHATTAN BOROUGH PRESIDENT  There is no primary.
Ruth W. Messinger (D-L) is the incumbent.
1st COUNCIL DISTRICT  MARGARET S. CHIN (D) Director, Chinatown Center of La Guardia Community College; member of Community Board 1; a candidate for City Council in 1991.
KATHRYN E. FREED (D-L) City Council member elected in 1991; tenant lawyer and former counsel to New York State Assembly Consumer Affairs Committee.
JUDITH JOICE (D) Businesswoman; co-owner of the Lion's Head, a restaurant and bar on Christopher Street; member, Greenwich Village Chamber of Commerce; member, Mayor's Small Business Advisory Board; former member, Community Board 2.
THE CAMPAIGN: Lower Manhattan Democrats have a rematch from 1991, but with strategic realignments.
Councilwoman Freed won a four-way race two years ago by nearly 1,000 votes.
Ms.
Chin, the runner-up, is renewing her bid to become the Council's first Asian-American member.
But 1991's two other losing candidates support Ms.
Freed, a veteran party official and legislative aide who won many endorsements from political clubs, unions and elected officials.
Ms.
Chin's base is Chinatown.
Ms.
Joice, the new entrant, draws support from Greenwich Village.
All are spending heavily.
In their Aug. 13 financial filings, Ms.
Chin led with $63,910 raised to $45,913 for Ms.
Fried and $39,371 for Ms.
Joice. 2d COUNCIL DISTRICT  MIRIAM FRIEDLANDER (D) Former City Council member who served for 18 years until 1991; created and was chairwoman of the Council's Committee on Women.
SYLVIA M. FRIEDMAN (D) Housing policy analyst with the Department of Housing Preservation and Development; former teacher; member, Community Board 6; chairwoman, Housing and Homeless Committee, Community Board 6.
ANTONIO PAGAN (D-L) City Council member elected in 1991; former executive director of Coalition Housing, a nonprofit developer of low- and moderate-income housing; former member, Community Board 3.
THE CAMPAIGN: At the age of 79, Ms.
Friedlander is fighting to regain her seat from Mr.
Pagan.
She was the only Council member to lose in the 1991 primary, by barely over 100 votes out of 12,000 cast in the ethnic and political cauldron of Gramercy Park, the East Village and Lower East Side.
While Mr.
Pagan is gay, the city's other two gay legislators, Councilman Thomas K. Duane and Assemblywoman Deborah J. Glick, pointedly backed Ms.
Friedlander.
Borough President Ruth W. Messinger of Manhattan also mobilized support for her.
Mr.
Pagan also has a long list of endorsements, and benefits from popularity with Hispanic voters.
By Aug. 13, Ms.
Friedlander had raised $64,960, compared with $56,509 for Mr.
Pagan.
Sylvia Friedman, a newcomer to the race, who could siphon votes from Ms.
Friedlander's base as a liberal Jewish woman, raised $41,530. 3d COUNCIL DISTRICT
No primary. Thomas K. Duane (D-L) is the incumbent. 4th COUNCIL DISTRICT
No primary.
Andrew S. Eristoff (R-L) is the incumbent.  5th COUNCIL DISTRICT  BARBARA W. KLOBERDANZ (D) Political consultant; former teacher; former member, Community Board 8.
SAMUEL D. MORELL (D) Liquor sales, wine imports; former salesman in wholesale and retail clothing; a candidate for City Council in 1980, 1982 and 1985.
No Republican primary.
Charles Millard (R-L) is the incumbent.
THE CAMPAIGN: The Democratic winner here faces the unenviable task of running in November's election against Charles Millard, the Republican-Liberal incumbent.
Ms.
Kloberdanz, City Council President's liaison to the Council, is backed by several political clubs and legislators.
She stresses quality of life issues and Council oversight powers.
Mr.
Morrell, who proposes a medical van for the elderly, Upper East Side jitneys and using vacant lots for parking, has run several times before. 6th COUNCIL DISTRICT
No primary. Ronnie M. Eldridge (D-L) is the incumbent. 7th COUNCIL DISTRICT
No primary.
Stanley E. Michels (D-L) is the incumbent. 8th COUNCIL DISTRICT  WILLIAM DEL TORO (D) Minister, Chapel of the Sacred Heart of Jesus; chairman of the Community Housing Anti-Crime/Anti-Drug Task Force; a candidate for City Council in 1991.
FRANCISCO DIAZ JR. (D) District Manager, Community Board 11; former Housing Development Adviser for Homesteading Coalition; community organizer in East Harlem.
ADAM CLAYTON POWELL 4TH (D-L)City Council member elected in 1991; son of Adam Clayton Powell Jr., the late Harlem Congressman; former assistant district attorney in the Bronx; worked for Comptroller Elizabeth Holtzman.
THE CAMPAIGN: Adam Clayton Powell 4th, 31, is struggling to keep his seat in this district that encompasses part of the South Bronx.
In 1991, William Del Toro squeezed by Mr.
Powell with 34 votes in the first tally but lost to him in a court-ordered runoff after hundreds of voting irregularities were found.
Mr.
Del Toro has returned to challenge Mr.
Powell.
The Del Toro name carries clout in East Harlem, where most of the district's residents live.
Mr.
Del Toro is a minister and the brother of State Assemblyman Angelo Del Toro.
A wild card in the race is a third candidate, Francisco Diaz Jr.
Mr.
Diaz, who is on leave from his job as district manager of Community Board 11, has the backing of Congressman Charles B. Rangel.
All candidates claim to have toiled in different arenas to help solve the district's most pressing problems: drugs, crime, poor services and a housing shortage.
But the outcome may be decided less on issues than on political alliances and the influence of the candidates' supporters. 9th COUNCIL DISTRICT
No primary. C. Virginia Fields (D-L) is the incumbent. 10th COUNCIL DISTRICT
No primary.
Guillermo Linares (D-L) is the incumbent.
BRONX BOROUGH PRESIDENT  MONICA BRAGGS (D) Real-estate saleswoman; co-founder and chairwoman, CENBRO Local Development Corporation, a community outreach organization in central Bronx; member, N.A.A.C.P.; Executive member (Secretary), Community Board 4 and serves on its Economic Development and Youth committees.
FERNANDO FERRER (D-L) Borough President since 1987; former City Council member, served five years; former chairman, Council Health Committee; former Housing Director in the Bronx Borough President's office; member, N.A.A.C.P.
THE CAMPAIGN: Fernando Ferrer, one of the most powerful Hispanic politicians in the city, is seeking a second full term as Borough President.
He was first elected to the post in 1987 to fill out the term of Stanley Simon, who resigned in a corruption scandal.
Mr.
Ferrer's opponent is a political newcomer, Monica Braggs, who works in real-estate sales.
11th COUNCIL DISTRICT
No primary.
June M. Eisland (D-L) is the incumbent. 12th COUNCIL DISTRICT  CAROLYN J. ALESSANDRO (D) Computer specialist; graduated from Brooklyn College; involved in successful campaign by husband, Francis, for Civil Court Judge in the Bronx in 1990.
SAMUEL BURKE (D) Supervisor of transportation, Montefiore Hospital; former legislative aide to Senator Jeff Korman; member, Community Board 10, serves on Health and Human Services Committee; member, Public School 178 Parents Association; member, N.A.A.C.P.
LAWRENCE A. WARDEN (D-L) City Council member elected in 1991; former health care administrator; member, N.A.A.C.P.
THE CAMPAIGN: Old political scores are being settled here.
Councilman Warden was first elected in 1991 with the help of the Bronx Democratic chairman, George Friedman, but then backed an insurgent bid led by Larry Seabrook to oust Mr.
Friedman.
That failed, and now Mr.
Warden now finds his renomination challenged by Mr.
Burke, a party district leader endorsed by Mr.
Friedman.
Both candidates are black, but Mr.
Burke's home base is Co-op City, which has a heavily voting white population.
But Mr.
Warden also has support in Co-op City, the advantage of incumbency and the Seabrook faction's backing. 13th COUNCIL DISTRICT
No primary. Michael DeMarco (D-R-C) is the incumbent. 14th COUNCIL DISTRICT
No primary. Israel Ruiz Jr. (D-L) is the incumbent. 15th COUNCIL DISTRICT
No primary.
Jose Rivera (D-L) is the incumbent. 16th COUNCIL DISTRICT  WENDELL FOSTER (D-L) City Council member elected in 1978; minister, Christ Church; Chairman, International Intergroup Relations Committee; member, Finance, Education and Parks Committees; member, N.A.A.C.P., World Peace Council and the Urban League; Founder, Bronx Shepherds Restoration Corporation, which builds low-income housing.
CARMELO SAEZ JR. (D) Community advocate; management consultant; President, School Board 9; former member, Community Board 4; former director, Development of Youth Inc., a private nonprofit center for youth; former executive director, Alianza, a federation of Hispanic organizations in the Bronx.
THE CAMPAIGN: This contest pits a longtime minister against the chief of a scandal-ridden school board.
The Rev.
Wendell Foster has served on the Council 15 years.
His challenger, Mr.
Saez, was removed as school board president in District 9 last year, accused of mismanaging funds and using school equipment for private business.
The district suffers from low reading scores.
Nine board members have been arrested in cases involving theft, extortion, kickback and abuse of office.
Denying wrongdoing himself, Mr.
Saez won re-election to the board this year.
Mr.
Foster raised a hefty $76,088 campaign chest by Aug. 13.
Mr.
Saez did not file a financial report by the deadline. 17th COUNCIL DISTRICT  RAFAEL CASTANEIRA COLON (D) City Council member elected in 1981; Chairman, Civil Service and Labor Committee.
DAVID ROSADO (D-L) New York State Assemblyman (74th Assembly District), elected 1990; former district leader; former member, Community Board 2 and Area Policy Board 2; former member, Community Board 1; Youth Coordinator, New York City Youth Bureau; administrative, alcoholism rehabilitation program; former machinist and garment worker.
ANDREW EATMON JR. (D) A Legal Aid lawyer.
THE CAMPAIGN: Despite a 704-count indictment accusing Councilman Colon of stealing $389,000 in city funds, he proclaimed his innocence and continued his reelection bid.
Prosecutors said he cashed paychecks for phantom employees and also voted from a false home address.
Before being indicted, his career was already troubled.
Democratic leaders and Ramon Valez, the powerful local head of private social service agencies, abandoned Mr.
Colon after his girlfriend accused him of assault in a child support dispute.
There were accusations that he lived outside the council district.
Earlier, Mr.
Colon's ex-wife said his failure to pay alimony forced her onto welfare.
The new candidate backed by the party and Mr.
Velez is Assemblyman Rosado.
Andrew Eatmon Jr. ran for this seat in 1991, but Mr. Colon prevailed.
A fourth contender, Rafael Mendez, a perennial candidate from the radical New Alliance Party, was removed from the primary ballot for lack of sufficient signatures in August, but he remains on the ballot in November as an Independent.
Financial filings on Aug. 13 showed Mr.
Colon had raised $39,1756.
State filings showed that Mr.
Rosado had $1,300 in loans and contributions. 18th COUNCIL DISTRICT
No primary. Lucy Cruz (D-L) is the incumbent. QUEENS BOROUGH PRESIDENT
There is no primary. Claire Shulman (D) is the incumbent.
19th COUNCIL DISTRICT
ANTHONY P. AVELLA JR. (D-L) Columnist, "The Courier"; president, Joint Community Council of College Point; former Queens coordinator, Mayor's Community Assistance Unit; former member, Community Board 7.
EDWARD S. GITKIND (D) Special projects manager, New York City Department of Environmental Protection; former production manager; executive member, Bayside High School P.T.A..
No Republican primary.
Michael J. Abel (R-C) is the incumbent.
THE CAMPAIGN: Whoever wins this race faces a bigger challenge in November, opposing Mr.
Abel in this district dominated by Republican voters.
Democratic leaders are lined up for Mr.
Avella.
In the 1991 primary, Mr.
Avella placed second among 10 candidates, the Council's most crowded contest that year.
This time he faces only Mr.
Gitkind, a business and government manager. 20th COUNCIL DISTRICT
No primary. Julia Harrison (D-L) is the incumbent. 21st COUNCIL DISTRICT
No primary. Helen M. Marshall (D-L) is the incumbent. 22d COUNCIL DISTRICT
No primary. Peter F. Vallone (D) is the incumbent. 23d COUNCIL DISTRICT
No primary. Sheldon S. Leffler (D-L) is the incumbent. 24th COUNCIL DISTRICT
No primary. Morton Povman (D) is the incumbent. 25th COUNCIL DISTRICT
No primary. John D. Sabini (D-L) is the incumbent. 26th COUNCIL DISTRICT
No primary.
Walter L. McCaffrey (D-L) is the incumbent. 27th COUNCIL DISTRICT  GARTH MARCHANT (D) Former radio reporter, WLIB; former assistant to the Superintendent, Community School District 23.
ARCHIE SPIGNER (D-L) City Council member elected in 1973; chairman, Housing and Buildings Committee; member, National Association for the Advancement of Colored People.
THE CAMPAIGN: Councilman Spigner, who in 18 years in office has risen to deputy majority leader, trounced Mr.
Marchant in 1991 with 70 percent of the vote.
For this return match, Mr.
Spigner had $111,975 in campaign funds on hand on Aug. 13, one of the largest campaign treasuries in the Council, while Mr.
Marchant had $1,022.
28th COUNCIL DISTRICT  ALLAN W. JENNINGS JR. (D) Former investigator, New York City Department of Correction; former Democratic district leader, 31st Assembly District; former legislative adviser to New York State Assemblyman John Duane.
THOMAS WHITE JR. (D-L) City Council member elected in 1991; founder and chief executive officer, Jamaica Community Adolescent Program (J-CAP); member, Aging, Contracts, Economic Development and Environmental Protection Committees.
THE CAMPAIGN: Councilman White swept nearly half the total vote when he won in 1991 against five primary opponents.
Mr.
Jennings, a district leader at odds with the county party, placed fourth with 9 percent of the vote.
This time he is the only challenger.
Mr.
White is a district leader, too, and is outspending his opponent.
Mr.
White, who runs a state-financed drug rehabilitation program, denied critics' charges that he pressured clients and workers to do political chores.
He said there were 27 campaign workers, all voluntary, from 500 people in the program.  29th COUNCIL DISTRICT
No primary. Karen Koslowitz (D-L) is the incumbent. 30th COUNCIL DISTRICT
No primary.
Thomas V. Ognibene (R-C) is the incumbent. 31st COUNCIL DISTRICT  EDWARD J. LEWIS (D) Business developer; marketing specialist; former director, Mayor's Office of African-American and Caribbean Affairs; member, N.A.A.C.P.; board member, Southeast Queens Park Association; vice chairman, Area Policy Board.
JUANITA E. WATKINS (D-L) City Council member elected in 1991; former Commissioner, New York City Civil Service Commission; former schoolteacher; former editor, McGraw-Hill Inc.
THE CAMPAIGN: Councilwoman Watkins eked out an initial victory of a few dozen votes out of 9,000 cast in 1991.
The margin was so thin that a judge ordered a runoff with the runner-up from her eight opponents.
She won that second primary by more than 1,200 votes.
This time her only challenger is Mr.
Lewis.
By Aug. 13, her campaign had raised $41,476 to his $3,530. 32d COUNCIL DISTRICT
No primary. Walter Ward (D-C) is the incumbent. BROOKLYN BOROUGH PRESIDENT
There is no primary. Howard Golden (D) is the incumbent. 33d COUNCIL DISTRICT
No primary. Kenneth K. Fisher (D-L) is the incumbent.
34th COUNCIL DISTRICT  F. LOUIS CARABALLO (D) Lawyer in private practice.
Candidate for State Assembly in 54th District in 1992.
VICTOR L. ROBLES (D-L) City Council member, has served nine years; chairman, Youth Committee; supports creation of all-civilian complaint review board.
THE CAMPAIGN: Councilman Robles has served nine years on Council and six in State Assembly.
In four-way primary in 1991, he swept half the vote and led nearest rival by 2,600.
His sole opponent this time, Mr.
Caraballo, is a lawyer and community activist who ran unsuccessfully for Assembly last year. 35th COUNCIL DISTRICT
No primary. Mary Pinkett (D-L) is the incumbent. 36th COUNCIL DISTRICT
No primary. Annette M. Robinson (D-L) is the incumbent. 37th COUNCIL DISTRICT
No primary.
Martin Malave-Dilan (D-L) is the incumbent. 38th COUNCIL DISTRICT  JOAN GRIFFIN McCABE (D) City Council member elected in 1991; former policy analyst, Public Education Association; member, Public School 154 P.T.A.; opposed Brooklyn Navy Yard Incinerator.
JOHN K. O'HARA (D) Lawyer in private practice; former cabdriver; member, Community Board 7 and Area Policy Board; chairman, Youth Services Committee of Community Board 7; candidate for City Council in 1991.
MIGDALIA RIVERA (D-L) President, New York Paralegal School, a private school she co-founded; interior designer.
THE CAMPAIGN: This strangely shaped district was designed to give Hispanic voters a majority and a Council member.
But nine contenders crowded the 1991 ballot, including three Hispanics and a black who split the minority vote.
The upshot was that Ms.
McCabe, who is white, won with 22 percent.
This time the contest's ethnic makeup is reversed.
Hispanic groups unified behind a single candidate, Ms.
Rivera, who also has important union support.
The second challenger, Mr.
O'Hara, competes with Councilwoman McCabe's ethnic base.
He drew 10 percent of the 1991 vote.
Party organization leaders also oppose Ms.
McCabe, who says she is too independent for their liking.
Despite the odds, she is running hard, has her own organization and by Aug. 13 had raised $47,979, more than double the total for her two opponents. 39th COUNCIL DISTRICT
No primary.
Stephen DiBrienza (D-L) is the incumbent. 40th COUNCIL DISTRICT  UNA CLARKE (D-L) City Council member elected in 1991; former educational consultant, Human Resources Administration; supports creation of all-civilian complaint board; member of Committee on Youth, Health and General Welfare.
ERNEST N. FOSTER (D) Businessman, has worked in catering and restaurants, real estate and building management; member, N.A.A.C.P.; supports creation of all-civilian complaint board; former member, Area Policy Board 14.
THE CAMPAIGN: Ms.
Clarke became the first Caribbean-born Council member when she narrowly won a three-way primary in 1991.
This year she has one challenger, Mr.
Foster, an American-born black.
He has allied himself with Alton Maddox and Al Sharpton and contends that blacks in Flatbush are "under 100 percent white control." Ms.
Clarke claims broad support and by Aug. 13 had raised $52,195, compared with $3,300 for her opponent. 41st COUNCIL DISTRICT  ATCHUDTA BARKR (D) Union organizer; organizer, National Union of Health and Human Service Employees; former P.T.A. president, Boys and Girls High School.
ENOCH H. WILLIAMS (D) City Council member for 15 years; former executive director, Housing Development Corporation; member of the Brooklyn chapter of New York City Council of Churches; member, N.A.A.C.P. and New York Urban League; chairman, Health Committee.
THE CAMPAIGN: Mr.
Williams, a longtime Council member and chairman of its Health Committee, won the 1991 primary by a ratio of 2-to-1.
But his challenger this year, Ms.
Barkr, is supported by several liberal and labor groups.
Their Aug. 13 campaign financial filings showed him far ahead, with $30,250 to her $1,795.  42d COUNCIL DISTRICT
SANDY BENDER JR. (D) Administrative assistant to New York State Assemblyman William Frank Boyland; former civil servant, worked in Department of Social Services; former day care teacher; regional representative of Community Action Board for Area Policy Boards 5 and 16; former chairman, Area Policy Board 16.
DIANE GORDON (D)  PRISCILLA A. WOOTEN (D-L) City Council member since 1982; former assistant to the Board of Education; chairwoman, Education Committee; member, Finance and Land Use Committees; member, N.A.A.C.P.
THE CAMPAIGN: After a decade on the Council, Ms.
Wooten faces two challengers.
She is supported by the party organization, unions and the local United States Representative, Edolphus Towns.
One opponent, Mr.
Bender, has been outpacing her in fund-raising.
By Aug. 13 he had raised $25,888, exceeding her $19,675.
The other challenger is Diane Gordon, who is backed by a party district leader who has a longstanding rivalry with Ms.
Wooten. 43d COUNCIL DISTRICT
No primary.
Sal F. Albanese (D-L) is the incumbent. 44th COUNCIL DISTRICT  SANDY ABBY ABOULAFIA (D) Businesswoman; personnel agent and data processing manager; member, Community Board 12; endorsed by Brooklyn Women's Political Caucus, Kings County Democratic Coalition and Progressive Democratic Club; candidate for City Council in 1991.
NOACH DEAR (D) City Council member since 1983; chairman, Transportation Committee; former district manager, Community Board 12; endorsed by Brooklyn Borough President, Howard Golden.
THE CAMPAIGN: Councilman Dear, who nearly lost in 1991 to Robert J. Miller, is breathing easier this year.
He has one opponent, Sandy Abby Aboulafia, who drew 7 percent of the vote as the third-place candidate the last time.
Mr.
Dear is counting on his many endorsements, party organization support and an extraordinary campaign treasury of more than $90,000 as of Aug. 13, compared with $24,465 for Ms.
Aboulafia.
His July 13 financial report showed he had spent another $99,363, ranking him among the top Council campaign spenders, according to the New York Public Interest Research Group, which monitors the filings. 45th COUNCIL DISTRICT  LLOYD HENRY (D-L) Headmaster, St.
Augustine's Day School; rector, St.
Augustine's Church; member, Community Board 17, N.A.A.C.P., Kiwanis and the Boy Scouts of America.
COLIN A. MOORE (D) Lawyer in private practice; former Assistant District Attorney in the Bronx; former Law Clerk with State Attorney General's Office; member, 29th Street Block Association.
JANICE L. ROBERTSON (D) Community organizer; founder and president, East 49th Street Block Association of Flatlands Inc.; member, 63d Precinct Community Council; member, Public School 203 P.T.A.; endorsed by Kings County Democratic Coalition; candidate for City Council in 1991.
THE CAMPAIGN: This is shaping up as one of the city's most contentious Council battles.
Carved out two years ago to encourage minority candidates, the largely working-class district is 75 percent black.
Susan D. Alter, who is white, managed to keep the seat in 1991 by capturing the Jewish vote in the primary; she is abandoning her seat to run for Public Advocate and is endorsing Ms.
Robertson, a black American-born community advocate.
Colin Moore, a 52-year-old Guyana-born lawyer who has developed a citywide reputation through his involvement in high-profile cases, came in second to Ms.
Alter in 1991 and considers himself the logical heir to both the seat and the support of Democratic Party officials in Brooklyn.
But the party has instead backed Lloyd Henry, a 45-year-old Belize-born Episcopal minister and newcomer to politics.
An unusually wide array of elected officials are stumping for Mr.
Henry, including the Manhattan Borough President, Ruth W. Messinger, a United States Representative, Edolphus Towns, and Mayor David N. Dinkins.  46th COUNCIL DISTRICT
No primary.
Herbert E. Berman (D-L) is the incumbent. 47th COUNCIL DISTRICT  HOWARD L. LASHER (D-L) New York State Assemblyman since 1972; lawyer; chairman, Assembly Committees on Child Care, Housing and Insurance; member, Fraternal Order of Masons.
JOEL M. MICHAELS (D) Lawyer; former executive director, Jewish Community Council of Greater Brighton; member, Brighton Neighborhood Association and Nottingham Association; former social worker; a candidate for City Council (48th District) in 1991.
SHELDON PLOTNICK (D) owner of bookkeeping and financial services company; member, Community School Board 21; current member, Community Board 13; former Democratic State Committeeman.
THE CAMPAIGN: Councilman Samuel Horwitz's retirement set off a brutal fight to succeed him.
For 21 years Mr.
Plotnick served on the community board and as school board president and local party leader.
For 21 years, Mr.
Lasher served as the local Assemblyman, gaining seniority to head committees.
Both sides are slinging charges: That Mr.
Plotnick used the schools for patronage and nepotism, including a job for his mother and promotions for his wife; that Mr.
Lasher took donations from insurance companies when he headed the Insurance Committee, and that he keeps a one-bedroom apartment to qualify for the Council district but his four-bedroom home is a few blocks over the border.
Although their Aug. 13 filings showed that Mr.
Plotnick outspent Mr.
Lasher by nearly double, $55,017 to $28,213, Mr.
Plotnick said Mr.
Lasher used his Assembly apparatus for mailings to voters.
The third candidate, Mr.
Michaels, said the others represent the abuses of entrenched politicians.
Brooklyn's Democratic chairman, Clarence Norman, calling the contest "a slugfest all the way," made no predictions or endorsements. 48th COUNCIL DISTRICT  ALEXANDER STABER (D) Retired businessman, appliance repair; co-chairman, Brooklyn-wide Interagency Council of the Aging; vice president, American Association of Retired Persons, Flatbush Chapter; member, Straphangers Campaign; opposed rebuilding the Southwest Brooklyn incinerator.
ANTHONY DAVID WEINER (D) City Council member, elected in 1991; former aide to Representative Charles E. Schumer.
THE CAMPAIGN: Councilman Weiner squeaked into office in the six-way 1991 primary by a margin of slightly more than 100 votes.
He faces only one challenger this time, Mr.
Staber, a longtime activist on health, the elderly, war veterans and housing who has run for office often but unsuccessfully.
Their Aug. 13 financial reports showed Mr.
Weiner had raised $26,675 and Mr.
Staber $7,737. 50th COUNCIL DISTRICT
No primary. John A. Fusco (R-C) is the incumbent. STATEN ISLAND BOROUGH PRESIDENT
There is no primary. Guy V. Molinari (R) is the incumbent.
49th COUNCIL DISTRICT
No primary. Jerome X. O'Donovan (D-C) is the incumbent.
50th COUNCIL DISTRICT
No primary. John A. Fusco (R-C) is the incumbent.
51st COUNCIL DISTRICT
No primary. Alfred C. Cerullo 3d (R-C) is the incumbent.


Rochester Retrenches as Kodak Cuts Work Force
The Eastman Kodak Company had always been there for Mark Assini, even paying his college bills 13 years ago.
But the investment that Kodak made in his education was not enough to save his job.
Mr.
Assini's election to the Monroe County Legislature last fall did not help either.


SEPT. 5-11: Elders Is Confirmed; Surgeon General Who Gives As Good as She Gets
For the new Surgeon General, Dr.
Joycelyn Elders, little has come easy.
Born into a Depression-era family of 10, all crammed in a three-room cabin in the Arkansas backwoods, she conquered poverty and bias and became not just a noted black physician, but the top state health officer under Gov.
Bill Clinton.
But none of that prepared her for the open-fire roasting that conservatives administered before the Senate finally voted last week, 65 to 34, to confirm her nomination.
To the critics, the nomination was a smorgasbord of red-meat ideological issues: Dr.
Elders supports early childhood sex education, and they do not; she favors offering condoms through high-school health offices, and they do not; she is an adamant supporter of abortion rights; and they, equally adamantly, are not.


Permit Parking Encroaches On Boerum Hill Residents
To the Editor:
The persistent and ever-increasing problem of privileged parking for politicians and bureaucrats in Boerum Hill speaks to the heart of good government.
It puts an unacceptable personal burden on those of us who live here, and it makes a mockery of the heroic urban renewal in this neighborhood.


The Focus On Fashion
The Costume Institute at the Met previewed its 'Versailles 1973' show, Sept. 8.


Integration: A Two-Way Street
To the Editor:
We are writing in response to Stuart Hoffman's letter regarding Jill Nelson's article on her summers at Oak Bluffs.
Mr.
Hoffman wrote that "blacks no longer need to live racially isolated lives" and called on a "critical mass" of successful black people to integrate themselves into mainstream society.


On Sunday; Fresh Foods With a Dash of Sociology
THERE was no denying the social interaction as the talkative shopper squeezed the tomatoes and loudly told her friend at the adjacent blueberry bin: "He's got to get by his psychological block and do it. I told him myself."
The passing wisp of urban colloquy seemed to be about a relationship that was going soft far more quickly than the gleaming tomatoes and lush blueberries arrayed in a corner of the farmers' market outside Brooklyn Borough Hall.
The blueberry listener, attentive to friend and fruit alike, affirmed, "Absolutely. Absolutely," as the two shoppers wandered farther into the sidewalk cornucopia.
All nuances regarding relationships and rutabagas seemed welcome, even triumphal, on a Tuesday business morning.


Around Holland Tunnel, a Deadly Jam
The traffic congestion around the Holland Tunnel has grown dramatically over the last few years.
So has the area's pedestrian death toll.
Eight pedestrians have been killed in traffic along Kenmare and Broome Streets since 1986, when the toll for eastbound traffic on the Verrazano-Narrows Bridge was doubled and the toll westbound was eliminated.
Tractor-trailers intended for interstate expressways began clogging the narrow streets of SoHo and TriBeCa to take advantage of the free outbound ride in the tunnel.


School Plan Threatens Stores
After hanging on for years despite hovering crime and surrounding economic decline, a group of merchants along Webster Avenue are facing a new threat: a plan to build a big new school to ease the painful overcrowding in the neighborhood's other schools.
The area has been populated by generations of immigrants, these days largely from Caribbean countries like the Dominican Republic.
Affordable space is in great demand, sometimes to the point that the new immigrants double up in the apartments of relatives who came a few years earlier.
Some of these new immigrants have school-age children.


New State Policy on Sex Harassment
ON Sept. 1, a far-reaching, uniform policy to prevent and eradicate sexual harassment in state government took effect for all New Jersey state departments.
The policy, which was established on Aug. 25 by Gov.
Jim Florio and Anthony J. Cimino, Commissioner of the Department of Personnel, applies to the estimated 120,000 state employees, including state colleges and universities and state authorities.


In Chinatown, A Food Fight
The Silver Palace, which in 1981 became Chinatown's first unionized restaurant, is writing another new chapter in its labor relations.
It has locked out the union and is being picketed.
The popular restaurant, which opened in 1976 as New York's first Hong Kong-style dim sum mega-parlor and banquet hall, says it must cut costs because of the recession and new competition from banquet halls.


Mutual Funds; Risky, Expensive -- Also Rewarding
MR.
KAUFMANN would be proud.
Lawrence Auriana and Hans Utsch, the team of investment managers who took over the nearly defunct Kaufmann Fund in 1986, brushed it off, spruced it up and built one of the best five-year track records in the business.
The fund has returned 24.2 percent a year, on average, through August, according to Morningstar Inc., Chicago-based fund researchers.
The team's area of expertise is the fast-moving and tricky universe of small-capitalization growth stocks -- which means the fund is not for the faint of heart.
Stocks like that can shoot up fast, and fall as hard: in 1987, for example, the fund lost a hefty 37 percent.


They'd Rather Be Jamming
ON weekends, Phillipe Kahn, the highly visible chief executive of the software powerhouse Borland International, disguises himself in a fake mustache, dark glasses and hat, and joins a group of musician friends to play his flute at weddings and bar mitzvahs in Silicon Valley.
"I play the theme from 'The Godfather' or Whitney Houston's latest hit," Mr.
Kahn said.
"I do it for fun."


LETTERS TO THE NEW JERSEY EDITOR
A recent article, "Battle Forming Over Teachers' Lifetime License," described three proposals to end New Jersey's practice of granting teachers lifetime certification and mentioned critics' charges that the proposals represent an indirect attack on the state's tenure law.
The article drew a number of letters to the editor, including these.
I agree that teachers need a continuing staff development program that would insure a lifetime commitment to the teaching career.
As a first-year teacher in graduate school, I feel it should be mandatory for all teachers to participate in staff development every year in the subject they teach.


THE ANGUISHED POLITICS OF BREAST CANCER
I delayed writing this letter a week because I was hoping that time would dissolve some of the frustration I felt after reading Susan Ferraro's article.
Although the goal is on target and money is desperately needed to fund research, was it necessary to paint such a negative picture?


Alice Iglehart, Bruce Schwartz
Alice Whitridge Iglehart, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Iredell W. Iglehart of Baltimore, was married yesterday to Bruce Joseph Schwartz, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Joseph J. Schwartz of North Merrick, L.I.
The Rev.
Santvoord Merle-Smith performed the ceremony at the Keene Valley (N.Y.) Congregational Church.
Mrs.
Schwartz is a lecturer on the educational staff of the Metropolitan Museum of Art in New York, where her husband is a photographer.
She graduated from Denison University and received a master's degree in museum education from the Bank Street College of Education.


The Joffrey and Prince: An Odd Couple
With its new ballet "Billboards" the Joffrey has something any arts organization would kill for these days -- a fun controversy.
Since the work, choreographed to 13 songs by the rock star Prince, had its premiere at the University of Iowa in January, it has toured the country, raking in crowds of a size and ebullience unusual in the ballet world, and generating reviews that range from the pretty good (Anna Kisselgoff of The New York Times called certain sections "impressive") to the very bad ("tasteless, vapid and silly," sneered Martin Bernheimer of The Los Angeles Times).
When the Joffrey Ballet performs "Billboards" during the troupe's engagement at the Brooklyn Academy of Music starting on Nov. 9 as part of the Next Wave Festival, New Yorkers will get a chance to see what all the fuss is about.
Is the piece a milestone for the Joffrey or a detour down the wrong path?


Reeves Is Wrong
To the Sports Editor:
The banishment of Pepper Johnson by Dan Reeves elicits several thoughts.
First, the powers that be made the first mistake by not rehiring Bill Parcells.
He had proved that he could field a winning team and that he knew how to handle men.


Sound Bytes; The Competition Gives Away Its Product. What, Him Worry?
Scott Cook may soon be keeping track of your money from the time it enters your hands until it is pried from your fingers by the Internal Revenue Service.
Mr.
Cook is chief executive of Intuit Inc. of Menlo Park, Calif., which makes Quicken, the most popular personal finance program for personal computers.
Intuit recently announced it would merge with Chipsoft Inc., maker of Turbotax, the leading PC tax preparation program.


Viacom to Announce Deal to Acquire Paramount
Paramount Communications Inc. and Viacom Inc. are expected to announce a deal today in which Viacom will acquire Paramount for $69 a share in stock and cash.
Both boards are expected to approve the deal at midday, people close to the negotiations said yesterday.
The transaction has a market value of $8.28 billion, making the merger of the two media companies, both based in New York City, the largest after the 1989 marriage of Time Inc. and Warner Communications.


Coping With New York
The City, a new weekly section for New Yorkers, will report on strategies for surviving the alluring but maddening place more than seven million call home.
It will also report on neighborhood issues and personalities, businesses and institutions.
And it will give New Yorkers a new outlet for opinions on city life.


Naming Names
To the Editor:
Just because there are no double nicknames in Robert Plunket's family does not mean that they do not exist.
In my family, I grew up with the double name Bess Pat (from Bess Paterson), and my first cousin was called Mary Sub (from Mary Sublette).
My grandmother had a friend who was called Aunt Pitty-Pat (I never knew her real name).
When I wassick and lost a lot of weight, my mother said I was like Aunt Pitty-Pat, who "just wasted away." Double names are still being used today.
One of my young cousins is called Ann Chappell, and the daughter of a friend is known as Ann Spencer.
I played bridge recently with a woman called Sue Marie.


Penn State Escapes By Barest of Margins
A pass into the end zone on a 2-point conversion play with 37 seconds left failed by an inch for Southern California today and the Trojans just missed pulling one of the major upsets of the young season.
Penn State (2-0) persevered to win, 21-20, in a game lacking in suspense or anxiety for the crowd of 95,992 until late in the fourth quarter.


Nerds Have Mothers, Too
To the Editor:
It's the 90's and I am amazed that we are still reading about bright and ambitious women who are unusual not because they are bright and ambitious, but because they are women with these qualities.


Steven A. Cash and Lisan Martin
Lisan Martin, a psychotherapist in New York, and Steven Abram Cash, an assistant district attorney in Manhattan, were married yesterday in Poughkeepsie, N.Y.
Justice Albert Rosenblatt of the Appellate Division of State Supreme Court in Brooklyn performed the ceremony at the Vassar College Alumnae House.
Ms.
Martin, who is keeping her name, works at the Jewish Board of Family and Children's Services.
She graduated from Brown University and received a master's degree in social work from New York University.
She is the daughter of Astrid B. Martin of Brooklyn, an administrator with the New York City Human Resources Administration.


Don't Just Fume. Phone.
How many times has it happened?
You lie in bed listening to your unaccomplished saxophone-playing upstairs neighbor practice for the sixth night in a row.
Or you notice that the light at the end of your street is out again.
Or an airline lost your luggage in Des Moines.
These are the kinds of things that annoy you incredibly, then pass through your mind.
You should complain, you want to complain, but you haven't a clue who to complain to.


The Faculty Is Not United On CUNY Reorganization
To the Editor:
The report on the City University of New York ("Faculty Leaders at CUNY Vote to Condemn Chancellor," July 28) leaves the impression that CUNY faculty are united in opposition to Chancellor W. Ann Reynolds's efforts to consolidate CUNY's academic programs.
The faculty is not at all united.


City May Buy Covenant Site
In the face of two major obstacles, asbestos and a hostile community, the Dinkins administration has signed a one-year option to buy Covenant House's buildings in Chelsea for use as an assessment center for homeless families.
The signing comes five years after Mayor David N. Dinkins's predecessor, Edward I. Koch, tried but failed to keep Covenant House from buying two buildings that were the former National Maritime Union headquarters at Ninth Avenue and 17th Street.
Under the terms of an option that runs until July 31, 1994, the financially strugglingh Covenant House, which once operated the nation's largest shelter network for young people, would sell the buildings for $13,750,000, said James J. Harnett, executive vice president of the charitable organization.


Stepping Up The Possibilities
To the Editor:
As executive director of the Dance Notation Bureau, I was pleased to read Jack Anderson's essay "Putting Dances in a Safe Place"  [ Aug. 1 ] .
At the bureau we have long been advocating a combination of film and notation, with an awareness of the proper use of each.


Amy Love Wright, Stephen Kiernan
Amy Love Wright, a daughter of Mrs.
Norton Stevens of New York and the late Philip Campbell Wright, was married yesterday to Stephen Patrick Gerard Kiernan, a son of Mrs.
Robert F. Callahan of New York and the late Peter Kiernan Jr.
The Rev.
Hugh Hines, a Roman Catholic priest, and the Rev.
Gary Kowalski, a Unitarian Universalist minister, officiated at the Mead Chapel of Middlebury (Vt.) College.
The bride, a designer of hooked rugs, owns A. L. W. Rugs in Middlebury.
She and her husband graduated from Middlebury College.
Her stepfather, Mr.
Stevens,, is an investor and management consultant and the former chairman of the Norlin Corporation, a diversified manufacturing company and supplier of office support systems in New York.


PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: September 12, 1993
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Fiction
1
37
RISING SUN, by Michael Crichton. (Ballantine, $5.99.) The investigation of a woman's death involves the American-Japanese rivalry.
2
3
THE STARS SHINE DOWN, by Sidney Sheldon. (Warner, $5.99.) A businesswoman's fortunes are imperiled by past and present secrets.
3
30
THE PELICAN BRIEF, by John Grisham. (Island/Dell, $6.99.) A law student probes the murder of two Supreme Court justices.
4
85
THE FIRM, by John Grisham. (Island/Dell, $6.99.) A young lawyer learns that his firm is engaged in secret, possibly illegal activities.
5*
14
CONGO, by Michael Crichton. (Ballantine, $5.99.) An American team seeks to discover why a group of archeologists died among ruins.
6
74
A TIME TO KILL, by John Grisham. (Island/Dell, $6.99.) Racial tensions surface during the trial of a man charged with murder.
7
60
JURASSIC PARK, by Michael Crichton. (Ballantine, $6.99.) A biotechnician clones dinosaurs for use in a theme park.
8*
21
SPHERE, by Michael Crichton. (Ballantine, $5.99.) Four scientists explore an alien spaceship found on the ocean floor.
9
10
COLONY, by Anne Rivers Siddons. (Harper Paperbacks, $6.50.) A 90-year-old woman recalls her summers at a Maine resort.
10
11
ALL THAT REMAINS, by Patricia D. Cornwell. (Avon, $5.99.) Searching for the truth behind the strange deaths of five young couples in Virginia.
11
6
ALL THE PRETTY HORSES, by Cormac McCarthy. (Vintage, $12.) The adventures of a 16-year-old Texas vaquero in the Mexico of 1950.
12
5
DECKED, by Carol Higgins Clark. (Dove/Warner, $4.99.) Her former roommate's death haunts a woman during a trans-Atlantic voyage.
13
1
DRAGON TEARS, by Dean Koontz. (Berkley, $6.99.) Two police detectives try to cope with a demonic serial killer in southern California.
14
6
WHERE IS JOE MERCHANT? by Jimmy Buffett. (Avon, $5.99.) On the trail of a dead rock star who has been sighted in the Caribbean.
15*
2
FOREVER IN YOUR EMBRACE, by Kathleen E. Woodiwiss. (Avon, $6.50.) A countess and a soldier of fortune in 17th-century Russia.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Nonfiction
1
4
UH-OH, by Robert Fulghum. (Ivy, $5.99.) Reflections on life's commonplaces.
2
514
THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $10.95.) Inspiration.
3
9
EVERY LIVING THING, by James Herriot. (St. Martin's, $6.99.) The veterinarian's memoirs.
4*
20
THE SILENT PASSAGE, by Gail Sheehy. (Pocket, $5.50.) The psychological and social significance of menopause for today's women.
5*
30
I KNOW WHY THE CAGED BIRD SINGS, by Maya Angelou. (Bantam, $4.99.) The poet's depiction of her childhood and adolescence.
6
17
TRUMAN, by David McCullough. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $15.) A biography of the 33d President.
7
7
A ROSE FOR HER GRAVE, by Ann Rule. (Pocket, $5.99.) Six true-crime stories.
8*
3
I CAN'T BELIEVE I SAID THAT! by Kathie Lee Gifford with Jim Jerome. (Pocket, $5.99.) The autobiography of the television talk-show host.
9
100
A YEAR IN PROVENCE, by Peter Mayle. (Vintage, $10.) A sojourn in the south of France.
10
31
TOUJOURS PROVENCE, by Peter Mayle. (Vintage, $10.) The charms of rustic France.
11*
13
A WORLD LIT ONLY BY FIRE, by William Manchester. (Little, Brown, $11.95.) An account of the Renaissance and the Reformation.
12
121
YOU JUST DON'T UNDERSTAND, by Deborah Tannen. (Ballantine, $10.) The different languages men and women speak.
13
1
SILENT WITNESS, by Don W. Weber and Charles Bosworth Jr. (Onyx, $5.99.) How the mysterious death of a young Illinois woman was solved by the police and forensic scientists.
14*
18
THE GOVERNMENT RACKET, by Martin L. Gross. (Bantam, $7.99.) Examples of waste.
15*
8
ACQUIRED TASTES, by Peter Mayle. (Bantam, $9.95.) Essays on the 1980's.
16*
2
PRINCESS, by Jean P. Sasson. (Avon, $5.50.) Life as lived by a member of the royal family and other women in Saudi Arabia.
17*
17
WHERE THE BLUEBIRD SINGS TO THE LEMONADE SPRINGS, by Wallace Stegner. (Penguin, $11.) Essays on the American West.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Advice, How-To and Miscellaneous
1
134
THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE, by Stephen R. Covey. (Fireside/S&amp;S, $9.95.) Principles to practice in the pursuit of success.
2
150
THE T-FACTOR FAT GRAM COUNTER, by Jamie Pope-Cordle and Martin Katahn. (Norton, $2.99.) How to reduce fat in one's diet.
3
109
LIFE'S LITTLE INSTRUCTION BOOK, by H. Jackson Brown Jr. (Rutledge Hill, $5.95.) A collection of some 500 tips for achieving a self-fulfilling life.
4
15
RAND MCNALLY ROAD ATLAS. (Rand McNally, $7.95.) The 1993 edition of a guide to the United States, Canada and Mexico.
Rankings reflect sales figures, for the week ending Aug. 28, at 3,050 bookstores plus wholesalers serving 38,000 other retailers, statistically weighted to represent sales in all such outlets nationwide.
An asterisk indicates that a book's sales are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.


What the Navy Taught Allen Schindler's Mother
Not far from the laminated portrait of Elvis, high on a shelf in her tumbledown house, sits the only photograph Dorothy Hajdys has of her father, who died in prison when she was 5: a dashing sailor with faraway eyes serving his country in World War II.
The pictures of her first husband -- a man named Allen Schindler who decided he was John the Baptist and, she says, nearly drowned her in the bathtub to prove it -- are not on display.
Water is a running theme in the family: Frank Hajdys, her second husband, was a Navy man as well; before he died in 1985 he regaled their young son, Billy, and his three stepchildren -- Dorothy's two girls and one boy -- with tales of his adventures aboard the battleship Arizona.
The stepson, "little Allen," so called to distinguish him from his biological father, must have taken Frank Hajdys's stories to heart because in 1988, at the age of 18, he signed up and shipped out.
"I thought I was the most proudest mother in the nation," Dorothy has said.
"I THOUGHT I WAS THE MOST PROUDEST MOTHER IN the nation," Dorothy was shouting into a microphone set up in front of the Capitol last April.
A sad curiosity to the general public, which might have caught her on the evening news, Dorothy Hajdys (pronounced HAY-jiss) was a hero to the hundreds of thousands of people gathered before her at the gay-rights march on Washington.
Earlier in the day they had cheered her wildly, this 47-year-old grandmother with the door-hinge voice and battleship proportions, marching at the head of a contingent of veterans and clutching a photograph of her son like a shield.


Looming on the Hudson, a Skeleton of Steel
There is no plaque or sign on the cathedral-like frame of steel pipes and girders at 125th Street and the Hudson River.
For drivers on the Henry Hudson Parkway, who speed past its upper reaches, and for those who walk along the boardwalk in its shadows, the structure is a quiet mystery.
"I don't know what it is," said Paula Dobbs who fishes from the park two or three times a week.
"Sometimes my son climbs on it, but otherwise I haven't found much use for it."


2 Hurt in Fire in Brooklyn
A Brooklyn couple were critically burned yesterday in a suspicious fire that caused heavy damage to the three-story building where they lived at 209 Harrison Avenue in the Williamsburg section, fire officials said.
The victims, Ingrid Percedy, 21, and Arsenio Pagan, 20, were taken to New York Hospital-Cornell Medical Burn Unit.
Firefighter Paul Hudak, a Fire Department spokesman, said Ms.
Percedy suffered serious burns to her legs and arms and Mr.
Pagan was burned over half his body.
"There is evidence of flammable liquid used," he said.


Book on Waldheim Says Wiesenthal Helped Him
A new book on Kurt Waldheim contends that the secret of the former United Nations Secretary General's wartime service in the German Army was first uncovered and then protected by an unlikely ally -- the famed Nazi-hunter, Simon Wiesenthal.
The book, written by Eli M. Rosenbaum, a war-crimes investigator now with the Justice Department, with William Hoffer, contends that Mr.
Waldheim not only played a better-documented role in Nazi atrocities than was previously reported but could not have maintained his secret without the help of Mr.
Wiesenthal.


Miami Unnerved by a Tourist's Killing
As his neighbors remember it, Recondall (Rico) Wiggins spent most of Tuesday night playing cards with them and talking about his baby son's health problems.
So when they heard that police had arrested Mr.
Wiggins and his girlfriend in the killing later that night of Uwe-Wilhelm Rakebrand, a German tourist, they did not know what to think.
"It's crazy and frightening and I can't understand it," said Cindy West, a nursing student who lives in the apartment below the couple and was one of the players that evening.
"How can somebody you know, somebody you see every day, be sitting there playing spades with you, and then 90 minutes later go out and kill that German man?"


THE DEVIL IN LONG ISLAND
My colleagues in the San Francisco legal community waver between awe and anguish at the moxie, born of my Long Island roots, that allows me to claim credit for having a friend who attended homeroom with Billy Joel, and I now know that I went to sleep-away camp with Joel Rifkin.
BONNIE R. COHEN San Francisco


U.S. Envoy Visits Azerbaijan To Promote Ties and Peace
The Clinton Administration's envoy at large for former Soviet republics, Strobe Talbott, arrived today in Azerbaijan on a visit to explore ways of fostering closer ties to the oil-rich but war-torn country and advancing peace efforts in the disputed enclave of Nagorno-Karabakh.


"The Cave"
Steve Reich uses high-tech video and computer gear -- and such low-tech items as live musicians -- to explore the common roots of, and tensions between, Judaism, Islam and Christianity.
Opening on Oct. 13 at the Brooklyn Academy of Music as part of the Next Wave Festival. (Didi Sattmann/Brooklyn Academy of Music)


Sports of The Times; Two Judges Too Quick On the Draw
IF boxing had a conscience, the ties of Texas would be on it.
Pound for pound, Pernell Whitaker deserves to be hailed now as the world's best boxer, but the Norfolk, Va., welterweight known as Sweet Pea must live with the sour memory of a rare majority draw with Julio Cesar Chavez at the Alamodome on Friday night.
Two imported judges, Mickey Vann of England and Franz Marti of Switzerland, each scored the 12-round bout even in points, 115-115.
That created the majority that put Dallas judge Jack Woodruff's 115-113 vote for Whitaker in the minority.
When the draw was announced, the silence in the crowd of some 65,000 was louder than the desperate cheers for Chavez had been in the final rounds.


Gold Plunges, But It Will Rise Again
IT was a cruel end to summer for the gold bugs.
What had looked like the beginnings of a great bull market turned into a rout.
Gold, above $400 an ounce in July, fell below $350 last week.
Now investors must decide if the surge of spring and early summer was a classic example of a small market briefly gone bonkers.
Or if it was an early warning of currency debasement.


"New York Beauties: Quilts From the Empire State"


Who's Perfect Now? Whitaker Claims the Title
Pernell Whitaker looked at himself in the mirror this morning and knew he had won, that he had beaten the symbol of perfection, Julio Cesar Chavez and his 87-0 record.
Yet in an Alamodome that grew muted with each Whitaker flurry Friday night, Chavez escaped before the largest indoor crowd in boxing history, a gathering of about 65,000 fans.
He escaped through something called a majority draw, an oddity of a decision even for this most confusing of sports.
Two of the three judges voted for the draw, with the third judge voting for Whitaker.


Known Names, New Cause
Vanessa Vadim (bottom right), the 24-year-old daughter of Jane Fonda and Roger Vadim, and Rory Kennedy (right), also 24, the youngest daughter of Ethel and Robert F. Kennedy, were born to be political.
That could mean participating in protests or running for office, but instead, the pair recently founded a nonprofit organization in California called May Day Media.
They plan to produce issue-oriented videos that can be used by grass-roots groups.


Reopening: 19th-Century Paintings and Sculpture Galleries


Shazia L. Rafiullah, Samuel S. Miller
Shazia Lynn Rafiullah was married yesterday in Racine, Wis., to Samuel Sanford Miller.
The Rev.
William H. Dummer, a Presbyterian minister, performed a nondenominational ceremony at the home of the bride's parents, Dr. and Mrs.
Mohammed Rafiullah.
The bride will enter the doctoral program in human development and social policy at Northwestern University later this month.
She and her husband are graduates of Northwestern.
Her father is a neurosurgeon in Racine.


Craftsmanship, American To the Core
It's not uncommon to grow up in America believing that home is the graveyard of esthetics, a place where the numbing, comforting everydayness of family life covers even beautiful objects with a pall of invisibility.
It can be hard to see the furnishings of domestic life for what they are simply because they are so thoroughly put to use, more palpable to the hand than to the eye.
That may be why at museums you often find the largest crowds in the gift shops and cafeterias, places where deeply familiar transactions like shopping and eating occur, rather than in the galleries, where the vital strangeness of art is evidenced once more.
And yet the vital strangeness of high art, as well as an oddly moral, almost political appeal, marks the extraordinary objects -- furniture, pottery, silver, textiles -- created for domestic use by the artisans of the American Arts and Crafts movement in the first two decades of this century.
Some 200 of the finest of those objects, drawn from public and private collections across the country, will be gathered at the American Craft Museum for an exhibition, opening on Oct. 21, called "The Ideal Home: 1900-1920," the first of a series of annual shows in the museum's proposed decade-long retrospective of crafts in the 20th century.


LETTERS TO THE NEW JERSEY EDITOR
A recent article, "Battle Forming Over Teachers' Lifetime License," described three proposals to end New Jersey's practice of granting teachers lifetime certification and mentioned critics' charges that the proposals represent an indirect attack on the state's tenure law.
The article drew a number of letters to the editor, including these.
As a tenured teacher of 20 years, I can appreciate the benefits and security of the tenure system.
In many New Jersey school districts, politics is the rule for job selection and advancement, and not necessarily the consideration of skills and confidence of the individual.


Candlewood Offers 'City of Angels'
"SOME nights, they don't get it," said Kim Hanson, the technical director of the Candlewood Playhouse in New Fairfield, who was talking about audience reaction to "City of Angels." That reaction jibes with response to the musical during a performance at the Gateway Playhouse in Bellport, L.I., last month.
"Maybe they're so wrapped up in the story line they forget to laugh, or don't understand the premise," Mr.
Hanson said.
"But other nights, they're vocal and laughter fills the house."


Stories of Sexual Abuse Transform Murder Trial
The defendant wept as he told of killing his parents after years of sexual abuse and a death threat.
So did some of the jurors.
Even some reporters were in tears.
In the first hours of what could be two weeks of testimony from two brothers accused of murdering their wealthy parents four years ago for their inheritance, one defendant, 25-year-old Lyle Menendez, transformed a trial in which some of the jurors had begun to doze off.


13,800 Masochists See Mets Fall Again
Plans for future expansion?
Crowds of 60,000 a game at Mile High Stadium?
The decision to add an extra round of playoffs as of the 1994 season?
Title races in three of the four divisions?
Want perhaps the single greatest evidence that, whatever the cries of poverty from the owners and cries of everything else from the players union, the baseball industry is safe from economic peril?


E. W. Eagleson, K. F. Mackie
Elizabeth West Eagleson, a vice president of the United States Trust Company, and Keith Forsyth Mackie, a vice president of Barclays Bank, were married yesterday.
The couple work in New York.
The Rev.
Rudolf Moore performed the Episcopal ceremony at the Chapel of St.
David's Church in Wayne, Pa.
Mrs.
Mackie graduated from Trinity College in Hartford.
She is the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
William B. Eagleson Jr. of Malvern, Pa.
Her father is the chairman emeritus of the Mellon Bank Corporation in Pittsburgh.


Technology; Transforming Scrawny Trees Into Sinewy Lumber
LAST fall and winter, when lumber prices doubled in five months amid concern about new restrictions on Pacific Northwest logging, many builders reluctantly turned for the first time to wood-composite products.
They liked what they found.
And now, even though lumber prices have settled down, many contractors have embraced this "engineered" structural wood as a good alternative to the long-span rafters, beams and joists formerly available only from Mother Nature's towering timber.
Engineered lumber, pieced together from veneers of shorter logs or wood strands culled from scrawny young "weed" trees like aspen or yellow poplar, can yield beams as long as 80 feet with the help of advanced adhesives and ultrasonic equipment that can measure the strength of small sections of wood.
Although more expensive than natural wood, engineered lumber tends to be stronger and lighter.
And with fewer tall old trees around these days, more and more contractors may soon have no choice but to adopt manufactured timber.


Another Title Likely,Gwynn to Have Surgery
His run at a fifth batting title all but safe and his team is well out of the running for a division championship, so rather than limp through the rest of the season, TONY GWYNN of the San Diego Padres is taking the logical step.
He will undergo arthroscopic surgery today to repair his ailing left knee.
Gwynn, who is leading the National League with a .358 batting average and has enough plate appearances to qualify for the title, made the decision after consulting with a doctor Friday afternoon.
"I think probably the lack of progress the last couple of days is the major concern," said the Padres' manager, JIM RIGGLEMAN.
"Instead of hoping it feels better and playing on a less-than healthy knee, the alternative is to have surgery."


NEIGHBORHOOD REPORT: Upper West Side; Community Garden's Days Dwindle
The City Council voted last week for a plan to build 35 units of housing for the homeless on the site of a 15-year-old community garden on West 84th street.
But the Council's approval of the project had a string attached.
The New York City Housing Authority must move the garden from its current 9,000-square-foot site between Amsterdam and Columbus Avenues.
One proposal: a smaller site across the street in the yard of the Louis D. Brandeis High School.


Carla Pike, Jay Schainholz
Carla Elizabeth Pike, the daughter of Anthony and Constance Pike of Calgary, Alberta, was married there yesterday to Jay David Schainholz, a son of Dr.
Marianne Wolff Schainholz of Teaneck, N.J., and the late Herbert Schainholz.
Rabbi Geoffrey Haber officiated at the Beth Tzedec Synagogue.
Mrs.
Schainholz is the vice president of Pike Surgical in Calgary, a distributor of medical and surgical equipment.
Her father is the company's chief executive and her mother is the president.
The bride graduated from the University of Lethbridge in Alberta.


City's Colleges Add $2 Billion In Facilities
NO ONE is going back to school at the College of Staten Island this month.
Rather, its 12,000 students are traveling to a place they have never been before: a 204-acre campus with 19 buildings, new and old, on the grounds of the infamous Willowbrook State School for the mentally retarded.
Although this $374 million campus is easily the largest academic property under development in New York City, it is by no means the only one.
Major colleges and universities have either launched, planned or recently completed more than three dozen projects -- about $2 billion worth of construction, renovation and acquisition.


Julie A. Simon, Donald Munro
Julie Ann Simon, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
William E. Simon of New Vernon, N.J., was married on Friday to Donald William John Munro, a son of Mrs.
William N. Munro of Sao Paulo, Brazil, and the late Mr.
Munro.
The Rev.
Frederick Schulz officiated at the First Presbyterian Church of East Hampton, L.I.
The Rev.
Andrew Smith, a Roman Catholic priest, took part in the ceremony.
Mrs.
Munro, 29, is a competitive equestrian in San Francisco.
She graduated from the University of Vermont.
Her father, the chairman of William E. Simon &amp; Sons Inc., a private merchant bank in Morristown, N.J., was the Secretary of the Treasury in the Ford Administration and the Deputy Secretary of the Treasury in the Nixon Administration.


"The Red Shoes"


Tent Revival Meetings Gain a Foothold
FOR 44 years, the Rev.
Vincent Giordano, an itinerant Christian evangelist, has spread his message in places ranging from Attica, Ind., to Manila.
This summer, the Vincentown clergyman pitched his 450-seat revival tent in an unlikely place -- the middle of the New Jersey city of Elizabeth.
Defying the summer heat and humidity, he preached for 27 nights in English and Spanish.
"A couple of hundred people" heard the message each night, said Mr.
Giordano, who added that some were sufficiently moved to "make a decision for the Lord," or to have a religious awakening.


What Overworked American?
To the Editor:
Regarding "All Work and No Play: It Doesn't Pay" (Viewpoints, Aug. 29) about the "overworked American" -- experts, or so-called experts, can make figures do whatever they wish.
Even amateurs can do this.


Photos at a Church and a Painting Show
AHN BEHRENS, a writer, and Peter Bill, an artist, have produced two exhibitions here.
One is at the Cathedral Arts Gallery, where they are in-house curators, and the other at the Cooper Gallery, where they are guests.
The first, a photographic anthology titled "Focus '93," must compete with its setting --a formidable task since this is none other than Grace Church Van Vorst.
The Gothic Revival building, at the junction of Erie and Second Streets, was erected in 1852 by a Danish-born architect, Detlef Lienau.
It has an interior that is in mint condition -- a rafter roof, two rows of columns supporting the Gothic arches of a clerestory and pale pink walls relieved by foliate and geometric ornament painted in green and blue around the lancet windows.


NEIGHBORHOOD REPORT: Upper West Side; Residents Win the Latest Battle in the Takeout Menu Wars
After years of protests and "No Menu" signs, angry Upper West Side residents have taken a new tack and won a round in their battle to stop delivery people from papering stoops and doors with takeout menus.
They have persuaded a city agency to order the closing of a prime offender's sidewalk cafe.
The object of their ire is Empire Szechuan Gourmet at Broadway and 97th Street, the flagship of the Empire Szechuan restaurant empire.
The local community board says the restaurant promised to stop distributing its menus.
When it did not, the board convinced the Department of Transportation to oppose the renewal of the license by the Consumer Affairs Department, which is legally bound to follow Transportation's lead.


Buttoned Up
He is not so nice.
It is the first thing that anyone who knows him comes to realize and the last thing that most New Yorkers would ever imagine about David Norman Dinkins, the 106th Mayor of their city and the first black man to hold the job.
Yes, of course, there is a Mayor Dinkins who speaks softly and smiles easily, whose gray-blue eyes exude charm, who greets every man he meets as "buddy" and kisses women's hands, who listens to complaints and weighs opinions, who is quick with figures and has a good memory for detail and who says "most people are good at heart" and seems to believe it.


New State Policy on Sex Harassment
ON Sept. 1, a far-reaching, uniform policy to prevent and eradicate sexual harassment in state government took effect for all New Jersey state departments.
The policy, which was established on Aug. 25 by Gov.
Jim Florio and Anthony J. Cimino, Commissioner of the Department of Personnel, applies to the estimated 120,000 state employees, including state colleges and universities and state authorities.


Learning to Cope With Hard Times
MATTIE CREECH lives in a ground-floor apartment in the Newhallville section of New Haven.
Outside her front door, city buses sit idling and the blare of car stereos rattle the dishes in her cupboard.
While sitting next to a window seat filled with herbs, Mrs.
Creech said she reckoned that the country has been going downhill since the days of Franklin D. Roosevelt.
"But let me add," said the 73-year-old, who retired in 1987 after working 20 years repairing guns for the Olin Corporation, "in the past five years, it's gone completely crazy."


Finding Your Polling Place
New York City primary elections will by held on Tuesday.
Polling places will be open from 6 A.M. to 9 P.M.
Voters will cast ballots for nominees for three citywide offices: mayor, city comptroller and public advocate.


At Pier 62, Start of Plan For Riverfront
It doesn't look like much: a bleak stretch of asphalt with volleyball and basketball courts, picnic tables and an information kiosk.
But the new playground on Pier 62 at 23d Street is the first sign that after two decades of controversy, including the killing of Westway, plans to revitalize this section of the Hudson River waterfront are moving closer to reality.
The Hudson River Park Conservancy, which will eventually manage the redeveloped waterfront from the Battery to 59th Street, installed the playground.
And as limited as it is, it still attracts residents of the area, people who work nearby and summer campers from the local Y.


Unwelcome: Nude Dancers
No one is sure exactly when it is to open, but some people in Jackson Heights are already trying to close Bare Assets, a juice bar in a storefront at 83-15 Northern Boulevard that plans to feature nude female dancers.
Since the State Liquor Authority prohibits nudity in any establishment that sells alcoholic beverages, nude-dancing clubs can sell only nonalcoholic beverages.
H.D.K.
Enterprises, the operator, is not saying when the club will open, but hundreds of people from the neighborhood protested at the site for two nights this month.
And the opponents say they are prepared to return if their message did not get through then -- ready to stage the sort of nightly protests that forced a similar club in Forest Hills to shut down last spring.


Historic Breakthrough? Not Yet. Stay Tuned.
It is too early to declare that we are facing one of the great moments of history.
This has yet to be proved.
We are certainly talking about one of the great opportunities of history, but much will depend on the detailed negotiations which will follow a statement of principles and mutual recognition between Israel and the Palestine Liberation Organization.
Euphoria does not characterize the atmosphere on the eve of the scheduled signing ceremonies in Washington.
It is more an atmosphere of hope mingled with doubt and uncertainty.
Developments could lead to peace, economic prosperity and even confederation.
They could lead to tragedy.


Expect Big Sparks to Fly When Jets Meet Dolphins
Coach Bruce Coslet of the Jets admits that he gets extra juiced up to go against Coach Don Shula of the Miami Dolphins.
And Jets cornerback James Hasty gets charged up to face Miami quarterback Dan Marino.
Like a rock striking flint, there is a spark whenever the Jets and the Dolphins meet.
As Hasty said earlier in the week, the two teams could play in Guadalajara and the electricity would still be there.


Big Pols Don't Cry (Except the Tough Guys)
IN the old days, if a woman wished to escape a difficult encounter, she could plead a case of the vapors and retire to her Victorian fainting couch.
In the modern world, the rules of the crying game are far more complicated.
The question of whether a display of emotion will hurt or help a politician is determined by an exquisitely calibrated set of variables that include sex, circumstance, temperament, amount of water shed, and amount of recomposure time required.


Ronnie Planalp, Stephen Trevor
Ronnie Dell Planalp, the daughter of Sarl M. Planalp of Burke, Va., and the late Dr.
Jack M. Planalp, was married yesterday to Stephen Spaulding Trevor, the son of Leigh B. Trevor of Rocky River, Ohio, and Barbara B. Trevor of Washington.
Dr.
S.
Bernard Issokson, a justice of the peace, officiated at the Chasin Estate on Chappaquiddick Island, Mass.
The bride, 31, graduated from Boston University and received an M.B.A. from Columbia University.


Leprosy's Long History Has Known No Freedom From Stigma
To the Editor:
"Looking to the End of Another Plague" (The Week in Review, Aug 29), on the World Health Organization's progress toward eliminating Hansen's disease (leprosy) opens with the traditional notion that leprosy has been documented since biblical times.
But biblical and medical scholarship have long provided explanations that debunk the concept that leprosy is represented in the Bible.
A careful analysis of the symptoms associated with the condition as described in the Bible by leprologists (known in Hebrew as "saraat") yields no indications that they bear a relationship to those of leprosy.


The View From: Old Saybrook; A Rare Reminder That the Past Has Not Entirely Disappeared
A WALK into James Pharmacy and Soda Fountain at Main Street and Pennywise Lane in Old Saybrook is a walk backward in time.
And you can pick the time.
If you walk to the right, the time is two centuries ago, when the Revolutionary War was a recent memory.
The wood is old and weathered and at the rear is an apothecary alcove that is more in keeping with an ancient mortar and pestle than the computer that is actually there.
If you turn left, past a huge oak phone booth that not even a 1905 superman could overturn, you're in a turn-of-the-century ice cream parlor: Vermont marble soda fountain, little tables and chairs with curved metal backs, reminiscent of a time when sodas were a few pennies and cones for ice cream were handmade.
Actually the cones are still handmade.


Bleary-Eyed Yanks Slap Themselves Awake
The suspense was minimal.
The drama was scant.
The manager's decisions were successful.
The frustration was finally absent.
For one night on this agonizing trip, the Yankees won.
They actually won.
The Yankees blasted three homers in the first inning, overcame an erratic performance by Sterling Hitchcock that allowed the Royals to trim a five-run deficit to one run and rumbled to a 12-5 victory tonight at Kauffman Stadium.
The triumph terminated their season-high four-game losing streak and enabled the Yankees to stay within one game of first-place Toronto with 19 to play.
The Orioles are one and a half games out of first because the three leading contenders in the American League East all won today.


LETTERS TO THE NEW JERSEY EDITOR
A recent article, "Battle Forming Over Teachers' Lifetime License," described three proposals to end New Jersey's practice of granting teachers lifetime certification and mentioned critics' charges that the proposals represent an indirect attack on the state's tenure law.
The article drew a number of letters to the editor, including these.
I am a firm believer that teachers need to be regulated somehow by an outside agency rather than the school board and administrators.
Safeguards for teachers who give 110 percent of themselves are a must.
In a field where respect is almost a nonexistent word, teachers who walk the extra mile must be given a sense of security.


Amsterdam
IT HAS AN ODD NAME for an airport -- Schiphol literally means Ship's Hole -- but it behaves more like a phoenix, reworking and burnishing itself ceaselessly.
Indeed, Amsterdam Airport is so keen to hold onto its reputation as one of Europe's most comfortable, that it keeps expanding services not related to travel.
A breezy new West Wing opened this past May, and, given Schiphol's many distractions, it would be easy to while away a whole day there.
Flight delayed?
Well, this airport will very soon boast a sauna and a casino with gambling tables.
The new terminal hotel provides personal care rooms, where, for a moderate price, you can check in for a few hours for a hot shower or a change of clothes.
A nondenominational chapel has a collection of Bibles and holy books in many languages.
The new business center offers meeting rooms, faxes, secretaries.
Meanwhile, given a little notice, the goldsmith will clean your jewelry.


POSTINGS: Antiques Dealers Leaving; Chanel Taking Over 57th Street Building
For some years, 15 East 57th Street was a building that specialized in the past.
James Robinson, the antique jewelry and silver dealer that owns the building, occupied the ground floor, with five other antiques dealers upstairs.
But soon it will be out with the old, in with the (very) new.
Chanel Inc., the American arm of the French high-fashion company, has taken a 25-year net lease on the six-story building.
By February the last of the antiques dealers should be out, at which point Chanel will start building what will be its new flagship New York store.


A Country Boy's Adventures
NAME: Jon Brennan.
IDENTITY: The 19-year-old Kool-Aid-drinking country singer on MTV's "Real World," a documentary series following the lives of a group of teen-agers and 20-somethings who lived together for five months in a house in Venice, Calif.
The show's 22 episodes are broadcast at 10 P.M. on Thursdays and are repeated on other days at various times.


INSIDE
Florida's Dangerous Game
The death of a German tourist in Florida was hardly random.
Robbers have developed a system for spotting and stalking likely victims.
Page 26.
Bombing Trial Starts Tuesday
The World Trade Center bombing trial, which opens in Manhattan on Tuesday, is likely to be a classic criminal prosecution.
Page 45.
Gunmen Kill Aristide Backer
Gunmen cornered and killed a backer of Haiti's ousted President after a church service in the capital.
Page 8.
Erich Leinsdorf Dies
The conducter, 81, was known for his restrained manner and uncompromising intellect.
Page 58.


RESULTS PLUS
GOLF  Take This Mike and Get Rid of It  Since losing the pain of arthritis and leaving his job as a broadcaster, Bob Murphy has been creating problems for others on the Senior P.G.A.
Tour.
Murphy shot a six-under-par 66 yesterday for a 134 total and a two-stroke lead over three others heading into the final round of the $500,000 GTE North Classic in Indianapolis.
Chi Chi Rodriguez, who had the day's low round of 66, was tied for second with Jim Ferree and Dave Hill.
Ferree, who won the 36-hole Vantage Classic for players 60 and over for the seventh time this year, had his second 68.
Hill had a 67 with the help of an eagle on the 482-yard, par-5 17th.
First-round leader Dave Stockton, seeking his fifth victory this year, was at 137 after a 71.
It was his 14th consecutive sub-par round and he is 56under during the streak.
"I drove it poorly, but I hit good iron shots. It's confusing to me what I'm doing on the driver," said Murphy, who resigned from his job as a golf commentator with ESPN in May to concentrate on playing.
"That was a hard decision, although it was obvious to me that this was getting in the way of my playing golf. After having not played for five years, I needed to be on the ground," Murphy said.


For Balletomanes And Diva Lovers
CAFE DES ARTISTES *** (212) 877-3500; 1 West 67th Street; $ [ c) all major credit cards


Shot Fired in a Scuffle at a Subway Station
A homeless man wrestled a transit policeman's pistol away and fired a shot before he was restrained and arrested yesterday at a Brooklyn subway station, the police said.
No one was seriously injured.
Two officers were taken to Long Island College Hospital in downtown Brooklyn, where they were treated for minor injuries and released, said Albert W. O'Leary, a transit police spokesman.


SEPT. 5-11: Anti-Russian Sentiment; In the Baltics, Pope Finds Domination a Problem Still
Pope John Paul II's first visit to lands once under Soviet rule might have been an occasion for triumph.
Yet when the Pontiff began a tour of the Baltic states last week, his message seemed to be that the battle to supplant Communist dominance with enduring political justice and reconciliation was far from over.
In Lithuania, Latvia and Estonia, the Pope dwelled on the theme he set from the moment he arrived in Vilnius, the Lithuanian capital.
He urged reconciliation between national majorities and ethnic minorities -- in particular the Russians who migrated to the Baltics after the Soviet annexations in World War II.


Libya to Give Decision on Pan Am 103 Suspects
A Libyan envoy is expected here next week to tell Secretary General Boutros Boutros-Ghali whether the Government of Col.
Muammar el-Qaddafi is ready to deliver for trial in Scotland two Libyans accused of complicity in the bombing of a Pan American World Airways plane over Lockerbie, Scotland, in December 1988 that killed 270 people.
If Libya again refuses to turn over the men -- Abdel Basset Ali al-Megrahi and Lamen Khalifa Fhimah -- the United States, Britain and France will ask the Security Council to impose new restrictions on Tripoli beyond those laid down in April 1992, which cut Libya's air links with the rest of the world and banned arms sales to Tripoli.
The new sanctions would seek to ban the sale of oil-drilling and other related equipment to Libya as well a freeze on its foreign bank accounts and other overseas assets.


Allies at Odds With U.S. on Bosnia Command
A dispute is looming between Britain and France on the one hand and the United States on the other after President Clinton said he would send American peacekeeping troops to Bosnia and Herzegovina only if the operation is under the control of NATO, not the United Nations.
Both Britain and France, which already have peacekeepers in Bosnia, want any operation to enforce an eventual peace agreement to be under the ultimate control of the United Nations.


Where the Chinese Go to Play
THE public beaches are often packed like a bus at rush hour, so that sand is scarcely visible through the carpet of towels and sizzling flesh.
But then again it would be a grave mistake for a foreigner to go to Beidaihe in China in search of the perfect beach.
Asia's greatest beaches are in Thailand and Malaysia, and Beidaihe's are too northerly, narrow and crowded to qualify for world renown.
So a trip there is more about China-watching and people-watching than tanning.
Beidaihe (pronounced bay-DIE-huh), on the Bohai Sea 170 miles east of Beijing, is China's most famous seaside resort.
Every year from June to September some five million tourists, mostly Chinese but including foreign diplomats, journalists and business executives who live in China, pass through for sun and sand.


THE DEVIL IN LONG ISLAND
Life is not so bad on Long Island ("The Devil in Long Island," by Ron Rosenbaum, Aug. 22).
I'm a middle-class Mid-Islander who hasn't contemplated knocking off my wife; nor has my spouse (to the best of my knowledge) inquired into the services of a hit man.
Yes, on my block in Deer Park we are guilty of such scandalous suburban atrocities as block parties and barbecues.
It is even rumored that a secret Tupperware party took place earlier in the year.


"Seven Deadly Sins"


Gale Wolfe and Dean Bloch
GALE WOLFE and Dean Bloch are "Rokeby alumni," not exactly something you'd put on a formal resume but definitely an honor of sorts.
"Everybody at Rokeby is wacky and interesting," said Ms.
Wolfe, 26, who worked until recently as a film editor at WTZA, a television station in Kingston, N.Y.
Dr.
Bloch, 37, is chief of gynecology and obstetrics at the Neugarten Birthing Center of Northern Dutchess Hospital in Rhinebeck, N.Y.


Filling Up the Days Of Endless Summer
Memo to parents: It only seems like an interminable summer, with children who say they have nothing to do.
Relief is in sight.
While school officials wrestle with emergency asbestos inspections and the delay till Sept. 20 in starting classes, other institutions are offering to help fill the void.
From museums to martial arts, a smelling bee and sports, here's a sampling of programs available this week, most of them free: AMERICAN MUSEUM OF THE MOVING IMAGE is offering free admission to students and workshops for 5- to 17-year-olds on sound effects, including learning how sounds were made for movies like "Star Wars," and using a computer to produce noise.
Tuesday through Friday, 1:30, 2:30 and 3:30 P.M.
At 35th Avenue and 36th Street, Astoria, Queens.
Information: (718) 784-4520, Thom Thacker.
ASPHALT GREEN is offering free classes including basketball for 7- to 9-year-olds on Friday, 4:30 to 6 P.M.; gymnastics for 7- to 9-year-olds on Tuesday and Thursday, 4 to 5 P.M.; swimming for 13- to 16-year-olds on Friday, 4 to 5 P.M., and many others.
Call for full listing: (212) 369-8890.


'The Tunnel's Not Big Enough for Both of Us'
A Seventh Avenue turf war has broken out near the Queens-Midtown Tunnel.
As drivers from Manhattan arrive in Queens, they are confronted by dueling billboards -- one for Norma Kamali and one for Donna Karan's DKNY line.
Much to Ms.
Kamali's annoyance, a small orange wall appeared late last month between the two signs, partially obscuring hers.


A Tennis Club (And Magnet) Risks Oblivion
Seated on a red-brick terrace overlooking the small red-clay tennis empire he spent 12 years building, Richard Northern pondered two questions: "Why can't we stay? And why can't they build around us?"
His South Oxford Health and Racquet Club is the city's only black-owned tennis club.
It is also a popular neighborhood center of social and political activity.
Come November, though, the four outdoor tennis courts and the three-story neo-Georgian building on the fringe of the Fort Greene Historic District are to be demolished to make room for moderate- to middle-income housing, part of Atlantic Center, a commercial- and residential-development plan.


Reform in Mexico: Now You See It, . . .
NOW that Mexico is being auditioned for a major role as a trading partner of the United States, the country may be more in the world's spotlight than at any time since Hernan Cortes sent word back to Spain that Moctezuma had rooms full of gold.
What makes Mexico so interesting now is that for the first time, a developed country like the United States is thinking of joining hands so firmly with a developing country like Mexico, and Mexico is determined to show that it is worthy of its new status.


Text of Holtzman Statement
Following is the text of New York City Comptroller Elizabeth Holtzman's statement about the city's Department of Investigation report.


Permit Parking Encroaches On Boerum Hill Residents
To the Editor:
The persistent and ever-increasing problem of privileged parking for politicians and bureaucrats in Boerum Hill speaks to the heart of good government.
It puts an unacceptable personal burden on those of us who live here, and it makes a mockery of the heroic urban renewal in this neighborhood.


"Franklin D. Israel: Selected Projects"


LETTERS TO THE NEW JERSEY EDITOR
A recent article, "Battle Forming Over Teachers' Lifetime License," described three proposals to end New Jersey's practice of granting teachers lifetime certification and mentioned critics' charges that the proposals represent an indirect attack on the state's tenure law.
The article drew a number of letters to the editor, including these.
It has always been my belief that teachers ought to be required to keep up with the newest available research in the field of education.
I agree that there should be some sort of required in-service program to enhance teacher effectiveness.


Child Abuse Drawing Closer Public Scrutiny
LATE last month, a baby boy who starved to death was buried in a tiny grave purchased by his grandmother in the Children's Garden at Greenwood Union Cemetery in Rye.
The boy was one of the latest victims of child abuse in Westchester.
Thirteen-month-old Saleem Groom of Yonkers died alone, face down in his crib, after no one heeded his cries to be picked up and fed, the County District Attorney's office said.
The infant had been dead at least four days from starvation and acute dehydration when his body was discovered on Aug. 20, the Westchester Medical Examiner's Office reported.


As Bomb Trial Nears, Strategies Emerge
Despite the notoriety and concerns about international terrorism that surround the World Trade Center bombing trial, which opens in Manhattan on Tuesday, it is likely to be a classic criminal prosecution, based largely on the nitty-gritty of forensic evidence and witnesses' testimony, as well as a good measure of inference.
Some of the defense lawyers say they will try to give an ideological cast to the trial, arguing that their clients are being persecuted for their political or religious beliefs.
But much of the case, according to lawyers involved and independent legal experts, will probably be far more banal.


Getting Shots For Russia
Travelers to Russia should make sure their immunizations, especially against diphtheria and typhoid fever, are current before visiting.
With the collapse of the Soviet Union, mass immunization programs have broken down, allowing once nearly eradicated diseases to re-emerge.
Moreover, many Russians have been avoiding immunizations because of a lack of trust in doctors and fear of contracting H.I.V., the virus that causes AIDS, through contaminated needles.
Russia's diphtheria epidemic is the most serious health concern, with more than 4,000 people reported to have been infected this year.
Diphtheria is transmitted by airborne bacteria and can cause rapid death.
Concern among Westerners rose sharply after the first foreigner, a 62-year-old Belgian woman, contracted diphtheria here and died Aug. 18.
One of Britain's largest travel companies, Thomson Holidays, announced last month that it was suspending its tours to Russia because of the diphtheria scare.
However, both Western and Russian medical experts point out that diphtheria can generally be avoided through proper immunizations.
Tetanus-diphtheria booster shots should normally be given every 10 years.


Melissa Epley, Brennan Warble
Melissa Jane Epley, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Marion J. Epley 3d of Millbrook, N.Y., was married there yesterday to Brennan John Warble, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Lawrence T. Warble of Bronxville, N.Y.
The Rev.
Eugene O'Brien, a Roman Catholic priest, officiated at the Chapel of Millbrook Meadows.
Mrs.
Warble, 26, is an exercise physiologist at Allen &amp; Company, an investment bank in New York.
She graduated from St.
Lawrence University, as did her husband, and received a master's degree in applied physiology and nutrition from Columbia University.
Her father retired as a senior partner in the New York law firm of White &amp; Case.


Mae West's New York
To the Editor:
Mae West would have undoubtedly loved "Peel Me a Grape" (Aug. 22), Ron Alexander's account of her 100th-birthday celebration.
However, some surprisingly omitted sidelights on the Mae West tour of New York need to be added.


Shed No Tears for Poor Ragweed Crop
The fall pollen season has arrived, turning once-carefree summer sunbathers into sneezing supplicants in the waiting rooms of their allergists.
Doctors and pollen counters say it could have been a lot worse.


Italian Menu for Those on the Light Side
EATING light when dining out is a challenge.
One of the newest Italian restaurants in Plainview proclaims its healthy intentions with its name, Pasta E Pesce.
The shopping-center spot is owned by Nick and Glenn Falcone, who also run a smaller Pasta E Pesce in Great Neck.
The Plainview restaurant is typical of the sleek modern Italian cafes that made their debuts on the Island a half-dozen years ago.
It sports pale wood, expanses of mirrors, ceiling fans, pastel neon, walls painted to resemble green marble and tablecloths covered with glass.


There Goes the Neighborhood
THE QUEEN AND I By Sue Townsend. 239 pp. New York: Soho Press. $22.


Black Skin, Blond Hair
If black is beautiful, then what are black and blond together?
Whether with wigs, hair extensions or dye, more and more black Americans in the public spotlight are finding out.
Here's a roundup of who has taken the platinum plunge:
THE SINGERS: T-Boz, the lead singer of TLC; Yo Yo, a rap artist, and Lonnie Gordon (below left), whose new album, "Bad Mood," has just been released by SBK Records.


Couples in Business: Separate but Equal
WHO is the boss in a company that is jointly owned by a husband and wife?
Such companies, 1.8 million of them, now represent the fastest-growing segment of the business population, according to the Small Business Administration.
From 1980 to 1989, the number of husband-and-wife enterprises jumped 66 percent.
What makes for an entrepreneurial couple's success?
Separate but equal responsibilities is the formula followed by those couples who have built lucrative businesses together.


Mideast Accord; A 'Practical Step': Excerpts From Interview With President
Following are excerpts from an interview early today with President Clinton aboard Air Force One, as transcribed by The New York Times:


Bit by Bit, CD's Take On a Silkier Tone
THE MAIN EVENT IN audio this fall has nothing to do with home equipment.
The usual parade of new models is overshadowed by a development of more lasting importance.
A new process for producing CD's is being introduced that will affect the sound of recorded music far into the future.
As a result, listeners buying CD's this fall will notice a difference in the new releases.
They may sound more silky.


Candidates On Television
The Democratic candidates for mayor, David N. Dinkins, Roy E. Innis and Eric Melendez, will appear in a half-hour debate on Channel 4 at 11:30 A.M. today.
Their hourlong debate on Thursday night will be rebroadcast at 10 A.M. today on Channel 7.
The candidates for New York City comptroller, Elizabeth Holtzman, Alan G. Hevesi and Herman Badillo, will appear in a half-hour debate at noon today on Channel 4.


Shakespeare, With a Touch of Fellini
SO much happens in "The Comedy of Errors," but so little of it matters.
Only a resourceful director can turn the inconsequential play, possibly Shakespeare's first and easily his shortest, into a smashing show.
For the New Jersey Shakespeare Festival, Bonnie J. Monte wisely avoids excess, given a confining stage and a play that overflows with the fixings of farce.
"The Comedy of Errors" has grown accustomed to circuslike antics, clowning and acrobatics, as in last year's New York Shakespeare Festival production in Central Park or the 1987 Lincoln Center staging, which was a display piece for the Flying Karamazov Brothers and Avner the Eccentric.


Craig S. Hecht, Suzanne P. Silver
Dr.
Suzanne Paula Silver, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Charles M. Silver of Stamford, Conn., was married there last evening to Dr.
Craig Steven Hecht, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Allan Hecht of Oceanside, L.I.
Rabbi Mark Golub performed the ceremony at the Radisson Tara Hotel.
The bride is a psychologist in Stamford and a lecturer in psychology at the University of Connecticut at Stamford.
She graduated from the University of Connecticut and received a master's degree and a doctorate in clinical psychology from Yeshiva University.
Her father, now retired, was a vice president of the ITT Corporation in New York.
Her mother, Rose Silver, is an artist.


Rousting the Peddlers of 125th Street
The bustling heart of Harlem's business district, 125th Street, is also a vivid street market where hundreds of street peddlers lay out clothing, food, books, political buttons and religious pamphlets.
Come fall, though, in the first major move arising from a citywide crackdown on vendors, the vendors will be forced out and into a new open-air market around the corner.
The peddlers -- licensed and unlicensed alike -- will be given certificates entitling them to sell their wares at the new market, primarily between Adam Clayton Powell Jr.
Boulevard and St.
Nicholas Avenue.
Those who remain on 125th Street will be moved by the police.


Orioles Finding Help In Search for Pennant
As streaky as they have been this season, the Baltimore Orioles figured they needed help, but of a different kind.
So like a gang that can't shoot straight, they imported a couple of hit men.
Mike Pagliarulo and Lonnie Smith aren't going to kill any pitchers, but they will provide the Orioles with some offense and some experience with pennant-race pressure.


"Roy Lichtenstein"


Four Years After His Death, Marcos Is Buried


Connie Lynn Francis, John V. Cioffi
Connie Lynn Francis, the vice president of corporate advertising for the Anne Klein Companies in New York, and John V. Cioffi, a senior vice president and founder of the Fortuna Group at Paine Webber, were married yesterday.
The Rev.
Dr.
Kenneth O. Jones performed the ceremony at the Fifth Avenue Presbyterian Church in New York.
Ms.
Francis-Cioffi, a daughter of Anna M. Francis of Rutland, Vt., and the late William B. Francis 3d, graduated from the Fashion Institute of Technology.


Blisters, Cracks and Other Problems of Flat Roofs
ROOF care is a priority as fall approaches.
Flat and low-sloped roofs require special attention.
Although they can provide years of trouble-free service when properly maintained, such roofs develop major problems if wear and minor damage are neglected.
Most flat and low-sloped roofs are built up with layers of roofing felt and asphalt or coal tar.
On some old houses the roof may be metal with an asphalt coating like that of built-up roofs, but without felts.


County Enforcing Cash Register Law
CONSUMERS looking for bargains in local department stores should also look closely at the cash register when making purchases, according to officials of the County Department of Consumer Protection.
The county's 1975 Consumer Protection Code describes it as a violation for a merchant to use any register or totaling device that does not allow the consumer to see the cost of each item purchased, plus the tax and total cost.


Mussel Bound
The mussel has become the canary of the sea.
Tufted on rocks and pilings, it inhales up to 18 gallons of ocean a day, filtering nutrients at high tide and living off the proceeds.
Like someone too sensitive to discern the difference between discretion and a slight, the mussel harbors nourishment and toxicity indiscriminately.
It's not sturdy enough to assimilate noxious flotsam and jetsam continuously.
And yet, once tethered by the thousands of strands it spins to make its beard, the mussel is loath to leave.
Primitive but not stupid, it often makes the best of a bad situation.


"Arata Isozaki: Works in Architecture"


SURFACING
STATEMENTS -- ZIP code T-shirts: Taking a cue from "Beverly Hills 90210," these shirts, printed simply with a place name and a ZIP code, are expressions of pride in the hood -- whether the hood is Harlem 10027 or Southampton 11968.
NEWS MEDIA -- "Read-n-hear" music reviews: A multimedia, interactive experience that doesn't require a PC.
You buy a newspaper.
You read a music review.
Then you call a toll-free number to hear a sample of the music.
TENNIS -- The height factor: As is evident in this year's U.S.
Open, a majority of the world's best tennis players are, simply put, tall (above, Helena Sukova, who is 6 feet 2).


Singapore
MOST OF THE MAJOR airports in Asia are a nightmare.
Tokyo's Narita is cramped, and a miserable 90 minutes from the city.
Beijing's grim passenger lounges always seem to boil in the summer and freeze in the winter.
But Singapore's Changi Airport is worth landing at even if you never step foot in the city itself.
Changi is regularly voted the world's best airport chiefly because of its shopping -- and there is lots of it.
Even as you wait to pass through immigration and customs -- which usually transpires with typically clipped Singaporean efficiency -- you are surrounded by brightly lighted stores, everything from densely stocked bookshops to sporting goods shops to specialty food stores, where you can pick up hard-to-find spices and an array of ingredients for Chinese and Indian dishes (the two cuisines thrive, and sometimes mix, in Singapore's back streets).
Prices are usually competitive with downtown, but be warned: Singapore is no longer the bargain center it once was.


"Laughter on the 23d Floor"


LADY HARLECH'S ALBUM
I was disappointed that you would give space to Amanda Harlech and her bunch of "pseuds." This is 1993, but as Suzy Menkes's Fashion feature "Lady Harlech's Album" (Aug. 15) proves, the class system in Britain prevails.
Does Amanda Harlech have a job that allows her to buy $3,000 Lacroix gowns?


Haute Hospital: At Your Service
A solicitous doorman in crisp safari suit and pith helment is on hand to welcome guests.
The rooms have been freshly painted and the staff newly trained in hospitality.
An entirely new kitchen produces designer meals served on elegant midnight blue trays with touches of shocking pink.
No, it's not a five-star hotel but the New York Hospital-Cornell Medical Center.
In an increasingly competitive hospital industry, New York-Cornell is adopting some of the amenities and atmosphere of a luxury hotel.
In a joint effort with the Pierre Hotel at Fifth Avenue and 61st Street, the hospital is learning how to treat all its patients more like hotel guests.
At the same time, the hotel is expanding its knowledge of nutritious foods.


Here's How to Save Heirloom Seeds for Next Year
It's easy to save the seeds of old heirlooms.
Here's how to save tomato seeds, according to "Seed to Seed" by Suzanne Ashworth (Seed Savers Exchange, 1991): Pick a ripe fruit and squeeze its seeds and the surrounding gel into a small container (I use recycled cottage cheese tubs).
Add a cup of water to each cup of seeds and gel, and stir.
The mixture should ferment about three days, and it will start to stink, so set it aside, away from the dinner table.
Don't forget to stir twice a day.
A layer of white or gray mold will form on top.
When bubbles start rising to the top or mold covers the surface, it's time to stop the fermentation process.


Alvin Ailey American Dance Theater


Correction
Because of a publisher's title change during the galley-proof stage, a review on Aug. 22 about a memoir by the novelist and screenwriter Cecil Brown used an outdated title.
The book is "Coming Up Down Home," not "Coming Up Down South."


LETTERS TO THE NEW JERSEY EDITOR
A recent article, "Battle Forming Over Teachers' Lifetime License," described three proposals to end New Jersey's practice of granting teachers lifetime certification and mentioned critics' charges that the proposals represent an indirect attack on the state's tenure law.
The article drew a number of letters to the editor, including these.
I agree that teachers need a continuing staff development program that would insure a lifetime commitment to the teaching career.
As a first-year teacher in graduate school, I feel it should be mandatory for all teachers to participate in staff development every year in the subject they teach.


Don't Just Fume. Phone.
How many times has it happened?
You lie in bed listening to your unaccomplished saxophone-playing upstairs neighbor practice for the sixth night in a row.
Or you notice that the light at the end of your street is out again.
Or an airline lost your luggage in Des Moines.
These are the kinds of things that annoy you incredibly, then pass through your mind.
You should complain, you want to complain, but you haven't a clue who to complain to.


THE DEVIL IN LONG ISLAND
Having lived on Long Island for 30 years, I really don't love it; at times, I'm not even sure I like it.
But as I read, and read, three ospreys wheeled overhead -- a singular success story.
Perhaps your writer would be advised to look up on occasion -- and out, rather than down.
H.
T.
ANDERSON East Islip, L.I.


Finding Better Health on Horseback
Karoline Martin saddled her horse and rode into the indoor arena for a class in dressage, the equivalent of ballet on horseback.
As she and her horse danced around, the only hint that the 29-year-old woman was blind was her instructor's occasional warning about the location of other horses.
Ms.
Martin's performance was just one of many on a summer day at the Thorncroft Equestrian Center, a stable with 70 acres of pastures and trails in this western suburb of Philadelphia and an unusual specialty: therapeutic horseback riding.


No Wonder We Need Health Care Reform; Not Socialized Medicine
To the Editor:
In "A Mythical Medical Monster" (Op-Ed, Sept. 1), defending the Canadian health care system, Douglas Coupland omits a major point: The Canadian system is not socialized medicine.
Doctors and other providers do not work for the Government.
They bill the provincial health ministry, using a negotiated fee schedule like the one long in use by Medicare.


Q and A
Spare That Neighbor's Tree Q. My apartment is very dark because of a neighbor's tree.
Do I have the right to trim some branches? . . .
Frances Cachot, Manhattan A. No.
Eric M. Davis, a Manhattan lawyer, said that while it was once the law in New York that an individual could enforce an easement for light and air, such abilities to govern property are no longer enforceable because of extensive development.


SEPT. 5-11: 'Endgame Stuff'; Bosnian Leader Gains Little From an Appeal to Clinton
President Alija Izetbegovic of Bosnia was met with stony silence from Western European ambassadors last week when he addressed the United Nations Security Council.
A few days later, after hearing what President Clinton and some members of Congress had to say about his country's plight, he may have longed for the silence of the envoys.
Mr.
Clinton told the Bosnian President that it was unlikely that the United States or Western Europe would intervene militarily to roll back Serbian or Croatian gains in Bosnia.
He advised Mr.
Izetbegovic to return to peace talks to achieve the best deal he could, even if that meant the partition of his country.


Nerds Have Mothers, Too
To the Editor:
In reading "Woman, Computer Nerd -- and Proud" (Aug. 29), I was struck by the dismissive descriptions of the mothers of these three extraordinary young women, two of them referred to literally in parentheses:


Park Users Ask To Banish Dogs
A feud has broken out between dog owners and neighbors who want to banish dogs from Clement Clarke Moore Park.
The Parks Department has begun a major renovation of the little park on the corner of 10th Avenue and 22d Street, which has become a haunt for homeless people, drug dealers -- and dogs.


Sharon Friedman, Jay A. Mazel
Sharon Deena Friedman, a daughter of Dr.
Kenneth and Gaby Friedman of Riverdale, the Bronx, was married last Monday to Dr.
Jay Aaron Mazel, the son of Abraham and Alice Mazel of Brooklyn.
Rabbi Moshe Horowitz officiated at the Sands, a country club in Atlantic Beach, L.I.


A Model of Understatement
To the Editor:
In James Gleick's essay about the new edition of Bartlett's Familiar Quotations ("Bartlett Updated: Renewing the Idea of a Shared Culture," Aug. 8), he questions the inclusion of a quotation from James Watson and Francis Crick: "This  [ double helix ]  structure has novel features which are of considerable biological interest. . . . It has not escaped our notice that the specific pairing we have postulated immediately suggests a possible copying mechanism for the genetic material."


Corrections
A picture on July 18 with an article about Cracow, Poland, erroneously included a temporary structure in its view of the city's 15th-century Jewish ghetto.
A reader's letter, dated Aug. 21, points out that the large gate in the foreground was recently built for a movie set and was not an original part of the ghetto.
The gate has since been taken down.


No Doubles Grand Slam
The top-seeded team of Gigi Fernandez and Natalya Zvereva -- looking for a doubles Grand Slam this year -- seemed en route to another dominating victory in the United States Open last night.
The pair took the first set, 6-1, in their semifinal match with Helena Sukova and Arantxa Sanchez Vicario.
But with the pressure mounting on their opponents, Sukova and Sanchez Vicario rallied, 1-6, 6-3, 6-4.


Miss McGoldrick, Mr. Donahue
Megan Dorothy McGoldrick and Edward James Donahue Jr. were married yesterday at the chapel at Our Lady of Good Counsel Academy in White Plains.
The Rev.
George Hommel performed the Roman Catholic ceremony.
The bride is a daughter of Dorothy S. Thompson of Mamaroneck, N.Y., and Thomas McGoldrick of Eastchester, N.Y., and a stepdaughter of Rita P. McGoldrick of Eastchester.
The bridegroom is a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Donahue of Westford, Mass.


Ethics Attack Puts Holzman on the Defensive
A YEAR ago, Elizabeth Holtzman finished fourth after running a bitterly negative campaign on ethics issues in the Democratic primary for the United States Senate.
Now, she is defending her own ethics in the race to keep the city comptroller's job.
Two underdog challengers have been battering her with questions about a loan to her Senate campaign.


Galveston
Galveston lies just 32 miles from Mission Control and the Johnson Space Center, but its towering Greek Revival palaces and abundant magnolias, oleanders and pecan trees evoke the Old South.
The city -- the place is too densely populated and the structures too vertical to be called a town -- seems to have one foot in the past and one in the present.
Galveston began life as a safe haven for pirates, most notably the privateer Jean Lafitte around 1820.
Confederate forces were more vulnerable -- the island was captured by Union forces in the Civil War.
By the end of the 19th century, Galveston was the commercial center of the State of Texas, full of banks, cotton traders, shipping companies and merchants.
A powerful hurricane, most often called the 1900 Storm, destroyed a large part of the city and killed 6,000 people.
The island was rebuilt and thrived again for almost two decades after the Depression as a sanctuary for illegal gambling and other vices.


Sports of The Times; Seeking Absent Stars Under an Autumn Sky
THE corporate ticket-holders voted with their feet yesterday.
They went for a long autumnal walk in the woods, they went to the Hamptons, they went to the Met, they watched Notre Dame on television, they went shopping, they cleaned their cabinets, anything, anything, to delay or even avoid attending Super Saturday of American tennis.
Can you imagine Wimbledon with gaps of unused seats for a semifinal match?
They'd queue up overnight to watch you and me, as long as it had the hyper-expensive Wimbledon logo on it.
And the Brits don't do any of this Super Saturday stuff, cramming as much as they can for weekend television.
They separate the women's and men's semifinals on Thursday and Friday, the finals on Saturday and Sunday, but the ancient joint is always packed.


"The Piano"
Jane Campion's film rivals "Wuthering Heights" in unsentimental romantic excess, with Holly Hunter (left) as a mute woman, Anna Paquin (right) as her daughter and Harvey Keitel as her illicit lover.
Exquisitely photographed in New Zealand.
Opening on Nov. 19. (Miramax)


Mideast Accord: The Ceremony; Old Enemies Arafat and Rabin to Meet
Once bitter enemies who vowed to destroy each other, Yasir Arafat and Yitzhak Rabin will stand side by side at the White House on Monday for the signing of the peace agreement that will usher in Palestinian self-rule in the Israeli-occupied Gaza Strip and the West Bank.
The last-minute decision of the chairman of the Palestine Liberation Organization and the Prime Minister of Israel to validate the signing with their presence adds another layer of symbolism to the event itself and the agreement it will codify.


Canis Major
Throughout August, a 15-foot rented Ryder truck, a Ford Aerostar mini-van and a Ford Explorer jeep, collectively carrying a 6-foot-high, 235-pound black-bellowed Polaroid camera, lighting, generators, assistants, assorted costumes and canines set off for locations on and around William Wegman's rambling property in Rangeley, Me.
This distinctive convoy, led by Mr.
Wegman behind the wheel of the jeep, his head flanked by drooling dogs, was on a mission: photography for his book "The Adventures of the Hardly Boys," which is to be published by Hyperion next fall.
After completing his renditions of two fairy tales -- "Little Red Riding Hood," out next month from Hyperion, and last spring's "Cinderella" -- Mr.
Wegman felt ready for some suspense.
The Hardy Boys struck his imagination, requiring only a small alteration: the addition of a significant "L." "After all," the artist explained, "They're dogs -- and girls -- hardly boys."


My Bum Bill, My Secret Sharer of the Streets
WHEN I moved to the block, my bum Bill owned the beauty salon's corner.
He never begged; he mooched off smaller, older bums who sat against a whitewashed brick wall and read paperbacks while Bill smoked and paced and harangued them.
"Reality," he would shout through the prematurely white beard that covered his lips, "what do you know about reality? You're bums."
He yelled at me for strolling through his sidewalk seminar.
I didn't catch the words, but the tone was pure outrage at my rude invasion of his space.
He was in the middle of a lecture on the worthlessness of four readers snoozing in the morning sun, and he seemed to be quoting from a book in his hand that had no cover.
Because he was so big, broad as well as tall, I couldn't let him intimidate me or I'd be crossing three streets instead of one to get my paper.
I glared at him and growled like a dog.
He wearily shook his head and rolled his bright blue eyes and waved me through.


Betwixt Among And Between
Charlotte Thorp of Brooklyn was struck by the subtitle of Lester Thurow's recent book, "Head to Head: The Coming Economic Battle Among Japan, Europe and America."
"I was taught, as a child," she writes, "that between was for two things, among for three or more." True, that's what most people are taught.
Even copy editors are taught that: The Associated Press Stylebook and Libel Manual repeats the maxim that "between introduces two items and among introduces more than two." That stylebook directs that between also be used when expressing the relationships of three or more items considered one pair at a time, as in "negotiations between the network and the Clinton, Bush and Perot committees."


Votes in Congress
Tally Last Week in Connecticut, New Jersey and New York
Senate
1.
Surgeon General: Vote to confirm as Surgeon General Dr.
Joycelyn Elders.
Approved 65 to 34, Sept. 7.
2.
National Service: Vote on a plan for students to earn college money in exchange for national service.
Approved 57 to 40, Sept. 8.
3.
Gays in the Military: Vote on an amendment to a Department of Defense appropriation bill that would let President Clinton use his discretion in determining policy governing homosexuals in the military.
Rejected 63 to 33, Sept. 9
4.
Somalia: Vote on a non-binding resolution urging the Clinton Administration to seek formal Congressional approval of deployment of American troops in Somalia by Nov. 15 or withdraw the troops.
Approved 90 to 7, Sept. 9.
1
2
3
4
Connecticut
Dodd (D) . . .
Y
Y
Y
Y
Lieberman (D) . . .
Y
Y
Y
Y
New Jersey
Bradley (D) . . .
Y
Y
Y
Y
Lautenberg (D) . . .
Y
Y
Y
Y
New York
D'Amato (R) . . .
N
N
Y
N
Moynihan (D) . . .
Y
Y
Y
Y
KEY: Y Yea; N Nay; (A) Absent or did not vote; (P) Present.
HOUSE There were no House votes last week.


Body Found and 2d Is Sought As Convicted Mobsters Talk
Recent convictions in an old mob killing have begun to unravel a skein of additional mob slayings in New Jersey, along with the already tattered reputation of the Lucchese crime family.
In a crime story where the main victims were criminals themselves, investigators on Wednesday unearthed the dismembered remains of John Redman in an open field at 174 Asbury Road in Farmingdale, Monmouth County, next to the seventh hole of the Shore Oaks Country Club.
They were acting on tips from mobsters who are about to be sentenced on murder convictions in a different killing.


Paterson Takes Pride in Appearance


Vanity Affair
Conde Nast celebrated 10 years of Vanity Fair magazine, Sept. 9


Where Kentucky Makes Its Bourbon
FOR more than 200 years, Kentucky bourbon has been the unofficial Bluegrass State spirit.
Bourbon folklore credits the Rev.
Elijah Craig, an 18th-century Kentucky Baptist preacher, with discovering the formula for this distinctly American beverage: mixing corn with smaller amounts of rye or other grains, cooking the mixture in limestone spring water, then aging it in charred, white-oak barrels.
During the 19th century, bourbon distilling became a popular Kentucky cottage industry, with hundreds of tiny distilleries sprinkled throughout the state.


'Spillville Got It Right'
To the Editor:
Richard Taruskin chooses to hear Dvorak as the master of superficiality, but in the broader culture, Dvorak has grown, not diminished, in stature over the years and his music endures -- rich, complex and constantly interesting .


Jean H. Baker, Robert Munroe
Jean Harvey Baker, a daughter of Drs.
R.
Robinson Baker and Jean Baker of Baltimore, was married yesterday to Robert Lindsay Munroe, a son of Mathilda M. Klaus of Pittsburgh and the late Robert L. Munroe.
The Rev.
William P. Baxter performed the ceremony at St.
Thomas' Episcopal Church in Garrison, Md.
Ms.
Baker, 29, is keeping her name.
She is an associate at the law firm of Baker &amp; Hostetler in Washington.
She graduated from Boston College, as did her husband, and she received a law degree from Catholic University.


The Tom and Gerry Show
To the Editor:
Your article raises a question: "What are the management credentials of these king makers?"


How Joe Pye Gave His Name to a Weed
AS the story goes, there once was an Indian medicine man named Joe Pye who used concoctions from a wild plant found growing in the nearby woods to cure typhoid fever.
His brew is said to have halted an epidemic that raged in Colonial Massachusetts.
Hence this local plant became forever known as joe-pye weed.
Here is another one about boneset.
Leaves of a particularly widespread wild flower appear to go right through the stem.
Botanists have a phrase for this and say that the leaves are perfoliate, "per" for through and "folium" for leaf.
Or as the noted plantsman Liberty Hyde Bailey once described this phenomenon as a "leaf surrounding the stem."


Mideast Accord: U.S. Policy; Clinton Seeks to Buoy Israelis, Saying U.S. Backing Is Firm
President Clinton today promised the Israeli public the unflinching support of the United States at this critical time in an effort not only to make Israelis comfortable about striking a deal with Yasir Arafat but also to obtain their backing for a future peace accord with Syria.
In his first interview since the breakthrough toward peace in the Middle East, Mr.
Clinton said King Fahd of Saudi Arabia told him in a telephone conversation on Friday that despite the lingering wrath of the Saudis over Palestinian support for Iraq in the Persian Gulf war, they would be ready to contribute funds and raise money from the other Arab nations of the Persian Gulf to insure that the new Palestinian entities in the Gaza Strip and Jericho get on their feet.


Julia Szabo, John T. Maher
Julia Szabo, the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
George Szabo of New York, was married on Friday to John T. Maher, a son of Brenda Maher of Congers, N.Y., and the late John J. Maher.
Justice Bruce Wright of State Supreme Court in Manhattan performed the ceremony in his chambers.
Ms.
Szabo, 28, is keeping her name.
A graduate of Vassar College, she is a fashion writer at Harper's Bazaar in New York.
Her father, an archeologist and art historian, retired as a curator of the Metropolitan Museum of Art.
Her mother, Martha Szabo, is an artist.


Erich Leinsdorf, 81, a Conductor of Intelligence and Utility, Is Dead
Erich Leinsdorf, a conductor whose abrasive intelligence and deep musical learning served as a conscience for two generations of conductors, died yesterday at a hospital in Zurich.
He was 81 years old and lived in Zurich and Sarasota, Fla., and until recently also had a home in Manhattan.
The cause was cancer, his family said.


Miss Anderson, Mr. Jarrett
Catherine Kennedy Anderson, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Larz K. Anderson of Dallas, was married yesterday in New York to Gregory Walter Jarrett, the son of Dorothy Jarrett of Palm Desert, Calif., and the late Joseph W. Jarrett.
The Rev.
Dr.
Thomas F. Pike performed the ceremony at Calvary Episcopal Church.
Mrs.
Jarrett, 31, graduated magna cum laude from Duke University and received an M.B.A. from the University of Texas.
She is the director of marketing and communications for the Alliance Francaise, the cultural organization, in New York.


Linann H. Harder, Michael Mullen Jr.
Linann Helen Harder, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Frank K. Harder of Garden City, L.I., was married yesterday to Michael Francis Mullen Jr., a son of Justice and Mrs.
Mullen of Huntington, L.I.
The Rev.
James Adelman, a United Church of Christ minister, officiated at the Garden City Community Church.
Msgr.
John Casey, an uncle of the bridegroom, took part in the ceremony.
Mrs.
Mullen, 24, is an analyst for the enforcement division of the New York Stock Exchange.
She graduated from Purdue University.
Her father and mother, Kristine Harder, own Harder Services Inc., a landscaping company in Hempstead, L.I.


Excellence in an Age of Diversity
Yolanda Moses, the former California educator who took office as president of City College last month, did not take long to imbibe the legends of her new institution, its historic reputation for helping the children of poverty attain success.
Less joyously, she also quickly realized that a lot of people in New York and elsewhere feel that City College is no longer what it used to be.


Germany Finds That Spies Are Still Doing Business
Fair game for Communist spies during the cold war, Germany has not let down its counterespionage defenses since the collapse of Communism in Europe.
German counterspies have caught more agents in the last three years than during most of the time East Germany and the Soviet Union existed, the authorities say.
"The Federal Republic of Germany remains one of the primary targets for foreign intelligence services," said the annual report issued late last month by its domestic security and counterintelligence service.
"Simply because of its economic strength and its scientific-technical resources, it offers plenty of opportunities for espionage activities."


Parents Study Divorce's Impact on Children
CHILDREN can be hurt when their parents divorce, but nobody -- least of all the parents -- wants them to be.
Now a Connecticut law requires divorcing parents to attend an educational program designed to help them recognize and deal with the impact of divorce on children.
The program is expected to be similar to one recently conducted in New London.
"Parents don't intentionally harm their children, but as an attorney I assure you that children are being harmed by unenlightened parents every day. The parents love their children, but they don't realize that their behavior can have devastating ramifications. The reality is that parents need educating in order to assist their children in coping with divorce," said a lawyer in New London, Linda Mariani.
She cited a father who told his daughter he couldn't attend an event at her school because her mother would have him arrested.
"Come on; don't bring in a little kid," said Ms.
Mariani, who helped launch the New London program.


"Death in Venice"


Chinese Runners Excel On Work and Worms
A provincial coach from northeastern China, whose female runners have been bursting past world records, lashed out tonight at those who attribute his team's remarkable success to performance-enhancing drugs.
He said, instead, that he had been feeding his athletes an expensive potion made from a rare worm found on China's western high plateau.
In a rambling news conference in which he blasted critics of his team, the coach, Ma Junren, also criticized coaches of China's national team for trying to steal his best runners, disrupting their concentration and, generally, not recognizing his genius.


The Tom and Gerry Show
To the Editor:
In reaching for a sexy story line ("Hiring a New Boss? Look No Further," Aug. 22), you overreached.
Gerry Roche and Tom Neff clearly do not "own the market;" together they can handle only 20-25 searches a year, a small fraction of the C.E.O. assignments even at their own firms.
JAMES H. KENNEDY  Fitzwilliam, N.H., Aug. 23  The writer is publisher of Executive Recruiter News.


LETTERS TO THE NEW JERSEY EDITOR
A recent article, "Battle Forming Over Teachers' Lifetime License," described three proposals to end New Jersey's practice of granting teachers lifetime certification and mentioned critics' charges that the proposals represent an indirect attack on the state's tenure law.
The article drew a number of letters to the editor, including these.
As a tenured teacher of 20 years, I can appreciate the benefits and security of the tenure system.
In many New Jersey school districts, politics is the rule for job selection and advancement, and not necessarily the consideration of skills and confidence of the individual.


M.T.A. Proposes Free Bus-Subway Transfers for Commuters
Hundreds of thousands of New Yorkers who have to take the bus to the subway have long cursed both geography and the Metropolitan Transportation Authority, which makes them pay for both trips.
Now, with ridership sagging, the M.T.A. has proposed something that will save commuters money, if not time: free transfers.


For Entrepreneurs, Traffic Spells Opportunity:


Unwelcome: Nude Dancers
No one is sure exactly when it is to open, but some people in Jackson Heights are already trying to close Bare Assets, a juice bar in a storefront at 83-15 Northern Boulevard that plans to feature nude female dancers.
Since the State Liquor Authority prohibits nudity in any establishment that sells alcoholic beverages, nude-dancing clubs can sell only nonalcoholic beverages.
H.D.K.
Enterprises, the operator, is not saying when the club will open, but hundreds of people from the neighborhood protested at the site for two nights this month.
And the opponents say they are prepared to return if their message did not get through then -- ready to stage the sort of nightly protests that forced a similar club in Forest Hills to shut down last spring.


Olmsted Fails As Sound Bite
One addition to the meadows and graceful woods of Prospect Park are 20 towering yellow sign-sculptures featuring quotes from one of the park's designers, Frederick Law Olmsted.
The signs stand 16 to 20 feet tall on thin black legs of iron, and the quotes, in Olmsted's austere, abstract and proper English, are intended to help visitors envision the park as he did during its design.


LETTERS TO THE NEW JERSEY EDITOR
A recent article, "Battle Forming Over Teachers' Lifetime License," described three proposals to end New Jersey's practice of granting teachers lifetime certification and mentioned critics' charges that the proposals represent an indirect attack on the state's tenure law.
The article drew a number of letters to the editor, including these.
As a teacher for 24 years, I feel it is time to discuss two issues: lifetime certification and tenure.


NEIGHBORHOOD REPORT: Upper West Side; Residents Win the Latest Battle in the Takeout Menu Wars
After years of protests and "No Menu" signs, angry Upper West Side residents have taken a new tack and won a round in their battle to stop delivery people from papering stoops and doors with takeout menus.
They have persuaded a city agency to order the closing of a prime offender's sidewalk cafe.
The object of their ire is Empire Szechuan Gourmet at Broadway and 97th Street, the flagship of the Empire Szechuan restaurant empire.
The local community board says the restaurant promised to stop distributing its menus.
When it did not, the board convinced the Department of Transportation to oppose the renewal of the license by the Consumer Affairs Department, which is legally bound to follow Transportation's lead.


Returning Dolce to the Vita
It has been a long time since the Via Veneto in Rome, immortalized in "La Dolce Vita," directed by Federico Fellini, was frequented by movie stars, paparazzi, authors and politicians.
In recent years the street has deteriorated into a melancholy strip of tired, overpriced sidewalk cafes patronized by tour groups staring at the prostitutes strutting by in search of work.
As a first step toward resuscitating the area, on Aug. 1 city officials banned traffic on the top half of the street.
Gone is the cacophony of typical Roman street sounds: the roar and whine of cars, buses, taxis and motorcycles.


Tent Revival Meetings Gain a Foothold
FOR 44 years, the Rev.
Vincent Giordano, an itinerant Christian evangelist, has spread his message in places ranging from Attica, Ind., to Manila.
This summer, the Vincentown clergyman pitched his 450-seat revival tent in an unlikely place -- the middle of the New Jersey city of Elizabeth.
Defying the summer heat and humidity, he preached for 27 nights in English and Spanish.
"A couple of hundred people" heard the message each night, said Mr.
Giordano, who added that some were sufficiently moved to "make a decision for the Lord," or to have a religious awakening.


Wordsmiths Test Their Words' Worth
THINK of it this way: poetry reading as Olympic event.
There are amateurs, scorecards and cheers for the home competitor.


World Markets; Curious Wrinkle in the Mexican Play
TO show how closely Mexican stocks mimic the ups and downs of the pending North American Free Trade Agreement, financial analysts point to a chart that plots stock values with Nafta news.
Check Oct. 4, 1992, the day then-candidate Bill Clinton announced his conditional support for the agreement.
The Mexican market index -- then at 1,250 and sliding -- suddenly turned skyward.
Then look at Jan. 20, 1993, Inauguration Day for President Clinton, when he gave his mixed message that he would support the agreement, but only if side accords were reached.
In Mexico, the stock index lurched up a bit, then sobered to turn sharply downward.


An After-Hours Directory
IT'S 3 A.M., and you're standing outside your apartment listening to the cries of your cat, which hasn't been fed all day.
The problem is, your keys are locked inside.
You need a locksmith.
Now.
Or perhaps you're having some unpleasant plumbing problems that can't wait until morning.
Or your car died on the Queensboro Bridge.
Or you're craving a Spanish omelet at midnight.


Ethics Attack Puts Holzman on the Defensive
A YEAR ago, Elizabeth Holtzman finished fourth after running a bitterly negative campaign on ethics issues in the Democratic primary for the United States Senate.
Now, she is defending her own ethics in the race to keep the city comptroller's job.
Two underdog challengers have been battering her with questions about a loan to her Senate campaign.


Filling Up the Days Of Endless Summer
Memo to parents: It only seems like an interminable summer, with children who say they have nothing to do.
Relief is in sight.
While school officials wrestle with emergency asbestos inspections and the delay till Sept. 20 in starting classes, other institutions are offering to help fill the void.
From museums to martial arts, a smelling bee and sports, here's a sampling of programs available this week, most of them free: AMERICAN MUSEUM OF THE MOVING IMAGE is offering free admission to students and workshops for 5- to 17-year-olds on sound effects, including learning how sounds were made for movies like "Star Wars," and using a computer to produce noise.
Tuesday through Friday, 1:30, 2:30 and 3:30 P.M.
At 35th Avenue and 36th Street, Astoria, Queens.
Information: (718) 784-4520, Thom Thacker.
ASPHALT GREEN is offering free classes including basketball for 7- to 9-year-olds on Friday, 4:30 to 6 P.M.; gymnastics for 7- to 9-year-olds on Tuesday and Thursday, 4 to 5 P.M.; swimming for 13- to 16-year-olds on Friday, 4 to 5 P.M., and many others.
Call for full listing: (212) 369-8890.


Taking New York Home, Bric by Brac
RALPH SARWARI can tell when the economy is turning sour in Germany or Japan, perking up in Brazil or taking off in Taiwan.
He can tell when the French franc is falling and the Swiss franc is soaring.
And he can do all of this without leaving his place beneath the fluorescent lights of Xanadu.
Not Kubla Khan's domed domain, not the too-opulent-for-words mansion in "Citizen Kane," but the casbah of kitsch, the Monte Carlo of mementos, the Shangri-La of souvenirs: a store at 1528 Broadway, at the northern edge of Times Square, that, under Mr.
Sarwari's management, sells everything from Statuettes of Liberty to "I NY" cigarette lighters, "I NY" pencils and "I
NY" T-shirts. Not to mention the $899 denim jackets with lower Manhattan hand-painted on the back under a sky of glittery spangles. One day, a Japanese man bought 12.


ALSO INSIDE
Making It Work 3
In a South Bronx housing complex, Lenny Hicks watches over streets, sidewalks and young people's souls.
New Yorks &amp; Co. 4
Xanadu: a Times Square emporium that sells images of New York City, kitschy and common, to the world.
Playing in the Neighborhood 19
Poetry Olympics, a radical walking tour and the (Queens) county fair. Movie CLock 20
What's showing at the local movie theaters, today through Thursday. Good Eating 22
Lincoln Center Territory, land of cassoulet, frito misto and Mandalay nungi noodles.
Soapbox 29
The bicycle theft: a painful lesson about race and class in New York.
Plus, letters and a cartoon strip.


Congress Opens the Larder, and Ducks
REMEMBER Fibber McGee's closet?
In every episode of the classic radio comedy "Fibber McGee and Molly," McGee would absent-mindedly open a closet door, unleashing an avalanche of pent-up junk -- shoes, bowling balls, maybe skis -- that would cascade onto the floor, raise an immense clatter and make the audience bray with laughter.
Washington has such a closet: it's known as Congress.
Every spring, lawmakers stuff great mounds of bills into its maw , and then ignore most of them until autumn, when Democratic leaders in both chambers realize that the year is about to end with little to show for it.
As distinguished from the radio comedy, the trick in Congress is to open the door just enough to free the political winners, but not so much as to get bonked by the legislative version of bowling balls.


Texas Official Is Model for Gore's Public Parsimony
When Al Gore started hammering ashtrays on "Late Show with David Letterman" and railing against the high cost of government-issue file folders, he freely admitted he was borrowing a page from the book of a fellow Democrat, John Sharp.
As the Texas Comptroller of Public Accounts, Mr.
Sharp conducted an exhaustive review of state government that President Clinton and Vice President Gore cited here today as the model for their plan to streamline the Federal Government.
And to understand why Mr.
Gore has come off this week as so obstinate, so miserly and even so zany in defense of the public treasury, one need only look to Mr.
Sharp.


Reclaiming A Park For Play
UNTIL a few weeks ago, you wouldn't have known so many children lived on the bedraggled block of East 12th Street between Avenues A and B.
There wasn't the perpetual sound of children's laughter, and young sidewalk-chalk Picassos had no quiet place to draw their masterpieces.
There was no luxuriant green lawn or soothing sprinkler spray or even a place where a new mother could sit with an infant on her lap and just daydream for a while without feeling afraid.


NEIGHBORHOOD REPORT: Upper West Side; Shakespeare &amp; Co. Is Fighting Back
How is Shakespeare &amp; Company, the old-style Upper West Side bookstore, weathering the arrival of the Barnes &amp; Noble superstore a block to the north?
Sales have suffered since Barnes &amp; Noble -- with three floors of books and a stylish cafe -- opened at 82d and Broadway in April, says Shakespeare's head buyer, Linda Marotta, though she notes that sales have been slow all over the city.


Beth Ann Zarkin, Charles Ditkoff
Dr.
Beth Ann Zarkin, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Herbert Zarkin of Sudbury, Mass., was married last evening to Charles Joshua Ditkoff, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Jerome L. Ditkoff of Manhassett Hills, L.I.
Dr.
Norman Pollock, a friend of the family and a marriage celebrant in Massachusetts, performed the Jewish ceremony at the Ritz-Carlton Hotel in Boston.
Dr.
Ditkoff, 29, is a fourth-year resident in general surgery at the Columbia-Presbyterian Medical Center in New York.
She graduated cum laude from Yale University and received her M.D. from Johns Hopkins University.
Her father is the president and chief executive of Waban Inc. in Natick, Mass., which operates BJ's Wholesale Clubs, a discount warehouse chain, and Home Base, a chain of hardware stores.


Boston, Where Puritan Meets Sybarite
AT BOSTON'S ISABELLA STEWART Gardner Museum, I'm making a sentimental pilgrimage to see the painting on which, as a college freshman, I was required to write a paper.
As I dimly understood the then-current art history argot, I was meant to discuss the composition of Titian's "Rape of Europa" without mentioning the fact that a half-naked, voluptuous woman was being carried off by a giant bull for Lord-knows-what interspecies amour.
Despite the oddity -- some might say the perversity -- of the assignment, I've always been grateful to my professor for having sent me to what was then, and still is, my favorite place in Boston: the pastel Italianate villa built in 1903 at the edge of the swampy Fens to house Mrs.
Gardner's eclectic, defiantly personal collection.
The Titian is more beautiful, more erotic than I remember, and I leave it a little reluctantly to drift from room to room, moving from the Gothic fantasy to the Orientalist, from the high Victorian to the quattrocento, in this theme park for art lovers: Isabellaland.


The Tom and Gerry Show
To the Editor:
"Tom and Gerry" reflected the complete self-indulgence and combativeness of two small boys.
Shame on them!
Opportunity lost!


Caren B. Low And Glen Coben
Caren Beth Low, the daughter of Robert and Frieda Low of Scarsdale, N.Y., was married last evening to Glen Coben, a son of Donald and Leah Coben of Boynton Beach, Fla.
Rabbi Peter Rubenstein performed the ceremony at the Old Oaks Country Club in Purchase, N.Y.
Ms.
Low, 31, is keeping her name.
She was until recently the manager of retail planning and analysis at J. Crew Inc., the clothing company, in New York.
She graduated from Lehigh University and received an M.B.A. from Fordham University.
Her father, a marketing consultant in Scarsdale, is the former president and a founder of the Savin Corporation, a manufacturer of copiers.


It Was More Than Rough Sex
To the Editor:
Your review of "Sade" (Aug. 15), Maurice Lever's biography of the Marquis de Sade, horrified me.
The color illustration distinctly idealizes him, while the headline bemoans his position as a "prisoner of pleasure" and the subhead minimizes his assaults on women and children as "rough sex." Lynn Hunt ends her review by elevating Sade to the ranks of philosophers like Nietzsche and Artaud.
Adding insult to injury, Mr.
Lever urges us in an interview to identify with Sade's tragic inability to "sympathize with those in pain" by reminding readers of "our" instinctive pleasure in witnessing live television footage of a husband killing his wife.


Putting Tomatoes to the Taste Test
THE Brandywine tomato is what started the whole thing.
"That is the ugliest tomato," said Cousin Janice the last time she dropped by with a couple melons, a jar of pickles, three zukes, some peppers and a bag of her favorites.
"Celebrity," she said, pulling a perfectly round red tomato out of the bag.
It was big, too.
"Now that's what a tomato is supposed to look like." I tasted it.
It was pretty good, though the skin was a little tough, and I like my tomatoes tangier.


Blending In With the Home Crowd
EVEN the most intrepid traveler has lonely moments, times when voyeurism and the zeal of discovery are eclipsed by the rueful sense of being The Other.
The exhilaration of being unaccountable and apart-from languishes.
Exploring landmarks, soaking in the landscape, lolling in a hotel, the traveler can be seized with an irrepressible desire to clamber over the barriers of language, culture and currency and become a participant rather than an observer.
When I have been stricken with a bad case of wanting-to-belong abroad, especially in Italy, I have found that the best strategy is to lurk around a busy center of local life and, after watching for certain telltale signs, follow the local people.
Almost invariably they have led me to the sorts of gathering places that are too modest to make the guidebooks, too unassuming to recognize the traveler as The Other.


Kasparov Hurls Back Attack With Precise Defense
Nigel Short strained as hard as he could to smash Gary Kasparov's king position yesterday in Game 3 of their world championship match in London, but he ran into the Russian's granite defense and was relentlessly denied the prize he aimed for.
Kasparov thus widened his lead to 2 1/2- 1/2 in the 24-game series.
The winner will get about $1.43 million, the loser, $861,000.


Haute Hospital: At Your Service
A solicitous doorman in crisp safari suit and pith helment is on hand to welcome guests.
The rooms have been freshly painted and the staff newly trained in hospitality.
An entirely new kitchen produces designer meals served on elegant midnight blue trays with touches of shocking pink.
No, it's not a five-star hotel but the New York Hospital-Cornell Medical Center.
In an increasingly competitive hospital industry, New York-Cornell is adopting some of the amenities and atmosphere of a luxury hotel.
In a joint effort with the Pierre Hotel at Fifth Avenue and 61st Street, the hospital is learning how to treat all its patients more like hotel guests.
At the same time, the hotel is expanding its knowledge of nutritious foods.


Ms. America
IN the teal-carpeted Media Center in the basement of the Convention Center in Atlantic City, many perky, pretty young women in shorts, T-shirts and sneakers were talking earnestly about hair.
Not just any hair.
Miss America's hair.
Important hair.
Hair that will wear a crown of rhinestones and go on tour to hundreds of schools, malls, parades, talk shows and P.T.A. meetings.
Hair that may well appear in testimony before the House of Representatives and gain an audience with the President of the United States.
This is hair purporting to represent the hair of the American woman of 1993.
And that woman, said Cindy Sims, the current Miss West Virginia, "can do her own hair."
Miss America has hit a turning point.
For the first time in 72 years, contestants will be forbidden from bringing entourages of hairdressers and makeup artists to this year's pageant, which NBC will telecast live from Atlantic City at 10 P.M.
Saturday night.
Television ratings were down precipitously in the last five years.
The show's producer for the last 31 years has been replaced.
In another momentous departure, pants are now permitted in the evening-wear competition.


Acquiring Finesse in the Art of Platform Diving
EACH summer the Muggers leave Manhattan and head for the suburbs.
To dive.


London
YOU'VE JUST LANDED in London, en route to Copenhagen and opening night at the opera, when it hits you like a thunderbolt: you've left your cummerbund home in Manhattan.
If you've touched down at Heathrow Airport's Terminal 3 -- and chances are you have if you've crossed the Atlantic on Virgin Atlantic Airways or any of the American carriers -- you're in luck.
Thomas Pink, a London shirt maker, recently opened a shop off the transit lounge where you can purchase a cummerbund for a cool, tax-free $51, about $9 off the price you'd pay on Jermyn Street.
Anybody with a few hours to dispose of will find plenty of diversions in Terminal 3, which includes one of the largest tax- and duty-free shopping complexes in Europe.
Retailers like Burberrys and Swatch have opened outlets, and so has Ballys, where the store assistants regularly switch the shoes on display, according to flight schedules: when Americans are passing through, it is the more classic look; when passengers from the Indian subcontinent or the Middle East are changing planes, they put out slightly higher heels with fancier trim.


CLINTON SCRAMBLES TO FIND FINANCING FOR HEALTH PLAN
Just days after sending a detailed description of President Clinton's health plan to Congress, Administration officials scrambled today to find new ways to pay for it, as they acknowledged that Congress would probably not accept deep cuts in the growth of Medicare and Medicaid.
The officials said they were considering several options, including a new Federal tax on hospitals, if they are forced to scale back the proposals on Medicare and Medicaid, the programs for the elderly and the poor.


It's as Big as the Period at the End of This Sentence.
ONCE upon a time, when the world was simpler, a foot was really as long as someone's foot, and a cubit the distance from someone's elbow to the end of the middle finger.
Now we measure things that are much smaller than shoes and larger than arks, but there is still a desire to put them in a human context.
Sometimes, comparisons to the old and familiar work -- so many football fields, so many times to the moon.
But sometimes it seems as if nature is too much with us as we try to express our expanding powers of science and industry in comprehensible terms.


The Little Woman?
To the Editor:
In his review of my husband's book, "A Hunter's Road" (Aug. 15), John Haines rather patronizingly says that I "must be an extraordinarily patient and indulgent woman to have put up with  [ my husband's ]  adolescent wandering and maiming of things."


Blisters, Cracks and Other Problems of Flat Roofs
ROOF care is a priority as fall approaches.
Flat and low-sloped roofs require special attention.
Although they can provide years of trouble-free service when properly maintained, such roofs develop major problems if wear and minor damage are neglected.
Most flat and low-sloped roofs are built up with layers of roofing felt and asphalt or coal tar.
On some old houses the roof may be metal with an asphalt coating like that of built-up roofs, but without felts.


Pioline Convinces Masur; Now for Rest of Universe
His ground strokes can be startlingly good.
His serve is cranked up to 115 miles an hour.
His athleticism, court coverage and creativity are simply first-rate.
Cedric Pioline, United States Open finalist, must have been the best player unknown to man until September of 1993.
A weathered Australian, undaunted by the dizzying heights of his own unforeseen ascent to the Open semifinals, searched valiantly for a weakness in the 24-year-old Frenchman's game yesterday.
By the fourth set, Wally Masur figuratively laid his racquet down and threw his hands up in despair, a 6-1, 6-7 (3-7), 7-6 (7-2), 6-1 victim.


Why Wait for November? You Can Vote Now
SO YOU won't get to pick a mayor -- yet.
So David N. Dinkins seems assured of victory, and the Democratic primary is not the usual be-all and end-all, because a Republican named Rudolph W. Giuliani is waiting in the wings for Nov. 2.
There are still plenty of good reasons to vote on Tuesday.
To begin with, you will be able to determine if your polling place has been changed, and with that you'll also know where to vote in November.


Reflections on a Golden City
EVEN ON A FIRST VISIT, THERE is no single place you must see in Prague, no need to be dutiful.
The city gives itself away on every street corner, down every alleyway.
You can't miss it.
Prague is a city of vignettes; it captivates with glimpses, moments, fragments.
It invites digressions and detours, with much meditative pausing at outdoor cafes and wasting of time in the dark warrens of coffeehouses and cellar vinarny over a glass of woodruff-scented Moravian wine.


A Voice Like a Stradivarius
To the Editor:
Having read Nora Sayre's article, "James Mason's Killer Charm"  [ Aug. 22 ] , I am more than pleased to learn that Mason is finally being honored with a retrospective of his motion pictures by the Film Society of Lincoln Center.
He was the consummate film actor and an extraordinary person.


Melanie Goodes, R. Louis Caceres
Melanie Janette Goodes, a daughter of Melvin and Arlene Goodes of Far Hills, N.J., was married yesterday to R. Louis Caceres, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Fernando Caceres of La Paz, Bolivia.
Msgr.
John Corr performed the ceremony at the Roman Catholic Church of Christ the King in New Vernon, N.J.
The bride, 28, is a staff accountant, in Washington, with Price Waterhouse.
She graduated from the University of Virginia.
Her father is the chairman and chief executive of the Warner-Lambert Company in Morris Plains, N.J., maker of pharmaceuticals and other consumer products.


El Paso
OUT IN THE WEST TEXas town of El Paso, there is an airport: El Paso International Airport -- which also happens to have an art gallery, a shopping center called La Placita, a good restaurant and even an Aviation Hall of Fame.
There are certainly many larger airports in the United States, but probably few where one can spend a more amusing hour or two when stuck between flights.
Actually, not all that many people get stuck there anymore.
Years ago, there was a nonstop flight from New York to El Paso, which local people dubbed the Divorce Special, and the airport served as a way station for a spouse en route to the nearby Mexican city of Ciudad Juarez, where a Mexican court would cheaply and efficiently tear asunder whatever had been joined together in this country.


The Palestinians: Who Are They?
Even as ink is drying on the recognition agreement between Israel and the Palestinian Liberation Organization, some Palestinians in Gaza and Jericho will begin the transition from being governed to governing themselves.
They must face problems like those detailed below - illiteracy, gaps in the infrastructure and economic dependency on the very people they rebelled against.


THE DEVIL IN LONG ISLAND
You illustrate the article with a gallery of Long Island kidnappers and murderers, 10 snapshots, ending with a photo of a fat man whose coffin had to be lowered by crane.
What was his crime?
Obesity?
DAVID GALEF Oxford, Miss.


If You're Thinking of Living in: Bronxville; A Bastion Against Urban Encroachment
JUST 2.5 miles north of the New York City line lies a village with distinctive turn-of-the-century homes and an excellent school system within a single craggy and wooded square mile.
Established 95 years ago in the path of a crowded city spilling northward, Bronxville, part of the Town of Eastchester, has fought hard and successfully to preserve the integrity of its village life against urban encroachments.
Almost fully developed by 1940, it now looks much the way it did then.
The average house is over 50 years old, there are only a half dozen vacant building lots and the most recent development occurred in 1972.


Using Photographic Methods To Produce a Quilt Collection
IN a group of quilts on exhibit at Sarah Lawrence College here, Sandra Sider has combined sophisticated photographic imagery with patchwork construction.
Along with nine wall quilts, Ms.
Sider is showing a dozen works on paper that were "drawn by light" in a darkroom.
The quilts are assembled from blocks of fabric on each of which a segment of the photographic image has been printed with a process called cyanotype.
Imparting an image to a fabric by means of an iron stain, this process is compared to that of making blueprints.
It requires that the cloth be sensitized to light in order to accept the image from a negative.


Corrections
An Off Off Broadway listing on page 62 of the Arts and Leisure section today, for "Punch Me in the Stomach," Deb Filler's one-woman show at the Jewish Museum, misstates today's performance time.
It is 2 P.M., not noon.


A Bright Idea For the Elderly
Almost a year after construction began on a vacant lot where Thomas A. Edison's studio made movies nearly a century ago, a much-needed apartment building for the low-income elderly is almost ready.
The new building, called Edison Arms, has received more than three applicants for each of the 69 studio and one-bedroom apartments, all being rented for $400 a month.


Mitchell Gone for Year
The season ended for KEVIN MITCHELL yesterday when the Cincinnati Reds placed the slugger on the 60-day disabled list with a torn rotator cuff in his left shoulder.
Mitchell, 31, will undergo surgery on his shoulder and left foot.
Mitchell has had a broken sesamoid bone in his left foot since spring training and had been receiving cortisone shots to keep playing despite the injury.
He finished with a .341 batting average in 93 games, with 19 homers and 64 runs batted in.(AP)


Graf Wins U.S. Open


Shakespeare, With a Touch of Fellini
SO much happens in "The Comedy of Errors," but so little of it matters.
Only a resourceful director can turn the inconsequential play, possibly Shakespeare's first and easily his shortest, into a smashing show.
For the New Jersey Shakespeare Festival, Bonnie J. Monte wisely avoids excess, given a confining stage and a play that overflows with the fixings of farce.
"The Comedy of Errors" has grown accustomed to circuslike antics, clowning and acrobatics, as in last year's New York Shakespeare Festival production in Central Park or the 1987 Lincoln Center staging, which was a display piece for the Flying Karamazov Brothers and Avner the Eccentric.


Defending Cyberspace
To the Editor:
I'm not sure if I should scold you or praise you for publishing Nick Ravo and Eric Nash's shallow, snide cyberpunk time line ("The Evolution of Cyberpunk," Aug. 8).
Scold you, because the piece gives the impression that everybody interested in cyberspace is a cyberpunk.
The vast majority of people who cruise the Internet don't wear black clothes, pierce their bodies in unusual places, participate in virtual sex or consume "smart drugs."


For Snacking or More, Day Into Night
IT probably should not be a surprise when a popular hangout like Brett's in Greenwich opens an additional place.
Voila!
Now we now have Brett's Pasta Cafe in Ridgefield.
The formula is similar: A menu of trendy items; pared-back decor of pale yellow walls, natural wood floors, bentwood chairs and glass-top tables; a friendly if offhand service staff and prices moderate enough to attract a youngish crowd.


N.B.A. Is Going to the Loophole
This weekend's National Basketball Association meetings are mostly about a loophole.
The Nets offered Chris Dudley $3 million a year, Portland offered him $790,000 a year, and he chose the Pacific Northwest.
How could he?
"It's the redwoods," said N.B.A. Commissioner David Stern.


New Man at Helm of the 115th
In the last few weeks, Arnold Dansky has moved single-mindedly through the clogged streets of Jackson Heights, past shops selling Indian trinkets and spices, clubs serving immigrants from Colombia and South Korea, and newsstands hawking papers from as far off as Quito, Ecuador.
He is the newest commander of the Police Department's 115th Precinct, with more than 150 officers, but he rambles about like some small-town constable, glad-handing residents and merchants along the way.


SEPT. 5-11: Public TV's Miscue; Death-Camp Liberators, And Prisoners of the Facts
Recently, it seems, hardly a month has gone by without an investigation into the veracity of a major non-fictional production on television.
First "Dateline NBC" was forced to acknowledge on the air that it had attached incendiary devices to a G.M. pickup truck so a fire could erupt after a test crash.
Then it was accused of unfairness in its portrayal of an eye clinic's eagerness to perform surgery.
Last week, WNET, the public television station in New York, announced the findings from a five-month investigation of "Liberators: Fighting on Two Fronts in World War II," a documentary that was broadcast nationally last fall.
The documentary, which WNET helped produce, portrayed members of a black tank battalion as liberators of the Nazi concentration camps at Dachau and Buchenwald.


What's at Stake for Voters in the Primary on Tuesday
ENROLLED Republicans, Democrats and Conservatives will be choosing their party's candidates in many races Tuesday, Primary Day, for what promises to be one of the county's most dramatic November elections.
All three of Westchester's countywide offices -- county executive, county clerk and district attorney -- are being contested this year and in two of those races, for county executive and district attorney, Democrats are vying for their party's designation.


THE GUIDE
GAELIC TALES
Some people may be familiar with Fingal's Cave, an extraordinary spot in the Hebrides islands that inspired a 20-year-old Mendelssohn to write an overture.
The cavern was also much admired by Turner, Keats and Tennyson.
Many, however, would find it difficult to say who Fingal was exactly -- unless, of course, they happened to be Irish or Scotch.
Marianne McShane, an Irish storyteller who has lived in the United States since 1982, will tell listeners all about this legendary Celtic hero in a program combining storytelling and music at the Chappaqua Library on Saturday at 8 P.M.


G.M. Offers To Extend Payments For 2 Years
GENERAL MOTORS has offered to continue local payments worth an estimated $5 million for two years after it closes its auto-manufacturing plant here in order to avoid complying with a recently enacted tough environmental cleanup regulation.
Among other things, the law -- adopted by the village five months ago -- would hold the automaker responsible for any pollution to the Hudson River, which is next to the 2.5- million-square-foot assembly plant.


Excellent Nachos
HARRY'S BURRITO JUNCTION  ($25 and Under)  (212) 580-9494; 241 Columbus Avenue, at 71st Street; $; no credit cards


Who Says 62-Year-Olds Should Be Called 'Elderly'?
To the Editor:
A recent article described the mugging of an "elderly" couple in Queens.
Imagine my dismay when I read that they were 62 (my age) and 64.
Who defined them as elderly?
Some wet-behind-the-ears young whippersnapper, no doubt.
Get with the new definitions, bub.
Charlton Heston is 68dob 10/4/24, per both Who's Who in America and Encyclopedia of Film.
"Elderly"?
I think not.
Elderly is 85.
Or 90.
Or 100.
I'll let you know when I get there.
DOROTHY ALLEN New Rochelle


Mideast Accord; 10 Palestinian Factions Call For Broad Strike on Monday
Ten Damascus-based Palestinian groups have called a general strike for Monday, when the P.L.O.'s peace agreement with Israel is to be signed in Washington.
A spokesman for the groups said Palestinians in the Israeli-occupied territories and in refugee camps in Syria, Jordan and Lebanon had been asked to mark "the black day in which the national rights of the Palestinian people are given up" with strikes and protest marches.


Rousting the Peddlers of 125th Street
The bustling heart of Harlem's business district, 125th Street, is also a vivid street market where hundreds of street peddlers lay out clothing, food, books, political buttons and religious pamphlets.
Come fall, though, in the first major move arising from a citywide crackdown on vendors, the vendors will be forced out and into a new open-air market around the corner.
The peddlers -- licensed and unlicensed alike -- will be given certificates entitling them to sell their wares at the new market, primarily between Adam Clayton Powell Jr.
Boulevard and St.
Nicholas Avenue.
Those who remain on 125th Street will be moved by the police.


Elisabeth Murdoch and Elkin Pianim
Elisabeth Murdoch, the daughter of Rupert Murdoch, the head of the News Corporation, and Anna Murdoch of Beverly Hills, Calif., was married in Los Angeles on Friday to Elkin Kwesi Pianim, a son of A. Kwame and Cornelia Pianim of Accra, Ghana.
The Rev.
John J. Ward, an Auxiliary Bishop of the Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Los Angeles, performed the ceremony at St.
Timothy's Church.
Ms.
Murdoch, 25, is keeping her name.
She and her husband graduated from Vassar College.
The bride is the manager of program acquisitions for FX, a Fox Inc. cable television service in development in Los Angeles and owned by the News Corporation.


Clinton's Big Gamble; Spreading the Pain of Health-Care Reform
IN the end, governments have a limited number of tools available to fix things domestic.
They can regulate, they can tax, they can spend and their leaders can exhort.
And they are assured of tremendous grief anytime they do any of the first three.
So they sometimes follow a normal human impulse and look for some way to share the burden.
The 246 pages of health-care proposals that were made unofficially public last week represent the promise, the gamble and perhaps the measure of Bill Clinton's presidency are also a textbook example of how to share these unpleasant tasks.
The plan's vision is health care, at reasonable cost, for all.
Its structure reflects its essential gamble: that the despised tools of taxation and regulation have been camouflaged in enough different ways to make the proposal politically palatable.
Understand this, and it is easier to understand why President Clinton's effort to exercise new control over one-seventh of the nation's economy seems so complex.


Essay; A Talk With Clinton
What does President Clinton think of the muttering on the right in Israel that when Likud comes back into power, today's agreement with the P.L.O. would be abrogated?
"It concerns me, although our information is that Mr.  [ Benjamin ]  Netanyahu has been quite careful about his comments. Israel is a democracy, and historically democracies have honored the commitments that their governments have made with others along their borders, even with a transition government," President Clinton said in an interview on the eve of the signing of the first pact between Israel and the P.L.O.


Melissa Landau, William Steinman
Melissa Beth Landau, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Thomas K. Landau of Mamaroneck, N.Y., was married yesterday to William B. Fenning Steinman, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
David G. Steinman of Waitsfield, Vt.
Rabbi H. Leonard Poller performed the ceremony at the Larchmont (N.Y.) Temple.
Mrs.
Steinman, 24, and Mr.
Steinman, 25, will become associates at law firms in Washington this fall, she at Venable, Baetjer &amp; Howard, he at Winston &amp; Strawn.
The bride graduated cum laude from Columbia University, and she and the bridegroom received law degrees from Harvard University.


Dividend Meetings
Following is a partial list of dividend meetings this week:  MONDAY


Marino's 6th Sense Vanishes In a Rush
Miami quarterback Dan Marino is one of the most feared passers in the National Football League because he possesses an uncanny knack for feeling defensive pressure and getting rid of the ball.
And he has seen virtually every defensive disguise, stunt, blitz or wrinkle that a team wants to throw his way.
So, nothing really fools him.
But for the better part of this afternoon, the Jets' defense stared down Marino, and the Dolphins' offense blinked.


More Evening Hours for Libraries
There is a library in nearly every community in New York City, offering children and adults an oasis of comfort and tranquillity, where questions can be answered and curiosity safely exercised.
Yet since 1991 many of the 206 branches have been closed, for a good portion of most days, to the neighborhoods they serve because of the city's budget crisis.
In 1991 some branches were closed for all but 14 hours a week.
By the end of this month the libraries will begin to rebound from the bruising budget cuts.
A $23 million increase in New York City's fiscal 1994 budget will enable the libraries to resume some operation in all branches six days a week by May 1994.
That is a big step forward.


Harold Boreanaz, 62, A Lawyer in Buffalo
Harold J. Boreanaz, a defense lawyer in Buffalo whose many clients included a former mayor of Syracuse, died on Friday in the Roswell Park Cancer Institute in Buffalo.
He was 62 and lived in Williamsville, a Buffalo suburb.
The cause was a small intestinal cancer diagnosed several weeks ago, said his son Robert L., who was also a law partner of his.


Brooklyn Boy, 14, Is Killed by Gunshot
A 14-year-old boy was fatally wounded by a gunshot in the chest at a home in Brooklyn yesterday by a young man who told the police that a handgun he was showing the boy had discharged accidentally.
Sgt.
Frances Haimeck, a police spokeswoman, said the victim, Manuel Gonzalez, whose address was unknown, was shot just before 4 P.M. in a bedroom at the home of a friend at 506 Elton Street in East New York.
He was dead on arrival at Brookdale Hospital.


Man Is Fatally Stabbed in Brooklyn Subway
An East New York man was fatally stabbed and robbed in a Brooklyn subway station Saturday night in front of a token booth clerk, the transit police said.
The man, Kenneth Sigismundi, 45, was attacked by a knife-wielding robber who followed him from a grocery where he had just won about $95 in a video poker game, the transit police said.
The attack occurred just after 11 P.M. in the Franklin Avenue station on the A line at Fulton Street in Fort Greene.


Israel and Jordan Plan Talks: Text of the Informal Agenda
Following is the text of the informal draft agenda for talks between Jordan and Israel provided by Jordanian officials:
A.
Goal: The achievement of a just, lasting and comprehensive peace between the Arab states, the Palestinians and Israel as per the Madrid Invitation.
B.Components of Israel-Jordan peace negotiations:


MIDEAST ACCORD: The Scene; In Washington, Arafat Brings Joy and Confusion to a Hotel
As Yasir Arafat settled into the ANA Westin Hotel here this evening, the buzz in the lobby was in Hebrew and Arabic, the guests from a midday Jewish wedding had mostly left and a handful of pharmaceutical executives bemoaned the commotion.
Nasser Ali, a Palestinian-American wearing blue jeans, a denim jacket, and a T-shirt with red and green stripes and the word "Palestine" on it, stood in the lobby excitedly discussing his sighting of Mr.
Arafat.


Broadway Musicians Avert Strike
Contract negotiations between Broadway producers and Local 802 of the American Federation of Musicians were adjourned last night after a session lasting more than five hours.
A strike was averted for the near future, and three new negotiating sessions were set for this week.
Although no issues were resolved, both sides expressed cautious optimism.
"There will be no strike tonight, and there was slight movement in the negotiations," said Judy West, the union's director of public relations.
The three-year contract expired at midnight.


CHRONICLE
His image may forever be engraved in the public's mind as that of John-Boy in "The Waltons," the hit television series of the mid-1970's, but RICHARD THOMAS has long been an actor of wider scope.
Now he is about to open in the title role in Shakespeare's "Richard II," a play of political power that opens in a city of political power, Washington, on Sunday.
"Shakespeare's plays deal with power and how it changes hands," Mr.
Thomas said the other day during a break in rehearsals at the Shakespeare Theater in Washington.
"They have a lot of resonance in the nation's capital."


Business Digest
Companies
Viacom will acquire Paramount Communications for $8.2 billion in cash and stock, a merger that would create a formidable power in entertainment programming and distribution worldwide and be the second-largest deal ever in the media industry.
The agreement brings the sale of the last of the major independent film companies, Paramount Pictures, which was founded in 1912.
Among Paramount's other entertainment businesses are Paramount Television, Madison Square Garden, the New York Knicks basketball team and New York Rangers hockey team.
Its publishing interests include Simon &amp; Schuster, Prentice Hall and Pocket Books.  [ Page A1. ]  For Paramount and its chairman, Martin S. Davis, the accord is a coup of sorts.  [ D3. ]  For Viacom's Sumner M. Redstone, the deal is seen as a "career capper."  [ D3. ]


Traders Disappointed By Municipal Bond Rise
Municipal bonds seemed to have everything going for them, but they have not performed like many analysts had predicted.
Since it became clear that the Clinton deficit plan would mean higher income tax rates, traders and analysts have been promoting the tax-exempt market, where the after-tax yield on a 30-year double-A municipal bond could reach 8 percent for those in the new 36 percent tax bracket.


Issues in Race for Comptroller


Melissa Belman, Steven Abeles
Melissa Hope Belman, the daughter of Drs.
Anita and Stefan Belman of Laurel Hollow, L.I., was married in her parents' home yesterday to Steven Charles Abeles, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Herbert A. Abeles of Annapolis, Md.
Rabbi Stuart Weinblatt performed the ceremony.
Ms.
Belman, 29, is keeping her name.
She is a graduate of Oberlin College.
She and her husband, a graduate of the University of Maryland, received master's degrees in public and private management from Yale University.


TRANSACTIONS
WEEKEND Baseball American League  BALTIMORE ORIOLES -- Activated Rick Sutcliffe, pitcher, from the 15-day disabled list.


Review/Dance; Works With Stories Open a Series
Richard Colton and Amy Spencer are performers and choreographers with a restless intelligence.
The two dramatic pieces in "Pursuing the Pleiades," a program presented by Spencer/Colton on Saturday night at the Bessie Schonberg Theater, were inspired by short stories by Grace Paley and Anton Chekhov.
Mr.
Colton, a former Joffrey Ballet lead dancer, and Ms.
Spencer both performed with Twyla Tharp and with Mikhail Baryshnikov's White Oak Dance Project.
They have used those influences to make something of their own that bears the mark of their distinctive ways of moving.
But the performing was often more interesting than what was performed in the handsomely produced program, which opened Dance Theater Workshop's Out-of-Towners 1993 series.


After Decades of Hatred, a Thaw: Israel and the Palestinians


RESULTS PLUS
SOCCER Uruguay Is Still Alive for '94 World Cup Uruguay kept its World Cup hopes alive yesterday with a 2-1 victory against Bolivia in a South American qualifying game.
David Fonseca scored the winning goal during injury time at the end of the first half at Centenario Stadium in Montevideo, Uruguay.
With only one round remaining in South American Group B, neither of the two berths is settled.
Bolivia, Brazil and Uruguay all have 10 points with Sunday's two games to decide the issue.
Bolivia, once seemingly secure in its bid for a World Cup bid, and Brazil need a draw to qualify.
Uruguay needs a victory, or a draw and a Bolivian loss, to get to next summer's World Cup in the United States. (AP) AUTO RACING Hill Wins in Italy as Prost's Engine Blows Damon Hill had a bad start and a good finish in the Italian Grand Prix yesterday in Monza, Italy.
His French teammate, Alain Prost, had quite the reverse.
Jean Alesi of France thrilled Italian fans by driving a Ferrari to second place, and Michael Andretti finished third, his best Formula One finish this year, in a McLaren-Ford.
Andretti, who fought back in the second half of the race after spinning off in the second lap, said he was delighted to have made his first trip to the podium in Formula One.
Prost, a 38-year-old French veteran, saw his Renault engine explode four and a half laps from the checkered flag and from his fourth world title.
He led for 48 laps after roaring off from the pole position. (AP) Fittipaldi Is Still in the Race: Emerson Fittipaldi kept the Indy-car championship battle alive with a runaway victory in the Pioneer Electronics 200 at Mid-Ohio Sports Car Course in Lexington, Ohio.
It was a turnaround for Fittipaldi, who had been struggling since winning at Portland, Ore., on June 27, and a day of missed opportunities for PPG Cup point leader, Nigel Mansell, and Fittipaldi's teammate, Paul Tracy.
Mansell, who went into the 199.3-mile, 89-lap race with a 34-point lead over Fittipaldi and a 47-point lead over Tracy, started from the pole and had a good chance to wrap up the championship with two races remaining. (AP) GOLF Birdie on 18th Gives Frost Canadian Title David Frost, given an opening by the back-nine collapse of Brad Bryant, two-putted for birdie on the final hole yesterday to win the Canadian Open by a stroke.
The 34-year-old South African scored his seventh PGA Tour victory, closing with a four-under-par 68 for a 279 total on the Glen Abbey Golf Club course in Oakville, Ontario. (AP) Elements Are Kind to Murphy: First the weather took away some of Bob Murphy's weapons.
Then it gave him his second victory on the Senior PGA Tour.
Murphy became the winner of the GTE North Classic in Indianapolis when rain and lightning forced officials to cancel yesterday's final round of the 54-hole tournament.
Murphy never had to take a club out of his bag to win with a 10-under 134. (AP) DOG SHOW  Schnauzer Takes Top Honors A standard schnauzer, Ch.
Kennebunk Special Beau, owned by Ruth Black, Dr.
Katherine Black-Lee and Peter and Ramona Fine of Andover, Mass., was named best in show yesterday at the 76th Westchester Kennel Club fixture, the most prestigious outdoor show in the East, on the grounds of the Lyndhurst estate in Tarrytown, N.Y.
It was the fourth top award for Beau, as the 5-year-old dog is called.


S. T. Gardiner, D. L. Kornblau
Susannah Tiffany Gardiner, a daughter of Jane and Charles Gardiner of Manchester, Mass., was married yesterday to David Leon Kornblau, a son of Marvin and Lois Kornblau of Great Neck, L.I.
Cantor Robert Abelson performed the ceremony at a house owned by the bride's family in Gardiner, Me..
Ms.
Gardiner, 30, is keeping her name.
She is the senior editor of Art &amp; Auction magazine in New York.
She graduated from Harvard University.
Her father is a software engineer with Bolt Beranek &amp; Newman Inc., a software technology company in Cambridge, Mass.


Add Another Weird One to the Mets' Record Book
The Mets, of course, haven't been too good in their pursuit of success.
But get them chasing an oddity -- a no-hitter, 100 defeats, a finish behind an expansion club, a record for failing to win two consecutive games -- and the Mets are relentless.
And so there wasn't much doubt how the drama of the peculiar would turn out when the Mets' Sid Fernandez walked to the mound to start the ninth yesterday against the Cubs.
The left-hander had retired the Cubs through eight innings on nothing but fly balls and strikeouts.
Only 10 times in the entire history of the game had a club not had to record an infield assist during the course of a game.


Jordan Sets Basis for Talks
Jordan and Israel have agreed on an agenda for talks, to include water rights, boundaries and the plight of Palestinian refugees.
Page A12.


White House Memo; Overselling Efficiency? White House Fat Shows
Live television call-in shows can be treacherous.
But everything was going smoothly for Al from Washington until Dennis from Los Angeles called in.
"In light of Government cuts, Mr. Vice President, why is it that the President maintains one office and you maintain five, including one down in Tennessee?" Dennis asked Al Gore last week on NBC's "Today."


Rebecca Lipman, John A. Cutler
Rebecca Lisa Lipman, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Melvin D. Lipman of Greens Farms, Conn., was married yesterday to John Asher Cutler, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Stephen D. Cutler of Chestnut Hill, Mass.
Cantor Mark Lipson performed the ceremony at the home of the bride's parents.
Mrs.
Cutler, 25, is an associate at the New York law firm of Cravath, Swaine &amp; Moore.
She graduated cum laude from Bryn Mawr College, from which she also received a master's degree in Russian.
She received a law degree from Harvard University.


Most Israeli Papers Endorse Peace Accord
Most major Israeli newspapers today praised the draft peace agreement between Israel and the Palestine Liberation Organization, and spoke hopefully of a new era now that Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin and the P.L.O. chairman, Yasir Arafat, will be together at the signing ceremony at the White House on Monday.
But there was considerable caution as well, reflecting widespread queasiness among Israelis about the prospect of their national leader possibly shaking hands with a man long reviled here as a sponsor of terrorism.


INDUSTRY SEES HINT OF SLOWER GROWTH IN HEALTH SPENDING
After years of startling increases, the growth in health spending unexpectedly appears to have relented somewhat over the last 12 months, according to unpublished data from insurance companies, employers and hospitals.
The signs of a slowdown in medical costs, which have surged by about 11 percent annually over the last five years, are scattered and too recent to show up in official national statistics.
And despite new evidence of restraint, the growth remains head-turning, certainly far above the growth in total spending in the economy, which is now around 5 percent.
That means health care will continue to consume an ever-greater share of the gross national product.


As Mayor of 20 Years Retires, Detroit Faces a New Kind of Election
Detroit voters go to the polls on Tuesday in the first round of a nonpartisan Mayoral election that all 23 candidates seem to agree is this troubled city's most interesting and important contest in two decades.
Not coincidentally, it is also the first time since 1969 that the incumbent, Coleman A. Young, will not be on the ballot.
Battling emphysema and declining political support, Mr.
Young, 75, who built a powerful political machine in 20 years as Mayor, announced on the very last filing day, June 22, that he would not seek a sixth four-year term in the office he first won in 1973.


MIDEAST ACCORD: The Overview; Arafat Arrives in U.S. to 'Make Peace'
After a lifetime of violent struggle for a Palestinian homeland, Yasir Arafat set foot on American soil today and expressed hope that an agreement with Israel would bring peace to the Middle East.
There was no red carpet or military brass band for Mr.
Arafat, the chairman of the Palestine Liberation Organization, who smiled broadly as he greeted about 70 P.L.O. officials, Arab ambassadors and Palestinian-Americans with kisses on both cheeks.


It's Not October or a Brauhaus, but New Jersey Goes German Anyway


Lead Poisoning Policies Have to Be Tough
To the Editor:
In "Regulated Senseless in New York City" (Op-Ed, Aug. 21), on Department of Health policies to prevent lead poisoning of children in their homes, Richard Miniter complains that "the city is doing a poor job of identifying and remedying the most serious risks."


Rypien Goes Out; Redskins Go Under
What's the worst thing that could happen here in the nation's capital?
The Administration's losing an election?
One tax increase on top of another?
A beverage shortage at Georgetown watering holes?


Andreotti Hires an Ex-U.S. Aide in His Mafia Case
Former Prime Minister Giulio Andreotti has jolted Italian investigators by retaining a former State Department counsel, Abraham D. Sofaer, to argue his case to the United States that it should lift the immunity of two Mafia turncoats who asserted that he was linked to the Mafia.
Mr.
Andreotti, who is under investigation here on charges of Mafia association, has denied having any ties to organized crime.


The Candidates on the Issues
The Democratic contestants for Comptroller and Public Advocate offer their views of the offices and some major issues.
With information on poll locations and hours.
Page B2.


He's There to Brighten Your Day


Bills Get Measure of Revenge Against Cowboys
The Buffalo Bills still haven't won the Super Bowl.
But for one Sunday, at least, they beat the Dallas Cowboys and made them look bad.
But make no mistake.
These two teams are different from the ones that met last January when Dallas roared to a 52-17 victory, helped by nine turnovers.


Yankee Stadium Needs A Metro-North Station
To the Editor:
Re "Yankee Stadium Needs Satellite Parking Lot With a Shuttle Bus" (letter, Aug. 30): The satellite parking lot Yankee Stadium needs isn't the giant shopping center in Yonkers.
It's the lots and garages in White Plains, Stamford, Scarsdale and the other towns in New York and Connecticut with Metro-North stations.


Andrew Rehfeld, Miggie Greenberg
Dr.
Margaret Greenberg, a daughter of Daniel S. Greenberg and Polly Greenberg, both of Washington, was married yesterday to Andrew Rehfeld, a son of Beverly Rehfeld of Wynnewood, Pa., and R. Rex Rehfeld of Baltimore.
Rabbi Peter Schaktman and Rabbi Julie Greenberg, the bride's sister, performed the ceremony at Wyndham House on the campus of Bryn Mawr College in Bryn Mawr, Pa.
Dr.
Greenberg, who is keeping her name, is known as Miggie.
She is a resident in psychiatry at the University of Chicago Hospital.
She graduated from Mills College and received a medical degree from the Case Western Reserve School of Medicine.


Sports of The Times; 'Dee-fense, Dee-fense' Once Again
ALL around him in Giants Stadium, Carlton Bailey could hear the roaring chant of "dee-fense, dee-fense." The new inside linebacker knew he was no longer in Buffalo.
"Up there," Bailey would say later of his five seasons with the Bills, "the fans get more involved with offense. Up there you had to wave to the fans to yell 'dee-fense.' "


Only Bills Will Be Auctioned By the Treasury This Week
The Treasury's schedule of financings this week is confined to today's regular weekly auction of new three- and six-month bills.
According to traders, at the close of the New York cash market on Friday, the rate on the outstanding three-month bill was at 2.95 percent and the rate on the six-month issue was 3.05 percent.


Protesters Have Their Say as Israeli Ambassador Visits Queens Synagogue


Issues in Race for Public Advocate


U.S. Panel Splits on Ways to Improve the U.N.
A commission invited two years ago by President Bush and Congressional leaders to suggest ways to make the United Nations more effective has produced recommendations, but the group has been unable to agree on them.
A majority of the 16-member panel argued that the end of the cold war has created "a unique chance for a United States-led United Nations to fashion common responses to mankind's common problems."


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY  AN UNUSUAL PRIMARY CAN SHAPE NOVEMBER
New York City headed into an unusual Democratic primary, the first time in decades that the battle for the Democratic mayoral nomination has been overshadowed by November's general election.
As the candidates raced through last-minute appearances, campaign managers and political strategists predicted a desultory Primary Day with a turnout so low as to confound predictions in the races for Comptroller and Public Advocate, whose outcome could affect the dynamics of what is expected to be a bruising confrontation between Mayor David N. Dinkins and the Republican-Liberal candidate, Rudolph W. Giuliani.
A1.
COMPTROLLER UNDER FIRE
Two days before a Democratic primary that has emerged as the most contested race in the city, and at the end of a week in which she broke down in tears when asked to sum up her career, Comptroller Elizabeth Holtzman found herself under fire from former Representative Herman Badillo and Assemblyman Alan G. Hevesi in the final debate of the campaign.
Questions focused on her refusal to allow the lease of an official city report on a loan to her Senate campaign.
B3.


Caron Chess, D. D. Wartenberg
Caron Chess, the daughter of Muriel R. Chess of New York, and Irwin W. Chess of Monmouth Beach, N.J., was married yesterday to Dr.
Daniel D. Wartenberg, a son of Rolf and Hannah Wartenberg of Southampton, L.I.
Rabbi Shana Margolin performed the ceremony at the Mountain Lakes House in Princeton, N.J.
Ms.
Chess, who is keeping her name, is the director of the Center for Environmental Communication at Rutgers University in New Brunswick, N.J.
She graduated magna cum laude from the State University at Buffalo and received a master's degree in environmental communications from the University of Michigan.


Learning to Appreciate the Bug, Closely
Mark Defreitas gingerly held the two-inch-long Madagascan hissing cockroach in his 8-year-old palm and let the bug crawl slowly up his wrist.
"I like bugs," the second grader from Bunker Hill Elementary School here exclaimed as he petted his new-found friend.
"I catch bugs."


TV Coverage Of the Signing
Major networks will provide live coverage today of the signing of the peace agreement between Israel and the Palestine Liberation Organization in Washington.
The ceremony is scheduled to begin at 11 A.M. on the South Lawn at the White House.
CBS will begin live coverage at 10:45 A.M. and continue until the ceremony ends.
ABC and NBC will provide coverage from 11 A.M. until noon.


RU-486: When?
RU-486, the French-manufactured "abortion pill" which should be available here in about two years, has been used safely by thousands of Europeans.
Furthermore, the fact that it can be administered in a physician's office and not in a clinic vulnerable to blockades and bullets permits the procedure to be what it should be: a very private decision between a woman and her doctor.
It is also a pill that may have far wider application -- provided its manufacturer, Roussel-Uclaf, is willing to brave America's anti-abortion activists.
A recent study by a National Academy of Sciences panel found great potential in antiprogestins, a class of drug used in RU-486.
"There appear to be a lot more uses for these drugs than simply as abortive agents," the panel's chairman, Dr.
Leslie Z. Benet, said last week.


Claude Renoir, 79, A Cinematographer With a Painter's Eye
Claude Renoir, a movie cameraman and director of photography who was a grandson of the Impressionist painter Pierre Auguste Renoir, died on Sept. 5 in Troyes, France, 55 miles east of Paris.
He was 79 years old and had a home in the village of Essoyes, not far from Troyes.
Critics praised Mr.
Renoir's skill in using color and in depicting countrysides.
He was a nephew of the film director Jean Renoir and of another Claude Renoir, who produced some of Jean Renoir's movies and died in 1969.


Bridge
The victory of the Dutch team over Norway in the final of the NEC Bermuda Bowl in Santiago, Chile, on Friday was not as comfortable as it might appear on paper.
Although the Dutch began the final 16 deals with a lead of 39 imps, the margin was cut to 15 with five deals remaining.
Norway then had some opportunities but failed to capitalize on them, and lost by 36.
The Dutch supporters, who had been on tenterhooks in the Vugraph theater, were at last able to relax and savor the first victory for their country in a world open team championship.


Both Sides Optimistic on Talks at Ford
Officials of the Ford Motor Company and the United Automobile Workers said today that they expected to avoid a strike and sign a new contract by the time the current one expires just before midnight on Tuesday.
Some issues, such as how the company and union will rein in health care costs, remain unresolved.
But officials on both sides said such lingering differences were not unusual for the bargaining process, in which the top negotiators sit down in the final hours of the old agreement, weigh the results of bargaining by subcommittees on specific issues and begin the serious horse-trading.


Carolyn Schwartz, Lawrence Krawitz
Carolyn Leigh Schwartz, a daughter of Sheila and Allen Schwartz of Stony Brook, L.I., and Lawrence Eric Krawitz, a son of Arlene and Jesse Krawitz of Hartsdale, N.Y., were married yesterday.
Rabbi Elliot Spira performed the ceremony at Temple Beth Shalom in Smithtown, L.I.
Mr. and Mrs.
Krawitz are medical students at the State University at Stony Brook.
Both graduated from Duke University, she cum laude and he summa cum laude.
Mr.
Krawitz was elected to Phi Beta Kappa.


The Warning Shots in Miami
The story was shocking and the specific circumstances unusual.
But did the slaying of another German tourist in Miami last week really warrant the universal attention it received?
Americans are murdered every day in Florida, yet few of these crimes make the front page and prime time.
Is the critical difference, then, the class and race of the victim?
It is a hard question, and a good question.
The other murder victims in Miami -- black, white and Hispanic -- fail to get such attention because their fate is, sad to say, commonplace in this increasingly violent society.
Killing a tourist is not.
The murder of a tourist -- and the shocked reaction in his homeland -- thus forces us to stare at the larger, bloody landscape: an America that has reverted to a frontier society where "hunters" -- to use Florida police terminology -- roam the highways to rob and gun down tourists.


It's More Than Words: Race in Election Year
"MORE Than Words" might be the plaintive cry of Mario M. Cuomo's die-hard supporters, and of his critics, after his nearly three terms as Governor.
It is also the title of his latest book, an anthology of his speeches over two decades.
The phrase might also sum up the 1993 mayoral campaign in New York City, except that the candidates' words have been less eloquent or consistent than Mr.
Cuomo's.
Most of their words may prove to be much less vital in this election than the unspoken way that people feel.
And on the basis of what the candidates have said so far, their words seem unlikely to be immortalized the way Theodore Roosevelt suggested preserving a series of inspiring and substantive open letters between his fellow mayoral candidates, Abram S. Hewitt and Henry George, in 1886.


In Gaza, Violent Resistance to Peace Accord


Thinking the Unthinkable, Japan May Curb Its Bureaucrats' Power
Like most countries, Japan works best when it is closing ranks to battle a perceived foe.
When they were struggling to rebuild after World War II, the Japanese seized on the threat of Communism.
As the cold war faded, overtaking the United States in world markets spurred workers to toil selflessly.
Now, with a new Government and a new generation in charge, Japan has found a new demon, this time from within -- the Government bureaucracy.


Martin Davis Finds His Deal
In 1966, Martin S. Davis began work on the negotiations that led to the acquisition of Paramount Pictures.
Mr.
Davis was then working for the formidable conglomerate-builder Charles Bluhdorn and he struck two deals, worth $150 million for Paramount and Desilu Productions, that put Mr.
Bluhdorn's Gulf and Western Inc. into the film and television business.
Now 27 years later, the 66-year-old executive is overseeing the sale of those companies, along with Paramount's extensive book publishing business, to Viacom Inc.


Review/City Opera; 'Carmen,' With 3 New Cast Members
On Friday night, a new cast came on board the City Opera's "Carmen." Emily Golden, Theresa Cincione and John Horton Murray made their City Opera debuts as Carmen, Micaela and Don Jose, respectively; Dean Peterson sang the matador.
It was an above-average set of leads, greatly outshining a scraggly chorus and diffident orchestra.
Ms.
Golden has a handsome mezzo-soprano voice, lustrously dark in the mezzo range.
While she never fully tied together the many moods of Carmen, she became more convincing as the evening went on; the high tragic tone of the final scene came off superbly.
Ms.
Cincione's soprano was also very fine, clear and coolly expressive.


33 MORE MILITANTS ON TRIAL IN EGYPT
An Egyptian military court today charged a third group of suspected Muslim militants with plotting to overthrow the Government and re-forming the outlawed group that assassinated President Anwar el-Sadat in 1981, defense lawyers said.
The 33 suspects, who were put on trial in Alexandria, were also accused of forming a group to overthrow the Constitution, illegally possessing weapons and hiding fugitives.
They could face the death penalty if convicted.


Books of The Times; From Man to Beast of Prey
To the White Sea  By James Dickey  275 pages. Marc Jaffe/Houghton Mifflin.


General's Father Tied to Nazis? Nonsense
To the Editor:
I was dismayed by your Aug. 28 report that Dmitri Shalikashvili, father of Gen.
John Shalikashvili, President Clinton's choice as Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, fought in a World War II unit of ethnic Georgians organized by the Nazis and commanded by the Waffen SS.
You fail to explain fairly the wartime travails of the Shalikashvili family in Poland.


MIDEAST ACCORD: The Images; P.L.O., Once Banned From Israel's TV, Is Now Getting Abundant Air Time
Yoni Ben-Menachem could not restrain himself.
The first reporter to interview Yasir Arafat on camera for Israeli television, Mr.
Ben-Menachem pumped the hand of the P.L.O. chairman eight days ago and blurted out, "This is a sign of peace."
"We'll meet in Jericho, God willing," Mr.
Arafat replied with a broad smile, referring to the plans for Palestinian self-rule in the West Bank town and in the Gaza Strip.


Democrats Turning Hope Into a Weary Divisiveness
This might have been a time of great expectations for the Democrats of Westchester County.
As they cast their votes in the primary tomorrow, Democrats in this usually Republican county can take comfort that they now outnumber Republicans, 178,753 registrants to 152,729.
And for the first time in generations, they have a solid chance to win the county's top two posts, County Executive and District Attorney, in the general election in November.


They Went Fishing While Custer Died
To the Editor:
In "What Is a River Worth?" (Op-Ed, Aug. 30), Steve Chapple defends the Yellowstone River against a threat of gold mining near Yellowstone National Park.
He states that the Lower Yellowstone has been so degraded by recent human activity that it no longer supports native trout: "When Gen. George Crook bivouacked on the Lower Yellowstone, after the 1876 defeat of Gen. George Custer, his troops caught thousands of cutthroat trout a week."


Protesters Have Their Say as Israeli Ambassador Visits Queens Synagogue


No Headline
"They all want to stay off of Hillary's list of who is responsible for high costs." -- MICHAEL BLUMENFELD, an Empire Blue Cross spokesman, on companies holding down price increases.  [ A16:4. ]


The Earl of Westmorland, 69, Former Chairman of Sotheby's
The Earl of Westmorland, a former chairman of the Sotheby Parke Bernet Group, the international auction company, died on Wednesday in Tetbury, England, near Bristol.
He was 69 and had homes in London and the Bristol area.
The Times of London said he had earlier suffered a paralyzing stroke.


Diana Newman, Isaac D. Corre
Diana Hilary Newman, a daughter of Carol and Melvin Newman of New York, was married yesterday to Isaac Daniel Corre, a son of Nita Corre and Dr.
Alan D. Corre of Milwaukee.
Rabbi Abraham Levy, an uncle of the bridegroom, officiated at the Pierre in New York.
Ms.
Newman, who is keeping her name, was until recently an English teacher at the Ramaz School, a private school in New York.
She graduated summa cum laude from Barnard College, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa.


A Sweet Victory For Hampton
Usually, like any growing running back, Rodney Hampton tries to have a well-rounded breakfast.
Maybe a little cereal here, some toast and eggs there, and throw in a big glass of orange juice.
But, for whatever reason, he was running a little late this morning and he only had time to grab a Snickers bar.
Candy?
For breakfast?
What would Richard Simmons think?
After the way Hampton almost single-handedly demolished the Tampa Bay Buccaneers today, the Giants may recommend he eat a candy bar three times a day.
Behind the powerful legs of the fourth-year running back, who rushed for 134 yards on a career-high 29 carries, and a fired-up Giants defense that stuffed the Buccaneers on an impressive goal-line stand in the third quarter, the Giants went to 2-0 by beating up hapless Tampa Bay, 23-7, before 75,891 at Giants Stadium.


Corrections
A brief article by The Associated Press in some editions yesterday about the decommissioning of the aircraft carrier Forrestal described a 1967 fire aboard the ship incorrectly.
It resulted from the explosion of an American rocket on the deck, not a Vietcong firebombing.


On to Duty-Free Shop For Jolly-Old Rangers
The trophy came from the flea market held in the parking lot next door.
The Rangers didn't mind.
After five days in London, the Rangers have managed to win over the British fans, take in a few sights and rebuild some of their shattered confidence with a pair of victories over the Toronto Maple Leafs in a preseason exhibition series at Wembley Arena.
Today at Wembley, Mike Gartner was awarded a flea-market-issue trophy as "Man of the Tournament" after scoring the game-winning goal in New York's 3-1 victory over Toronto.
The Rangers had beaten the Maple Leafs, 5-3, Saturday afternoon.


Susan A. Waxenberg, Michael A. Bass
Susan Abby Waxenberg, a daughter of Drs.
Barbara and Sheldon Waxenberg of New York, and Michael Alan Bass, the son of Marcia and Stanley Bass of Lake Worth, Fla., were married yesterday at Tappan Hill in Tarrytown, N.Y.
Rabbi Robert Lennick performed the ceremony.
Ms.
Waxenberg, who is keeping her name, is a lawyer at Time Warner Inc. in New York.
She graduated from Radcliffe College and received her law degree from New York University.


Review/City Opera; A Renovated 'Turandot,' With New Choreography
At their best, the standard repertory productions at the New York City Opera are economically staged, yet without an unreasonable sacrifice of detail or even, in some cases, the appearance of lavishness.
This can be a difficult balancing act, but one way the company has made it work is by creating hybrids: productions in which the sets and costumes are retained, but which are reworked, sometimes considerably, by new directors.
The company's "Turandot" has had three directorial renovations since it opened in 1976, the latest being Jonathan Eaton's 1991 restaging, with new choreography by Shi Zheng Chen.
Mr.
Eaton's version returned to the New York State Theater on Saturday evening.


Elizabeth Dinces and Dmitry Svetlov
Dr.
Elizabeth Anne Dinces, the daughter of Stephen and Gale Dinces of Harrison, N.Y., was married yesterday to Dmitry Svetlov, the son of Vladimir Svetlov of Princeton, N.J., and the late Alla Svetlov.
Rabbi Jon Hadden officiated at Tappan Hill in Tarrytown, N.Y.
The bride, 27, is keeping her name.
She graduated from Amherst College, as did her husband, and received her M.D. from the Albert Einstein College of Medicine.
She is a third-year resident in the department of otolaryngology at the University of Medicine and Dentistry of New Jersey in Newark.


Thieves Discover Yet Another Tempting Car Part: the Computer
When Elizabeth Eppich saw that a thief had smashed the window in her mother's 1987 Chevrolet Eurosport, she feared she would find a gaping hole and torn wires where the radio had been.
For a moment, she was relieved: Only the bottom section of the dashboard appeared disturbed.
But when she tried to start the car, nothing happened.
Then Ms.
Eppich, a 21-year-old legal secretary who lives in Queens, realized all too well what the thief had been after.
"Someone took the computer chip," she said in disgust.
"Last year, the same thing happened when somebody stole the computer out of my father's car."


Review/Dance; Movement With the Ease Of a Late-Summer Night
"Summer Dances," presented on Friday night at the Cunningham Studio, lived up to the simplicity and ease of its title.
The program was an evening spent in good company, with three choreographers who seemed intent less on innovation than on quiet exploration.
Dance, music, light and blessedly professional, imaginative projections came together in a seamless whole in "Cloister" and "Edge," both by Carol Blanco.
Movement was even, abstracted and almost secondary to visual effect.
But each dance created a portrait of an interior state.


Indonesia Still Caught In Population Squeeze
To the Editor:
Your Aug. 27 front-page article on Indonesia states that "Indonesia averted a population disaster" by dropping its annual growth rate from 2.4 percent to 1.8 percent.


David G. Cogan, 85, Researcher Into Radiation's Effect on the Eye
David G. Cogan, an international leader in ophthalmology who discovered radiation-induced cataracts in the survivors of the atomic bombing of Japan, died Thursday at a hospital in Wayne, Mich., while on a trip.
He was 85 and lived in Chevy Chase, Md.
The cause was a heart attack, his family said.


Economic Calendar
Listed below are the scheduled release dates for major economic indicators this week.
Monday None Tuesday  Consumer Price Index August Retail Sales August Wednesday  Business Inventories July1 Thursday  Weekly Jobless Claims Industrial Production August  Merchandise Trade July Friday None


Review/Rock; A Touch of Arrogance, With a Twist
Riffs first, explanations later: that's the strategy of the Breeders, who played a sold-out Irving Plaza concert on Friday night.
The Breeders are led by the ever-smiling Kim Deal on rhythm guitar; she used to play bass for the Pixies, and the songs she writes still have bass lines that swagger and pump.
Above them, Kelley Deal (Kim's sister) plays tersely melodic guitar licks, while Kim Deal strums distorted chords on an acoustic guitar and sings in a voice that can be breathy, raw or girlishly winsome.
For the length of a few verses and few choruses, the music has all the confidence of its roots in 1960's surf rock and garage rock; it's lean, brash pop.
But in alternative rock, nothing arrives unmixed.
The Breeders' songs shift abruptly from soft to loud, and they stop and start, mocking their own momentum; they end suddenly, as if determined not to overstay their welcome.
It's a twist on the unquestioning arrogance of previous, overwhelmingly male rock bands, a skepticism made more explicit when Josephine Wiggs, on bass, sang a deadpan version of Aerosmith's "Lord of the Thighs."


Market Place; A wireless telephone venture excites experts, not investors.
FOR months, the initials P.C.S. have quickened the pulse of the telecommunications cognoscenti but not of investors.
How else to explain the indifferent market reaction to the most ambitious P.C.S. project anywhere, the first commercially available cheap wireless telephone service to as many as eight million people in greater London?


GIANT MERGER SET IN ENTERTAINMENT
Marrying a hot cable television company with a legendary Hollywood studio, Viacom Inc. will acquire Paramount Communications Inc. for $8.2 billion in cash and stock, the two companies said yesterday.
The acquisition will create a formidable power in entertainment programming and distribution worldwide and will be the second-largest merger ever in the media industry.
Time Inc. paid $14 billion to acquire Warner Communications Inc. in 1989 to create Time Warner Inc.


Ross Roy Group Gets Kmart Foreign Jobs
The Kmart Corporation, based in Troy, Mich., has named the Ross Roy Group in Bloomfield Hills, Mich., to handle all its marketing communications in the Czech Republic, Slovakia and Mexico, countries where the discount retailer plans to expand rapidly.
Billings have not been determined.


At 32, He Bows Out; A Connecticut Whiz Quits Politics
Jonathan Pelto won his spurs as a certified wunderkind of Connecticut politics at age 23 when, as Gary Hart's state campaign manager, he led a kiddie corps of Hart zealots to a victory over Walter F. Mondale in the 1984 presidential primary.
Elected to the state Legislature that same year, appointed statewide strategist for the Democratic Party at 25, his track seemed set and ever-upward.
The young Congressman from Connecticut, maybe?
With a top-loaded resume and a resonant if nasal baritone, who could tell?


Review/Rock; Aerosmith Delivers The Ritual Rebellion Its Audience Craves
For critics of mass culture, a hard-rock stadium concert provides a lot of ammunition.
They're all virtually the same, and even one of the giants of 70's rock, Aerosmith, who performed on Saturday night at the Brendan Byrne Arena in East Rutherford, N.J., plods through them with the same formula: a few power ballads, solo guitar and drum sections, and lots and lots of volume and excess, especially at the service of rebellion and sexuality.
But critics of pop culture usually put the emphasis in the wrong place, thinking in terms of artists, originality and creativity instead of the audience's needs.
The wildly cheering sellout crowd for Aerosmith had probably seen the same routine dozens of times before, and it didn't care a bit.
There's a clear need, culturally, for some sort of transcendence in entertainment, and the band and its lead singer, Steven Tyler, were there to supply it.
In this case, transcendence came in the form of rebellious decadence, decadence being the quickest way to slip out of the 9-to-5 existence.


G.M.'s Return Signals Revival for Argentina
Fifteen years ago General Motors left Argentina, fed up with coups, military governments and economic policies that produced only inflation and instability.
For Argentina, the closing of G.M.'s two plants was more than just the departure of a giant foreign corporation.
It symbolized industrial descent, a country abandoned by most international businesses.
But things change, and G.M. has now come back to Argentina.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A2-13  YASIR ARAFAT ARRIVES IN THE U.S.
Yasir Arafat, who has spent a lifetime fighting for a Palestinian state, arrived in Washington and espressed hope that the agreements to be signed with Israel will bring peace to the Middle East.
A1  YITZHAK RABIN'S MIXED EMOTIONS  In an interview, Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin of Israel expressed the view of many Israelis -- that even if they support accords with the P.L.O., things have been moving almost too fast.
A1


Sampras Captures His 2d U.S. Open


CLINTON'S HEALTH PLAN: Doctors and Insurers Say Program Would Tread Too Heavily on Their Turfs; Cap on Premiums Is Seen as Stifling Real Competition
The nation's big health insurance companies, who would be central players in President Clinton's plan for overhauling the health care system, say the Administration has taken a perfectly good idea called managed competition and turned it into something more like managed condescension.
In their first reaction to a working draft of the Clinton plan, executives of leading health insurance companies said last weekend that two crucial elements of the plan -- ceilings on insurers' premiums and the powers given to the insurance purchasing groups at the center of the plan -- would leave lumbering government agencies, rather than consumers, to choose what kind of health care Americans receive.


Patents; Computer software from Otis uses fuzzy logic to make elevators smarter and more efficient.
WAITING for an elevator may seem like nothing more than a matter of standing in line, but in fact sophisticated computers decide the best way to deploy cars in modern office buildings.
New artificial intelligence software patented by the Otis Elevator Company could mean more elevators will zoom past a lone person in favor of a large group waiting on a different floor.
The invention uses so-called fuzzy logic to estimate how many people are waiting for elevators.
Fuzzy logic is a programming method that allows computers to deal with uncertainties or information that is considered partly true.
All modern elevator banks are run by complex computer programs that deploy cars with pre-programmed standards -- sending a car to a floor because it is closest, can get there fastest or is already on its way toward that stop.


The Metropolitan Museum Rebuilds the Past
It was early June, and Philippe de Montebello was navigating his way through the workmen's clutter of ladders and sawhorses inhabiting the new 19th-Century European Paintings and Sculpture Galleries in the Metropolitan Museum of Art.
"That is where 'The Hand of God' will be," said Mr. de Montebello, the museum's director, pointing to a diamond of parquet flooring where the celebrated Rodin bronze will stand.


Robin Kallman And Allan Horing
Robin Lynn Kallman, the daughter of Joan G. Kallman and Donald H. Kallman, both of New York, was married yesterday to Allan Horing, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Saul Horing of Woodmere, L.I.
Rabbi David Greenberg officiated at the Jewish Center of the Hamptons in East Hampton, L.I.


Critic's Notebook; TV, by Its Very Nature, Can Stack the Deck
In its exertions to dredge up support for the North American Free Trade Agreement in Congress, which will receive all 2,000 pages of it tomorrow, the Administration may have failed to notice that the battle of the tube is well on its way to being lost.
The weeks of battering are not the work of conspiring news producers or reporters; one imagines that this cadre, sympathetic to ideals like breaking down barriers among neighbors and in no danger of having their jobs shipped to Mexico, would be favorably inclined to the proposed treaty.
The problem for the Administration is with television itself.
Discussions of the agreement, like those on the "MacNeil/Lehrer Newshour," have been performed through a glass dimly.
It takes a powerful dose of civic responsibility to sit through the opposing predictions and predilections; the screen turns as smoggy as Mexico City.
When these encounters are not incomprehensible, they are inconclusive.
Talk show interviewers must be forgiven for fleeing the details of the pact for the good old question of how many votes it will get in the House of Representatives.


Christine Kessler, Marc A. Lebowitz
Christine Kessler, a daughter of Beatriz Abouchar of Garden City, L.I., and the late Dr.
Victor A. Kessler, was married yesterday to Marc Andrew Lebowitz, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert Lebowitz of Merrick, L.I.
Lois Kellerman, a senior leader at the Brooklyn Society for Ethical Culture, officiated at the New York Marriott Financial Center.
Mrs.
Lebowitz, 24, is a retail manager at Episode, a chain of women's clothing stores in New York.
She graduated from the Juilliard School.
Her mother is a credit analyst at J. Abouchar &amp; Sons Inc. in New York, a manufacturer of decorative towels, where the bride's stepfather, Edward D. Abouchar of Garden City, is the vice president.


Mary Moore and George Gomes
Mary Moore, the vice chairman and chief creative officer of the advertising agency Wells Rich Greene BDDP, and George Gomes, a television commercial director, both in New York, were married yesterday in Remsenburg, L.I.
The Rev.
Jean Dix, a Presbyterian minister, performed the ceremony at the Remsenburg Community Church.
Ms.
Moore is the daughter of Violette Szekely of Los Angeles, and the late Steven Medvey.
She is a graduate of Pratt Institute.


PULSE: Livestock
Better breeding and management in animal agriculture, dominated by the dairy industry, has pushed up production in the New York metropolitan region in the last two years, while the number of livestock actually fell.
Dairy operations, which account for more than 50 percent of New York's $3 billion-a-year farming industry, put the state in the third ranking among milk producers nationally and continue to be the strongest form of animal agriculture in Connecticut and New Jersey.
But while allowing farms to increase production, better management has also led to consolidation.
There are about half as many diary farms in the region as 10 years ago.
The beef industry in all three states occupies a small niche in the agricultural economy. (Sources: U.S. Dept. of Agriculture, N.Y. State Agricultural Statistics Service, Departments of Agriculture in each state.)


A Killer in Law School: Admirable or Abominable?
If ever there was a model prisoner it was James J. Hamm, who mortally shot a man during a drug deal in 1974, pleaded guilty against the advice of his lawyer and spent the next 18 years in state prison "shaken to my moral core and determined to build a new way of looking at myself and the world."
While others lifted weights and fashioned zip guns, Mr.
Hamm studied Jungian psychology, sociology and Taoism.
He enrolled in stress management classes and meditation groups and every other self-improvement program the Department of Corrections had to offer.


Jennifer Zboray, Anthony LeCrichia
Jennifer Lynn Zboray, a daughter of Judith L. Panza of Oyster Bay, L.I., and Richard T. Zboray of Valley Stream, L.I., was married yesterday to Anthony Frank LeCrichia, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Frank LeCrichia of Smithtown, L.I.
The Rev.
Brian Brennan performed the ceremony at St.
Patrick's Cathedral in New York.
Mrs.
LeCrichia, 23, is an administrative assistant at Cantor Fitzgerald &amp; Company, a stock brokerage in New York.
She graduated from Adelphi University.
Her mother is a nurse in the medical department at The New York Times.
Her father teaches physical education at Valley Stream Central High School.


Brave New World: First Place
The Atlanta Braves were still on the road yesterday, but they woke up in very recognizable surroundings -- first place.
"It never felt like we were in second place," Manager Bobby Cox said.
"We were playing well enough to be in first, but the Giants were playing some of the most incredible ball I've seen in a long time."


Sumner Redstone Lands the Big One
Yesterday at 7:45 A.M. as Sumner M. Redstone strode into Viacom Inc.'s law offices in New York, where his board would later approve the $8.2 billion buyout of Paramount Communications, the 70-year-old chairman was ebullient.
"I feel great," he said, "tired but great." And with the fervor of an unabashed salesman, Mr.
Redstone began to list the value of putting the two companies together, his voice rising with enthusiasm.


Clinton Plan Would Move Meat and Poultry Inspections to F.D.A.
Among the recommendations announced by the Clinton Administration to streamline Government is one that would have serious health consequences for anyone who roasts a chicken, boils an egg or grills a hamburger.
In the wake of several recent incidents of deadly bacterial poisoning from commercial meats, the Administration wants to move the inspection of meat, poultry and eggs from the Department of Agriculture to the Food and Drug Administration, where all other food is regulated.


Coslet's Dream, Virtual Reality
For the past three seasons this is the way that Jets Coach Bruce Coslet has imagined things would work.
Coslet would design a creative, ball-control offensive game plan.
The quarterback would make the proper calls and the offense would flawlessly execute the plan.
And the defense would come up with timely big plays to keep the whole thing together.
Until now it was only a dream.
But in their 24-14 victory over Miami at Joe Robbie Stadium this afternoon, the Jets proved that they can now turn Coslet's dreams into reality.


Times Co. in Magazine Deal
USAir Magazine, a monthly publication provided on USAir flights, will be published by NYT Custom Publishing beginning with the January 1994 issue.
The announcement was made jointly yesterday by Seth E. Schofield, chairman, president and chief executive of USAir, and Lance R. Primis, president and chief operating officer of The New York Times Company.
The magazine, published since 1979, is available to passengers on the 5,000 daily flights of USAir and its USAir Express affiliates.
The flights include the hourly Washington-New York and Boston-New York service of the USAir Shuttle.


Mexico City Journal; At Mexico's Very Heart, the Aggrieved Cry Out
Every September, midway through the month that Mexicans take to celebrate their independence, the great central square of the capital fills with patriots and the President steps onto a balcony of the National Palace.
More or less echoing Miguel Hidalgo, the Roman Catholic priest who first cried for his parishioners to rebel against Spain early on the morning of Sept. 16, 1810, the President shouts "Viva Mexico!" and "Viva la independencia!" The patriots shout back, fireworks explode, and the party goes on for hours.


HAITIANS FEARFUL OF MORE VIOLENCE
The slaying on Saturday of Antoine Izmery, an outspoken ally of Haiti's exiled President, has raised fears here about whether President Jean-Bertrand Aristide will be able to return and resume his office as planned.


End the Assault on the Health of Poor Women
To the Editor:
For too many low-income women and other women who rely on the Government for health care, freedom of choice is more illusion than reality.
In the last 15 years, an unfair Federal budget provision known as the Hyde Amendment has banned abortion coverage under Medicaid, the Federal health program for the poor.


Julie R. Coltoff and Aaron M. Adler
Julie Ruth Coltoff, the daughter of Kay and Philip Coltoff of Hastings-on-Hudson, N.Y., was married yesterday to Aaron Mark Adler, the son of Gloria Adler and Dr.
David Adler of Clark, N.J.
Cantor Bette Cohen, an aunt of the bride, officiated at Tarrytown House, a conference center in Tarrytown, N.Y.
Mrs.
Adler, 25, is a social worker in the neurosurgery department of the New England Medical Center in Boston.
She graduated from Connecticut College.
In June, she received a master's degree in social work from Hunter College in New York, where her mother, Kay Coltoff, is a professional-development counselor in the School of Social Work.
The bride's father is the executive director of the Children's Aid Society of New York.


Polling Location Changes


Where to Vote And the Hours
New York City primary elections will by held tomorrow.
Polling places will be open from 6 A.M. to 9 P.M.
Voters will cast ballots for Democratic nominees for three citywide offices: mayor, city comptroller and public advocate; there are no Republican primaries for citywide office.
The Bronx will hold a Democratic primary for borough president.
And many local districts also have contested primaries for City Council.


World Economies


John Butler, 74, Choreographer And a Versatile Dancer, Is Dead
John Butler, a prolific and popular ballet choreographer, died on Saturday at Lenox Hill Hospital in Manhattan.
He was 74 and lived in Manhattan.
The cause was lung cancer, said Melvin Dwork, a friend.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; In a whisky pitch to Generation X members, Leo Burnett tries to prove it is not their fathers' agency.
THE agency that failed to convince the younger car buyer that "This is not your father's Oldsmobile" will try to convince the younger drinker that Dewar's is not your father's Scotch whisky.
In a startling departure for Dewar's White Label, the country's best-selling brand of Scotch, Leo Burnett U.S.A. will introduce later this month a provocative campaign aimed at that skeptical demographic cohort of 21-to-29-year-olds known variously as Generation X, baby busters and slackers.


The Talk of Hollywood; 2 Stories of Youth And Its Wilder Side
Chazz Palminteri doesn't live in the Bronx anymore.
But at the age of 41, the writer and actor makes it plain that his old neighborhood has shaped and defined him in ways that he still doesn't fully understand.
"I loved my neighborhood; I loved my childhood," said Mr.
Palminteri, who grew up in the Belmont section.
"Was it a little dangerous? Was it a little racist? Sure. But there was a decency there. It was a working-class neighborhood with fathers who woke up every morning to jobs they didn't like but did it for their families. They were firemen or cops or sanitation workers or bricklayers or bus drivers, like my father. These people are the glue that holds together Italian-American communities around the country."


Sports of The Times; Sampras Picked the Right Role Models
THIS is just a wild suggestion on my part, but it may be time to start taking Pete Sampras quite seriously.
He just may be around for a while.
Not only is he knocking off Grand Slam tournaments two per year now, but he is giving the impression he is not going to get bored or sated, not drifting off to Borgville, out there in his own private Monaco, just watching the wheels go round and round.


CLINTON'S HEALTH PLAN: Doctors and Insurers Say Program Would Tread Too Heavily on Their Turfs; Managed Care Called Radical Plan
President Clinton's proposed overhaul of the health care system goes far beyond simply assuring access to health care for all Americans, doctors across the country said in interviews last weekend.
It would reshape the practice of medicine, they said, changing aspects that do not need to be changed.
The doctors acknowledged that the Clinton plan would take health care down a path it had already begun, with more and more doctors joining health maintenance organizations and giving up the freedom, as well as the long hours, of practicing alone.
In addition, the Administration's plan would give consumers the option of consulting any doctor in what is known as a fee-for-service system.


Review/Theater; Missed Opportunities As Time Speeds By
"Later Life," initially produced by Playwrights Horizons, has reopened at the Westside Theater, 407 West 43d Street, Clinton.
Following are excerpts from Frank Rich's review, which appeared in The New York Times on May 24.
Josef Sommer has succeeded Charles Kimbrough in the role of Austin.
In the multicultural American theater, A. R. Gurney may be the last playwright who writes full time about that quaint old bird, the New England WASP.
Maybe it's an unfashionable calling, but Mr.
Gurney's view of his terrain is so objective that his plays often fill in the missing pieces of the fractured American social puzzle.
When you meet the economically rarefied yet often emotionally disadvantaged characters in Gurney plays, you remember just why the rest of the country has spent 25 or so years fleeing in the opposite direction.


Cathy Beck and Paul David Golob
Cathy Beck, a daughter of Hilaire Beck of New York and the late Louis Beck, was married yesterday to Paul David Golob, the son of Mimi and Norman Golob of Rego Park, Queens.
Rabbi Ronald B. Sobel performed the ceremony at Temple Emanu-El in New York.
Ms.
Beck, who is keeping her name, is a lawyer with the Housing Litigation Bureau of the New York City Department of Housing Preservation and Development.
She graduated cum laude from Wesleyan University and received her law degree from Yeshiva University.
Her father was a lawyer in New York and the treasurer of the New York State Democratic Committee from 1963 to 1970.


For Holtzman, Campaign Echoes Feuds of the Past
In the unforgiving world of New York City politics, where old feuds and long memories are the stuff of legend, there was an eerie sense yesterday that the game had finally come full circle for Comptroller Elizabeth Holtzman.
At the same television station where one year ago today Geraldine A. Ferraro was fighting for her political life against Ms.
Holtzman's attacks on the eve of the Democratic Senate primary, Ms.
Holtzman fought yesterday for hers.
She accused her rivals of distorting the meaning of a loan she took for her Senate campaign, then posed with a crowd of supporters and finally dashed past a phalanx of reporters to cut off questions about why she refuses to allow the release of an official city report on the loan.


INSIDE
Oil Prices Under Pressure
A steady drop in demand for energy and record high production have pushed world oil prices down to the lowest level in three years.
Page D1.
Crime and Redemption
A convicted murderer has enrolled in an Arizona law school, stirring a debate about punishment and the rights of former inmates.
Page A14.
Shuttle Aloft, at Last
After two months of delays, the space shuttle Discovery and its crew shot into space.
Page A22.
Behind Asbestos Debacle
Workers who were involved describe a trail of errors and panic that led to New York's asbestos crisis.
Page B1.
The Gorbachev Syndrome
In trying to pare the Federal Government, President Clinton and Vice President Al Gore face the danger of being outpaced by their own changes.
Political Memo, page A18.


Prayers and Pleas for Action Mingle at Baptist Gathering
The annual gathering of the National Baptist Convention, which brought almost 50,000 pastors and church members to New York City last week, had the mood of a gigantic family reunion.
But it was a family burdened with a sense of urgency.
With a membership estimated at about three million, the National Baptist Convention is the nation's largest organization of black Americans.
Virtually no session or sermon at the meeting, which opened on Tuesday at Madison Square Garden and closed yesterday with a worship service at the New York Hilton, passed without pleas for action on the ills troubling black America: inner-city crime, drugs, AIDS, teen-age pregnancies and unemployment.


White Stands Out Against Eagles, but Packers Don't
Reggie White won the battle. His former teammates, however, won the war.
White started fast, just as the Green Bay Packers did, as he sacked Philadelphia Eagles quarterback Randall Cunningham twice and stripped him of the ball twice in the first half.
The two fumbles, one coming on a White sack, were recovered by the Packers.
By halftime, Cunningham had thrown for an interception, the Eagles' Roger Ruzek had missed a 31-yard field goal and Philadelphia trailed by 10-7.
And on the first drive of the third quarter, Green Bay scored to make it 17-7.


CHRONICLE
PAUL TAYLOR paid little attention when told recently that he had choreographed 100 works during his 39-year career.
"I did have some rough idea and said 'Oh yeah, this must be the 100th work,' " he said of "Spindrift," which will have its premiere on Oct. 26.
Though he may be shrugging off the import of the occasion, an unusual number of leaders of dance companies will converge on City Center that evening.
The performance will also include MIKHAIL BARYSHNIKOV in "Aureole," the 1962 classic that helped catapult Mr.
Taylor into prominence.


MIDEAST ACCORD: Israel; Israel's Old Soldier Is Edgy, Yet at Peace, About Accord
Inside, the old soldier was in a jumble.
Yitzhak Rabin, former general and army Chief of Staff, is rarely given to public displays of emotion.
But in the mildly formal sitting room of his official residence in Jerusalem, the Israeli Prime Minister churned his hands around his stomach to make the point that butterfly wings were flapping extra hard there.


MIDEAST ACCORD: The Opposition; 4 Israelis and 3 Palestinians Killed in Guerrilla Attacks
On the eve of the signing of the Palestinian-Israeli peace accords in Washington, a wave of violence swept Israel and the occupied territories today, leaving four Israelis and three Palestinians dead.
The attacks were a reminder of the potent opposition to the accords from militant Palestinian groups that have vowed to sabotage the agreements in which the Palestine Liberation Organization renounced anti-Israel violence.


Mayoral Race Is Overshadowed In New York Primary Tomorrow
New York City yesterday headed into an unusual Democratic primary, the first time in decades that the battle for the Democratic mayoral nomination has been totally overshadowed by November's general election.
Candidates raced through street rallies, visited churches and faced off in last-minute debates.
But campaign managers and political strategists predicted a desultory Primary Day tomorrow, with a turnout so low as to confound predictions in the campaigns for public advocate and city comptroller -- races whose outcome could, in turn, affect the November confrontation between Mayor David N. Dinkins and the Republican-Liberal challenger, Rudolph W. Giuliani.


Accounts
*
City Center, New York, to Ziff Marketing, New York, to handle the theater's account, previously at Nappi/Eliran, New York.
Billings were not disclosed.


After Delay of Months, Shuttle Is Off to Good Start
Ending a string of bad luck, the space shuttle Discovery and five astronauts shot into space today on a 10-day mission that features a space walk and the deployment of two satellites, including one built by NASA for $600 million to test advanced types of communications.
Tinged with gold by the rising sun, the winged spaceship lifted off on time at 7:45 A.M. to cheers and rounds of applause, thundering into space on a thick column of smoke and flame.
The virtually flawless countdown today came after two months of launching delays and after the failures of a weather satellite that cost $67 million and a Mars probe that cost nearly $1 billion.


Mike Gibson, 67, Dies; Referee at Wimbledon
Capt.
Mike Gibson, an imperious referee at Wimbledon from 1962 to 1975 and at the United States Open in 1969 and 1970, has died, the British newspaper The Daily Telegraph reported last week.
He was 67 and lived in Horsham, south of London.
He had a debilitating illness in recent years, The Daily Telegraph said.
The date and place of his death were not reported.


Ron Holland Joins Lois/U.S.A. Agency
Ron Holland, the chairman of Ron Holland Advertising Inc. in New York, has closed the shop and joined Lois/U.S.A. in New York.
The move was one of a number of changes that Lois/U.S.A. announced on Friday.
Mr.
Holland, 57, brings with him an estimated $7 million in billings from clients like Lebenthal &amp; Company and the Rainbow Room.
He joins Lois/U.S.A. as the senior vice president and creative director, overseeing all New York accounts; he assumes that responsibility from George Lois, who continues as the chairman and chief executive.


A Race Against Time


End the Assault on the Health of Poor Women; Welfare Reform
To the Editor:
"Scapegoating Women on Welfare" (Op-Ed, Sept. 2) compels me to respond to my good friends Mimi Abramovitz and Frances Fox Piven.
They misunderstand President Clinton's approach to welfare reform.


Sampras Puts Exclamation Point to No. 1
Tall, dark and lean, they looked to be body doubles in shorts as they took that last athletic stroll onto the shadowy Stadium Court in a duel for the year's last Slam championship.
But beyond the one-handed backhands, the tennis games of Pete Sampras and Cedric Pioline didn't match up at all in the foregone conclusion that masqueraded as the men's United States Open final yesterday.
Just as he'd expected, Sampras, who calls himself "the class" of the crop of players at the top of this game, outclassed Pioline, the 14th-ranked Mr.
Nobody from France who three rounds ago dumped Jim Courier from the No. 1 ranking only to be rudely dumped by the new No. 1.


Rotation of Rookies Has Yanks Spinning
Buck Showalter said he was beyond caring about whether he'd run too deeply into his bullpen Saturday night.
The Yankees had won and they were a group deeply in need of walking into a clubhouse after a game with something to feel good about.
Well, the feel-good vibes petered out a day later.
The run on the Yankees' bullpen did not, however, as the Yankees continue to underscore the fact that the foundation under the rotation is anything but solid.


Topics of The Times; What'd She Say?
What goes around comes around, accentwise, a native New Yorker discovered the other day.
She had left the city in the 60's to attend a Southern university and stayed below the Mason-Dixon line until the early 80's.
She returned to New York with a slightly chirpy, non-adenoidal accent that people couldn't quite place.
Most people assumed she was from someplace else -- at least until last week, when, having made a minor mistake, she uttered an apology.
"Mayeh coopah, mayeh coopah, mayeh maxima coopah," she said, using a pre-Vatican II phrase for placing blame on oneself for a most grievous fault -- a phrase she hadn't used since parochial school.


In Britain, a Paper Under Pressure
Rupert Murdoch's decision to slash the price of his venerable but money-losing flagship British newspaper, The Times of London, could not have come at a worse time for the paper's closest and youngest rival, The Independent.
The price cut, which took effect last week, has been seen by media analysts, journalists and The Independent itself as a direct assault on the seven-year-old daily.


Abroad at Home; A Chance To Live
In Tel Aviv years ago I visited Shabtai Teveth, the Israeli historian and biographer of David Ben-Gurion.
We talked about the Israeli-Palestinian conflict; I said I thought the two sides had mutual interests that should make peace possible.
"How long have the British and the Irish been fighting?" Mr.
Teveth asked.
"About 700 years," I said.
"And you think this is going to end in our lifetime?"


Dead in the Driveway: Yanks' Engine Won't Start
The pennant chase has officially stalled.
First place is slowly sneaking away from the Yankees.
The games are dwindling, their deficit is growing and tonight they found themselves in third place for the first time since Aug. 11.
The potentially treacherous road trip is not just a potential problem anymore.
It is an unmitigated problem.
In their 144th game of this memorable season, the Yankees desperately needed a stellar start today, so they chose Mark Hutton to oppose Kansas City.
Mark Hutton?
That is what the struggling rotation has evolved into because of injuries and ineffectiveness.
Manager Buck Showalter had to use a rookie who had not started a major league game in 39 days or a minor league game in two weeks.
It was disastrous.


Looking to November, Badillo Glides Into Primary
At a campaign stop at a Manhattan center for the elderly on Friday, Herman Badillo was inching his way toward the door just as the band broke into a brassy salsa tune.
Engulfed by well-wishers and drowned out by the music, Mr.
Badillo did what any politician would so in such circumstances: he danced.
He twirled a white-haired woman onto the floor, then glided from partner to partner while the singer improvised rhyming lyrics in Spanish that ended, "Vote for Herman Badillo." Crowd members, most of them women, roared.


Oil Prices, Plunging, May Not Have Hit Bottom
A steady drop in the demand for fuel and energy around the world, combined with record high oil production in the North Sea as well as by the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries, has pushed world oil prices down to the lowest level in three years, and many experts predict that prices may fall to a low not seen since the oil price collapse of 1986.
Since June, oil prices have dropped more than $3 a barrel, bringing the average price late last week to about $15.50 a barrel on spot markets in London and about $16.75 a barrel in the United States.


Topics of The Times; Personal Puzzling
Eugene T. Maleska died six weeks ago, having tantalized New York Times crossword fans for 16 years with 7,000 puzzles and more than a half million clues.
But for Mr.
Maleska's extended family of puzzlers, he has remained very much alive because, a man of admirable discipline, he was six weeks ahead in his puzzle editing at the time of his death.
Alas, those puzzles have now run out.


Esiason Can Still Fake and Shake
The game had been over for 45 minutes.
Tom Olivadotti, the Miami Dolphins' defensive coordinator, stood in the parking lot outside Joe Robbie Stadium chatting with family and friends but still mulling over the afternoon's unsettling events.
Olivadotti's mind was working overtime trying to figure how a 32-year-old retread quarterback named Boomer Esiason helped the Jets pierce Miami for 429 yards of offense in a 24-14 victory.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Television; The networks' rebroadcasts of season premieres could give viewers double vision this fall.
LET'S say you were channel-surfing Tuesday night.
On NBC, there was the premiere of "The John Larroquette Show."
Let's say you were channel-surfing Thursday.
On NBC, there was the premiere of "The John Larroquette Show." Again.


Rewriting Rules for Book Sales
To understand something of the sea change taking place in bookselling across the country, it helps to visit the flagship store of Kroch's &amp; Brentano's, Chicago's proud old bookstore chain, and take a look down the street.
There, on a corner in the heart of the downtown Loop, sits the new age of bookselling, a six-month-old Crown Books superstore that offers a dizzying number of titles, a no-frills feel and, most important, steep discounts on every book.
"If you paid full price, you didn't buy it at Crown," is the chain's motto, and that was exactly why 33-year-old Margaret Geary of Chicago was in the store looking for a computer book recently.


Attacked, White House Defends Proposal
As it sought to combat a variety of criticisms, the Clinton Administration insisted today that its health care plan would mean more care for the same or less money for most Americans.
Vice President Al Gore said the plan would "improve the quality of health care and reduce the cost of health care." Speaking on the ABC News program "This Week," he insisted that the plan could be paid for largely by eliminating "unnecessary paperwork and bureaucracy."


First Trial In Scandal Of Troopers Opens Today
A New York State Police investigator charged with faking evidence in two criminal cases goes on trial today in Binghamton, becoming the first of five investigators to challenge the charges in a growing scandal.
David M. Beers, a trooper for 15 years, pleaded not guilty in May to charges that he helped a colleague fabricate evidence in a 1991 armed robbery of a Best Western motel in Johnson City, a few miles from Binghamton.


Confusion Ruled First Tests For Asbestos, Workers Say
It started with a growing public panic over the dangers of asbestos -- fears that led a jumpy Congress to pass a law in 1986 requiring asbestos inspections of schools nationwide.
But the Federal rules putting the law into effect were sloppily written and confusing.
And the New York City Board of Education soon made a bad situation worse, jury-rigging a plan for inspections and hiring a consulting firm with no track record in the field.


MIDEAST ACCORD: Jordan; Jordan and Israel in Accord On Agenda for Negotiations
Senior officials in Jordan have for the first time outlined the basis of planned negotiations with Israel in a detailed agenda that has been approved by both countries.
The agenda is the first step toward the establishment of diplomatic relations and a peace treaty between Israel and Jordan, according to a draft copy of the document obtained in Amman.


Norma Benardette, Charles Blumberg
Norma Benardette and Charles Blumberg were married yesterday at the New York Botanical Garden in the Bronx.
Rabbi Mark Winer performed the ceremony.
Ms.
Benardette, 44, is keeping her name.
She teaches learning disabled children at Middle School 143 in the Bronx.
She graduated from City College and received a master's degree in special education from Lehman College.
She is a daughter of Marco Benardette of the Bronx, a retired New York City police officer, and the late Mildred K. Benardette.


Doubleheader at Belmont
Belmont Park ran its annual doubleheader for New York-bred juveniles yesterday, and the winners in identical times were the favored gelding Gulliviegold in one division and the filly She Rides Tonite in the other.
The races don't exactly make careers, but they do influence the state's stature in breeding.
And Gulliviegold made a solid contribution, winning the Empire by four lengths over Light Lake as the 4-5 choice, with Seminole Spirit third.
The winner, a son of Gulch owned by the Quarry One Stable and trained by Phil Johnson, covered the six furlongs in 1:114/5 under Jose Santos and returned $3.60 for $2 to win.
In four career starts, he has won twice and placed twice.


Equity Issues This Week
The following equity and convertible debt offerings are expected this week:
American Natural Energy, Tulsa, Okla., 1.125 million shares. Gaines, Berland.


When the Mind Strays, Upsets Aren't Far Behind
Distractions, distractions.
Head coaches complain there is nothing more distracting than probations, suspensions or -- heaven forbid -- a book.
On Saturday, distractions were prominent and one could say that the teams affected by them lost, 2-1.


MIDEAST ACCORD: The P.L.O.; Statesman's Role for Arafat And It Suits Him Just Fine
Transforming one's image from guerrilla leader to statesman is not easy, but Yasir Arafat was trying hard to make it happen.
The last time the leader of the Palestine Liberation Organization came to the United States -- for a speech to the United Nations in 1974 -- he arrived with a black leather pistol holster on his hip, and in his words, "an olive branch in one hand and a freedom fighter's gun in the other."


Did One Judge's 'Low Blow' Lead to Whitaker's Undoing?
Is it possible that nothing more sinister than a rules misunderstanding cost Pernell Whitaker the decision in his draw with Julio Cesar Chavez last Friday night in San Antonio?
The draw was the first blemish on Chavez's almost-legendary 87-0 record, but Whitaker retained his World Boxing Council welterweight title without a clear victory.


Hampton Gives the Line A Truly Grand Reward
As a way of showing his offensive line how much he appreciated the huge holes they opened for him against the Buccaneers, Giants running back Rodney Hampton said he would give each of them $1,000.
Merry Christmas, a little early.
And because of his new contract that contains some healthy bonuses, he can afford it.
Hampton is already wealthy because of his new three-year, $6.9 million contract, which makes him the third highest paid running back in the league, behind Buffalo's Thurman Thomas and Phoenix's Garrison Hearst.
But because of several clauses that could easily be reached if he continues at his current pace, Hampton could become even richer.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Companies
Texaco plans to sell its Texaco Chemical unit and almost all of its worldwide chemical operations to the Utah billionaire Jon M. Huntsman for $1.06 billion.  [ Page D1. ]
The interests of retired auto workers, more than any other issues, are driving labor negotiations with Detroit this year.  [ D1. ]  With a deadline looming tonight, Ford and U.A.W. officials continued to predict they would agree on a new contract.  [ D5. ]


Cut-and-Paste Eagles Find the Genuine Article
"Hebron! Get in there!"
Vaughn Hebron heard those words on Sunday afternoon from Philadelphia Coach Rich Kotite in the fourth quarter with the Eagles down by 17-7.
Hebron had played for three quarters on the punt and kickoff teams and in the first half had one run for 2 yards against the Green Bay Packers, but this was different.
The coach wanted him at running back in the last quarter?
On the road in a game the Eagles were losing?
What about Herschel Walker and Heath Sherman?


MORE ON THE ACCORD
Arafat's Strategy: '2 Olive Branches'
Transforming one's image from guerrilla leader to statesman is not easy, but Yasir Arafat was trying hard to make it happen.
Efforts in the past have had mixed results for all the countries involved.
"This time," he said just an hour after making peace with Israel, "I am coming with two olive branches." Page A15.
Arabs and Jews Reflect
As many speak out about the events of recent days, there are new hopes, on both sides, but fears from years past remain.
Page A16.
Divisions in Syria
Thousands marched in Syria, waving black flags in protest against Mr.
Arafat, but elsewhere in the nation the response was more stunned, disbelieving, silence.
Page A17.
Security Surprises
Security for the dignitaries was about what you would expect in the capital, but despite the hardware and planning, there were surprises.
Page A14.
A 45-Year Struggle
Over the years since the birth of Israel in 1948, the Palestinian movement has drawn support from Palestinians inside Israel, in Israeli-occupied territories and in neighboring Arab countries while pressing for nationhood or self-rule.
Page A15.


Fleet Securities Officials Say They Lobbied Holtzman
Executives of Fleet Securities met with New York City Comptroller Elizabeth Holtzman at a fund-raising breakfast to lobby for a greater share of the city's underwriting 10 months before Ms.
Holtzman claims she first became aware the firm was seeking city business, bank and law-enforcement officials said.
Ms.
Holtzman has maintained that she was unaware Fleet was vying to become a member of the syndicate of firms that sells city bonds until a reporter told her in April that the firm had been selected.
She said her deputy, Darcy Bradbury, selected Fleet in March.


Reno Tours With Florio
Hoping to borrow some of the popularity that seems to follow Janet Reno around like a puppy, Gov.
Jim Florio escorted the United States Attorney General around the state today.
During a morning news conference in Hackensack, Ms.
Reno and Mr.
Florio stood side-by-side near a table covered with semiautomatic weapons and called for a national ban that would mirror legislation that New Jersey adopted in 1990.
The New Jersey law bans the sale and restricts the possession of semiautomatic weapons.
The passage of the ban, and Mr.
Florio's defeat of a Republican-led effort to rescind it, are two of the successes of his first term, and the Governor has strived mightily to keep them before the public.


Review/Television; Prime-Time Comedy With a Sting
With adorable parents and cuddly children hogging much of the prime-time television schedule these days, chronic grumps may be understandably desperate for a dose or two of humor with bite.
Examples of two very different sorts are available tonight: "The John Larroquette Show," a new series at 9 P.M. on NBC, and "Bill Hicks: Revelations," a comedy special on HBO at midnight.
Television likes John Larroquette.
The actor won four consecutive Emmy Awards, a unique feat for a performer, for his portrayal of the flakily pompous prosecutor on the NBC series "Night Court." This time around, as the star and an executive producer of his own show, created by Don Reo ("Blossom"), Mr.
Larroquette plays John Hemingway, a recovering alcoholic.


Review/Pop; Laura Nyro, Honest
"I'm a Libra, and I seem to like balance," Laura Nyro declared solemnly near the end of her first set at the Bottom Line on Friday evening.
"Since I started the show with some sweet old rock-and-roll, I'll finish with some more."
The 45-year-old singer and songwriter, who accompanied herself on an electric piano, struck a few mournful chords and began a soulful version of the old Everly Brothers hit, "Let It Be Me." Ms.
Nyro's choice of harmonies and her loose-jointed phrasing transformed the song from a pristine country-pop ballad into what could only be called "Laura Nyro music." Like everything else she sang, it became a late-60's-style soul ballad located stylistically somewhere between Philadelphia and Motown, and infused with her own particular brand of introspective angst.


Questions Linger in Explosion Case: Defendants; Suspects Linked To Islamic Causes
From the start, the plot and accused plotters did not seem to match.
The plot was ambitious, the execution amateurish.
Some of the accused drove taxis or fished for odd jobs in construction and delivery services, hustling to scrape together enough money to pay the rent for their crowded apartments in Brooklyn or New Jersey.
Mr.
Ayyad had the best job as a $38,000-a-year engineer for Allied-Signal.


MIDEAST ACCORD: Syria Israelies Are Transfixed; Palestinians Run From the Rapturous to the Furious; 'Down, Down With Arafat!'
Many people in the Middle East reacted to the signing of the Israeli-Palestinian accord with rejoicing, but strong curents of confusion, anger and dismay ran through Israel, the occupied territories, and neighboring Arab countries.
Here is a sampling of the reaction.
In the tumbledown refugee camps south of here, a stronghold of the Palestinian movement's most radical leaders, Palestinian protesters left little doubt today how they felt about Yasir Arafat's morning in the sun in Washington.


Bridge
Players taking part in a major team event at a national championship have a very long day.
They go into action at 1 P.M. and often play until after 1 A.M., with a break of about two hours for dinner.
Some of them have more to do when play ends.
Those who are members of the Appeals Committee may have to spend two hours or more considering thorny issues that have arisen at the table somewhere in the tournament.
One might think that staying up in the small hours would damage a player's performance the next day, but two Appeals Committee co-chairmen both did well in the Summer Nationals in Washington in July.
Peggy Sutherlin of Dallas reached the semifinal of the Women's Knockout, and Alan LeBendig of Los Angeles was second in the Life Master Pairs and reached the quarterfinal of the Spingold after his team eliminated the defending champions.


Growing a Nation of Electronic Hermits?
To the Editor:
Americans should evaluate new technologies with their science fiction goggles off.
"The Keyboard Becomes a Hangout for a Computer-Savvy Generation" (front page, Aug. 31) quotes computer network enthusiasts who imagine that children and teen-agers are "pioneers" of a "new kind of public space" that can be a "refuge for kids" from a violent reality.


MIDEAST ACCORD: Jericho Israelis Are Transfixed; palestinians Run From the Rapturous to the Furious; 'We Are Feeling Freedom'
Many people in the Middle East reacted to the signing of the Israeli-Palestinian accord with rejoicing, but strong curents of confusion, anger and dismay ran through Israel, the occupied territories, and neighboring Arab countries.
Here is a sampling of the reaction.
He gave his name as Fatah, one of hundreds of young men who packed the center of this city today carrying, waving and wrapping themselves in Palestinian flags in a daylong eruption of joy.


Service for Owles
A memorial service for James W. Owles, founding president of the Gay Activists Alliance, will take place in Manhattan on Saturday at 2 P.M. at the Friends Meeting House at 15 Rutherford Place, near 15th Street, west of Second Avenue.
Mr.
Owles died on Aug. 6.


Growing a Nation of Electronic Hermits?; The Darker Side
To the Editor:
The Internet is certainly a national treasure, and something that will benefit generations to come, as you indicate (front page, Aug. 31).
But parents need to recognize the darker side of the net.


MIDEAST ACCORD: Security; Protection Is Rigorous, But Not on All Occasions
For the most part the security was what you would expect for two men like Yitzhak Rabin and Yasir Arafat: streets blocked off to traffic and pedestrians, sharpshooters prowling in high places, Secret Service helicopters buzzing overhead.
But despite the hardware and the planning, there were moments that were certainly not what the State Department officials who had scrambled all weekend to provide security had in mind.


Search for New Kodak Chief Draws Questions on Insiders
An embattled company discards its chief executive, convinced it needs an outsider's fresh perspective.
It assembles a search committee of outside directors to find the best possible leader.
So whose names are said to included on the short list?
Two directors, one of whom is a member of the search committee.
In the re-engineering of the Eastman Kodak Corporation, investors may now be wondering about the resolve of the company to change its ways.
Last week, Kodak's board huddled in Rochester and discussed possible replacements for Kay R. Whitmore, the chief executive, who is being forced out by restive outside directors who are demanding higher profit margins.


Woman Sexually Assaulted in Central Park
A 40-year-old woman walking her dog in Central Park was raped yesterday near the Museum of Natural History, the police said.
The woman was walking in a wooded area about 10:30 A.M. when she was attacked, said Sgt.
Frances Haimeck, a police spokeswoman.


A New Asbestos Setback
The agency inspecting for asbestos in the New York City schools failed yesterday to provide the new Chancellor with a report he had ordered to determine which classrooms could open and which would have to remain closed next week.
Article, page B3.


U.S. Isn't the Sheriff Of the Americas
To the Editor:
Your call in "Champion Freedom in Peru" (editorial, Aug. 20) for more vigorous United States action to deter Peru's military from violations of human rights suffers a defect common in Washington's foreign policy: the notion that the United States alone ought to, and can, control Latin America's destiny.
Why else would you fail to mention that a multilateral machinery, that of the Organization of American States, is charged with precisely the task you advocate?


Buffalo Election Finds Troubled City at Crossroads
There is a sense in this city of aging factories and corner taverns that things are at a turning point, and not only because the man who has been Mayor for 16 years is not seeking re-election this year.
Crime is more widespread and more violent.
City finances are increasingly desperate.
The schools are struggling.
And the middle class is fleeing.


U.N. Still Struggling With Somali General's Militia; Aidid Proposes U.N. Panel
General Aidid has offered to submit to the judgment of a special United Nations investigative commission that he proposes, even if it means he would leave Somalia, former President Jimmy Carter said today.
The commission, which would be appointed by the Security Council, would examine charges that the general was guilty of ambushing United Nations troops and committing other crimes.


People
*
David Jones, 47, was named chief executive at Lowe Howard-Spink, London, assuming the responsibilities of David Wheldon, the managing director, who left last week to join the Coca-Cola Co. in Atlanta as the director of advertising.
He had been the chief executive at CDP, London.


Market Place; Airline shows signs of life. But is that any reason to buy the stock?
WHEN America West Airlines reported a $10.3 million net profit for the second quarter, it joined Southwest Airlines in the winner's circle as the only major carriers to have made money in the first quarters of 1993.
Until this year, America West had lost money for 10 consecutive quarters, a total of $432 million, and only once had the 10-year-old carrier's earnings surpassed the $10.3 million of the second quarter: in the fourth quarter of 1988 it earned $19.1 million, thanks to a one-time gain of almost $18 million from the early retirement of some bonds.


Illiterate Americans
Half the adults in the United States can't read or do simple math, according to an Education Department study.
Pretty shocking; but what does it really tell us about America's ability to function as a society?
First of all, things are not getting worse.
As the study observes, "Today we are a better educated and more literate society than at any time in our history." Second, even those who do have problems with sentences and sums don't seem to feel at a disadvantage.
Most of the respondents at the two lowest levels of proficiency (respondents were divided into five levels) said they could read or write English "well" or "very well."


Books of The Times; An Island Girl Flees to More Enticing Shores
Sleeping Beauties By Susanna Moore 231 pages. Alfred A. Knopf. $22.
Like the heroines of Susanna Moore's other two novels ("My Old Sweetheart" and "The Whiteness of Bones"), Clio Lynott is an "island girl," a girl brought up in the fierce, Edenic beauty of Hawaii, and unprepared for the confusions and seductions of that other world that lies, beckoning, on the other side of the ocean.
Like theirs, hers is the story of a woman's search for identity and her attempt to mediate between the claims of the past and the present, family and self, home and the world.
Clio is the cousin of Mamie, the heroine of "The Whiteness of Bones," and she shares Mamie's tortuous family history.
Clio's great-grandmother was a full Hawaiian princess who married a shipwrecked Irish sailor in 1871; her dowry, Ms.
Moore writes, included "a coastal plain on the island of O'ahu that was one day to become the city of Honolulu." Her house, once the center of all that was lovely in island society, has been handed down to Clio's eccentric aunt Emma, the self-appointed custodian of the family's past.
Clio's own immediate family has disintegrated, a victim of the centrifugal forces of selfishness and dislocation.
Her mother, Kitty, a flighty, impulsive woman vaguely reminiscent of Lily's mother in "My Old Sweetheart," has abandoned Clio and her brother, Dix, to start a new life with a new husband in Australia; she occasionally mails Clio presents -- a flea- bitten ermine muff, a stained bed jacket, an alligator handbag with a broken clasp -- then later asks for them back.
Clio's father, John Lynott, is an equally negligent parent.
He marries a cruel, mocking woman named Burta and allows her to terrorize his children: Burta starves Clio and Dix, humiliates them and kills their beloved pets.
Unable to cope any longer, Clio runs away from home to live with her aunt Emma.
Emma's house, formerly the princess' town residence, is filled with treasures from Hawaii's past: feather capes from the time of Kamehameha I, carved idols with abalone-shell eyes, koa chests filled with musty, fragrant antiques.
And Emma has set herself the task of preserving Hawaii's less tangible treasures from the past: the long songs without meter or rhyme known as meles, the oral genealogies of its island families, its hulas and its myths of gods and goddesses and spirits.
Knowledge of such matters is disappearing in the new Hawaii of tourists and fancy hotels, and she wants Clio to become "the next keeper of the flame"; she wants Clio to become the repository of the family's and the islands' history.
This dedication to the past has already warped the lives of Emma and her mother, Mabel.
Many years ago, each of them gave up the chance to run away with the man she loved to stay on at the family homestead.
Both now live willfully in the past: Emma spends hours recording and memorizing "the lore of her race"; Mabel actually thinks she's living in a bygone era, inviting the likes of Mark Twain and Jack London for tea.
Clio dutifully absorbs her aunt's lessons, and she soon finds she can "no longer separate what had happened a hundred years earlier from what she had dreamed in the night." "She used to say laughingly," Ms.
Moore writes, "that she knew the ritual ceremony for wrapping the bones of a chief, but she could not divide fractions. She could steer an outrigger canoe through rough seas, but she had never learned to iron."
The weight of her family's past, however, has begun to suffocate Clio, and she yearns to explore the bright, mysterious world beyond Hawaii's shores.
At the age of 27, she meets and marries a movie star named Tommy Haywood, a modern-day Prince Charming who is her complete opposite, a man without a past, a man who lives relentlessly in the present.
Tommy -- who seems to have been modeled on another Tom, Tom Buchanan, the hard-nosed, careless husband of Daisy in "The Great Gatsby" -- takes Clio away to California and introduces her to a world of rich, vapid movie people, a farcical West Coast version of the frivolous world of New York socialites encountered by Mamie in "The Whiteness of Bones."
This world is delineated in overly bright comic-book colors of greed, stupidity and shallowness, very different from the lyrically described world of Hawaii rendered in a shimmering chiaroscuro of soft, tropical tints; and it's consequently hard to understand why someone as thoughtful and intelligent as Clio would linger there for even a moment.
And yet she does linger, convinced that Tommy has awakened her from years of sleepwalking, convinced that she has escaped the fate of her aunt and her grandmother.
It is only when her marriage comes to a sudden and violent end that she is forced to return home to Hawaii and finally grapple with her family's emotional legacy.
Clearly "Sleeping Beauties" would be a better novel if Ms.
Moore had modulated her satire of Tommy's Hollywood world and depicted the people surrounding Clio in more muted, realistic terms.
As it is, Tommy and Clio's father and stepmother are cardboard villains, devoid of any real emotional reality, and hence flimsy foils to Clio's dreams and aspirations.
What redeems the book is Ms.
Moore's persuasive ability to delineate Clio's inner life and the place she has come from.
Clio's childhood in Hawaii and her relationships with her aunt and grandmother are so fervently and authentically described that we feel we know her, not just as a character, but also as a flesh-and-blood human being.
As a result, we can sympathize with her struggles both to embrace and to flee the claims of her past.
For all its problems, "Sleeping Beauties" ratifies Ms.
Moore's earlier achievements and attests to her lucid, poetic gifts as a writer.


I.B.M.'s Chairman Does Some Fine-Tuning
Louis V. Gerstner Jr. reshuffled I.B.M.'s management yesterday by creating an 11-member executive committee he hopes will enable the various parts of the big computer company to work together more smoothly with less bureaucracy.
The move, explained in an I.B.M. memo released yesterday, was a clear signal that Mr.
Gerstner believes the company's future lies in making the organization work better rather than in remaking it by overhauling it top to bottom or selling off major businesses.


Rita Karin, Actress And a Film Narrator For U.S., Dies at 73
Rita Karin, a stage, film and television actress who performed in both Yiddish and English, died on Friday at her home in Manhattan.
She was 73.
She had been ill with pneumonia, but no cause of death was listed on the death certificate, said her son, Dr.
Michael Horowitz of Evanston, Ill.


MIDEAST ACCORD: The Festivities; With the Fish and the Fowl, This Lunch Was No Picnic
Lunch at the State Department today, after the signing of the Israeli-P.L.O. agreement, created logistical problems, that, if not on the order of partitioning Jerusalem, were unique to an event at which both Muslims and Jews were fed.
Respecting the Muslim dietary laws was simply a matter of keeping wine and pork off the menu.
For the Israeli delegation much more was involved.
All of the food had to be not just kosher but glatt kosher, which means the meat had to be slaughtered according to certain rituals, under Rabbinical supervision.


Mystery of Migraine Begins to Yield Genetic Clues
AS any serious migraine sufferer knows, an attack can bring pain without pity or horizon, a pain so stupendous that it obliterates work, family, thought, otherness.
Yet for all its galactic sweep when it strikes, migraine is a mundane and commonplace ailment, afflicting about 12 percent of the population.
It is a trait passed along from parent to offspring with the seeming ease of wispy hair or nearsightedness: three-quarters of all sufferers are thought to have an inherited predisposition to the disorder.
Neurologists and other researchers have long been fascinated by migraines, by the shimmering, hallucinatory auras that can accompany or on their own constitute an episode, by the concurrence of a pulsating, often one-sided headache and roiling waves of nausea that are migraine's wretched hallmarks, and by the strongly familial nature of the disease.
But while the physicians of ancient Egypt and Greece vividly described the headaches and suggested a variety of herbal and opiate therapies to ease the pain, only now are scientists gaining real insight into the physiology and genetics of migraines.


Mark Jollie, 41, Dies; A City Opera Official
Mark Jollie, the financial administrator of the New York City Opera since 1987, died on Thursday at the New York University Medical Center.
He was 41 years old and lived in Manhattan.
Susan Woelzl, the spokeswoman for the New York City Opera, said that the cause was AIDS.


Treasury Issues Little Changed
The prices of Treasury bonds and intermediate Treasury notes rallied most of yesterday as traders and investors seemed to be betting that today's inflation report will be moderate.
But late in the afternoon, as traders and investors seemed to lose some of their nerve, prices fell and the market wound up little changed on the day.
"Traders were reluctant to stay with this thing in front of a high-risk number," said Joel Marver, the chief technical analyst at Technical Data in Boston.


Packers' Noble Is Lost for the Season
Linebacker BRIAN NOBLE of the Green Bay Packers will undergo surgery on his injured right knee this week and will be lost for the season, Coach MIKE HOLMGREN said yesterday.


Classical Music in Review
Beethoven Festival  Planting Fields Arboretum Oyster Bay, L.I.


Town Regulates Farm Stands, and Reaps Resentment
Douglas C. Feinberg has sold home-grown tomatoes, peas, carrots and leeks at his family's roadside farm stand for 17 years, first from a truck, and later from a wood-shingled building on Montauk Highway in Sagaponack.
Over the years, Mr.
Feinberg and other farm-stand owners have added "accessory items" to their shelves, like arugula and endive, cookies, pies, eggs, milk, salad dressings and sauces to increase profits and answer the changing demands of summer tourists and year-round customers.


For Desktop Advice, A Publishing Wizard
A PROFESSIONAL desktop publisher needs the best tools: a hefty computer system, a top-rated printer and a powerful piece of software like Aldus Pagemaker or Quarkxpress.
But many other people must occasionally produce printed materials, or would do so if it were not so much trouble to learn and remember the ins and outs of the major programs.
Broderbund's Print Shop has fitted into the easy to learn and recall department for years, and keeps improving as powerful personal computers become more common. (Good news for Macintosh owners; a Mac version of Print Shop is almost here.) Still, there is plenty of room for other programs.


Prison Officers' Labor Protest Blocks Bridge to Rikers Island
Two hundred correction officers, angry over working for three years without a contract, blocked the bridge to the city's huge jail complex on Rikers Island Sunday night and early yesterday, but quietly returned to work after city officials promised to expedite contract talks.
Hundreds of police officers were sent and a tense confrontation developed, but there was no violence and no one was arrested.
There was no disruption on the island, where officers remained on overtime duty to guard 14,000 inmates in 10 jails.
Twenty-five cars blocking the bridge approaches were towed away.


Tarkanian Strikes With U.N.L.V. Suit
JERRY TARKANIAN, former basketball coach at Nevada-Las Vegas, has filed suit against university officials, charging they conspired with National Collegiate Athletic Association investigators to spoil his college career.


Council Races to Watch
The New York City Council's tightest primary contests involve fights to fill vacancies left by two departing Council members, several rematches of close campaigns from the 1991 primaries and two incumbents who ran afoul of their party organizations -- including one who also is under indictment on accusations of stealing public funds.
Here are the eight most heated races:


MIDEAST ACCORD: History; After 4 1/2 Decades of the Palestinian Struggle, a First Concrete Achievement
Over the years since the birth of Israel in 1948 the Palestinian movement has drawn support from Palestinians inside Israel, in Israeli-occupied territories and in neighboring Arab countries while pressing for nationhood or self-rule by violence and diplomacy.
Yet by the beginning of this decade, the movement had no major concrete achievements to show for all its declarations, raids on Israeli targets, stone-throwing at Israeli soldiers and other forms of militancy.


In new incentive programs, retailers of men's apparel are trying for a kind of male-bonding.
TO say that men need to be coaxed to shop for clothing is akin to wondering whether Burt Reynolds may find it a tad difficult to resume his endorsement career.
As a result, retailers of men's apparel are more willing than most advertisers to experiment with unusual kinds of marketing communications, if they sense some potential for cajoling reluctant men into their stores.
That is why several well-known chains are participating in a test program, sponsored by GQ magazine, to reward their best customers with incentives in the form of credits that can be redeemed for merchandise like goatskin boots, mountain bikes, vacations -- even a night on the town from tuxedo to meal to symphony tickets.


'Enough!'
The hostility between Arabs and Israelis has yielded nearly a half-century of warfare and only a few moments of promise.
Yesterday brought the brightest promise of all: reconciliation between the two main parties to the conflict, Israel and the Palestine Liberation Organization.
Before a glittering crowd of 3,000 on the White House lawn and a worldwide television audience of millions, these old enemies came together to recognize each other's right to exist.
There were no flags, no anthems, no saluting cannons.
Yet those who watched and listened will find it hard to let go of their memories.
Yitzhak Rabin and Yasir Arafat squinting at each other across a distance of a few feet and many years of hostility.
President Clinton coaxing a dramatic handshake from the two men.
All three -- President, Prime Minister and P.L.O. chairman -- working the crowd afterward.


Growing a Nation of Electronic Hermits?; Computing Costs
To the Editor:
Chatting with unseen acquaintances nationwide on a computer network can make for an energizing experience for kids, as you describe (front page, Aug. 31).
It's exciting to discover who's out there, to engage in verbal thrusts and parries, to win a stranger's interest in you.


Hours to Vote in Today's Primaries
There will be several primary elections today in New York State, New York City and Connecticut.
Polling places will be open from 6 A.M. to 9 P.M. in New York State and New York City and from 6 A.M. to 8 P.M. in Connecticut.
In New York City, voters will cast ballots for Democratic nominees for three citywide offices: mayor, city comptroller and public advocate; there are no Republican primaries for citywide office.
The Bronx will hold a Democratic primary for borough president, and many districts have primaries for City Council.


Snapple
Shares of the Snapple Beverage Corporation, which has been a darling of investors since it went public in December, took a nose dive yesterday.
On Friday, Snapple said it had filed to sell four million common shares.
And Barron's reported that Snapple's market capitalization was six times estimated 1994 sales.


Please, Governor, Sign The Mental Health Bill
To the Editor:
One of the most important bills to pass the New York State Legislature this year stands in limbo.
The community mental health resources bill, sponsored by State Senator Nicholas Spano, Westchester Republican, and Assemblyman Steven Sanders, a Manhattan Democrat, passed both houses unanimously.
Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo refuses to sign the bill in its current form.


Head of Smithsonian Institution Is Quitting After 10 Years at Helm
Robert McC.
Adams, the ninth person to head the Smithsonian Institution in its 147-year history, announced today that he would retire next year and return to writing, research and teaching.
"You shouldn't allow leadership to congeal," said Mr.
Adams, 67, an anthropologist who was provost of the University of Chicago before joining the Smithsonian in 1984.
"Ten years is an appropriate length of time."


Compaq Disputes Japan Ministry's Bid Procedure
In what could be the start of another dispute between the United States and Japan, the Compaq Computer Corporation has complained about a recent decision of the Ministry of International Trade and Industry to obtain more than 2,000 notebook computers from the NEC Corporation of Japan.
In a letter sent earlier this month to Hideaki Kumano, vice minister of the trade agency, Eckhard Pfeiffer, Compaq's president, raised questions about NEC's low bid, which was half that of Compaq's.
Mr.
Pfeiffer also said the agency's emphasis on price alone, rather than on machine abilities, made it difficult for foreign companies to participate in Japanese Government procurements, according to a Compaq spokeswoman.


Blockbuster to Gain Republic Pictures
In a move that merges the Blockbuster Entertainment Corporation's interests in film and television under one roof, Spelling Entertainment Group Inc. agreed today to acquire the Republic Pictures Corporation for $13 a share in cash, or a total of $100 million.
Blockbuster, which operates a nationwide chain of video rental stores, currently controls 67 percent of Spelling and 35 percent of Republic.
After the merger, Blockbuster, based in Fort Lauderdale, Fla., will control 70 percent of the combined company.


Harry Bakalian; Editor and Teacher, 44
Harry Bakalian, science editorial director of the school division at Prentice Hall publishers, died on Saturday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 44.
The cause of his death was a heart attack, a family spokesman said.


Review/City Opera; Once More to Titipu, With Feeling
Could it have been merely a fluke that the New York City Opera's schedule this weekend was devoted entirely to operatic glimpses of Asia?
The tragic clash of Western and Japanese cultures was examined in "Madama Butterfly" on Saturday afternoon, and the legend of the vengeful ice princess "Turandot" was offered that evening.
And perhaps to sweep away the tense emotionalism of those works, on Sunday afternoon the company revived its 1984 production of "The Mikado," Gilbert and Sullivan's deliciously silly fantasy about the Japanese town of Titipu, and its odd web of bureaucratic and romantic entanglements.
Lightweight though "The Mikado" is, this production is one of the most delightful in the company's repertory, and it has retained its freshness.
Originally staged by Lotfi Mansouri, and now directed by Christian Smith, it plays on subtle contrasts.
Thierry Bosquet's sets, for example, are delicate Oriental hangings and screens, painted in pastel shades.
But his costumes use bright reds and greens.
There is a spareness that makes the stage seem roomy, yet the bustling crowds are on hand when Gilbert calls for them.


Tornadoes Strike in Texas


Questions Linger in Explosion Case; Trial of Four of Seven Suspects in Bombing of World Trade Center Opens Today
Under extraordinary security, the trial of four of the seven men charged in the World Trade Center bombing opens today in Federal Court in Manhattan, promising the first comprehensive picture of a crime that shook American complacency about terrorism.
After almost seven months of investigation, prosecutors have concluded that the plotters had sought to collapse a 110-story trade center tower, killing thousands.
The defendants -- Mahmud Abouhalima, a 33-year-old Egyptian cabdriver, and three men with Palestinian roots, Ahmad M. Ajaj, 27, Nidal A. Ayyad, 25, and Mohammed A. Salameh, 25 -- contend that the charges are flawed by false identifications and that the Government is putting Islam on trial.


Curtain Up on Tharp's Creative Processes
"Twyla Talks!" the posters might read if Twyla Tharp's season at City Center were a movie from the golden age of the silver screen.
In a two-week engagement that opens tonight, Ms.
Tharp will appear as a master of ceremonies and, in each performance, will choreograph onstage a phrase, or a sequence of steps.
As she choreographs, Ms.
Tharp will talk her 16 dancers and the audience through the steps and offer insights into the other dances in the two-program repertory.
The unusual season, planned in recent residencies at University of the Arts in Philadelphia and the Wexner Center for the Arts at Ohio State University in Columbus, will offer audiences a kind of backstage look at dance.
In addition to the onstage choreography, it will include performances of new and signature Tharp dances, without sets or costumes, as well as a lecture-demonstration on partnering that is to feature the former Tharp dancers Sara Rudner and Keith Young.
There will also be a sneak preview made up of excerpts from "Demeter and Persephone," a work Ms.
Tharp created for the Martha Graham Dance Company's October season at City Center.


Giants' Defensive Call: Mix and Match Them
Everyone is abuzz about the Giants.
Indeed, they are off to a good start, going 2-0 by beating teams they should have beaten.
But as receiver Mike Sherrard noted, it's not like they have played the San Francisco 49ers or the Dallas Cowboys.
And while the Giants are pleased in general, they must be especially pleased by their young and rapidly improving defensive line.
Only weeks ago considered the weakest element of the team, it has seemed to come together.
In fact, it's been a tremendous surprise.


Corrections
A front-page article on Saturday about preparations in Washington for the signing of the Israeli-Palestinian agreement included an incorrect reference in some editions to the date of the 1979 Egyptian-Israeli peace treaty.
As noted elsewhere in the article, it was signed in March, not September.


Japan Plans a Third Economic Stimulus Package
The Japanese Government is expected to announce on Thursday its third program in a year to stimulate the country's slumping economy.
But economists are already predicting that the package might be too small to make much difference.
The package is expected to be valued at about 5 trillion yen, about $47 billion, and will consist of public works spending, low-cost housing loans and tax incentives for businesses.
The details of such programs tend to change until the program is announced.


The Field of 6 for Public Advocate Deploy Their Shock Battalions
A storefront office on Livingston Street in downtown Brooklyn, the campaign headquarters of State Senator David A. Paterson, a candidate for Public Advocate, is filled with marked-up maps, boxes of campaign literature and an atmosphere heavy with fatigue.
In a race in which turnout is expected to be crucial, Mr.
Paterson, like the five other candidates for the office, is doing his utmost to make sure that armies of campaign volunteers are in place, phone banks are well staffed, and posters and voter cards are distributed.


Transactions
Baseball  American League
SEATTLE MARINERS -- Signed Makoto Suzuki, pitcher, to a minor-league contract.
TORONTO BLUE JAYS -- Recalled Gregory Flener, pitcher, from Knoxville of the Southern League.


Lemaire Doesn't Mind If the Devils Laugh It Up
With Coach Jacques Lemaire leading the way, the laughing and joking could be heard in the stands at the Devils' training center as players alternated taking penalty shots at the end of today's scrimmage.
It was the fourth day of practice for the veterans under Lemaire.
But there was an aura of unity and relaxation in the air at South Mountain Arena, as though the coach and the players had been together for ages.


Airlines Cut Fares by Up to 45%
Following the lead of Northwest Airlines, the nation's airlines cut fares yesterday up to 45 percent on domestic flights through Dec. 16.
But tickets must be bought before Saturday.
Some airlines, including Northwest, have included flights to Mexico and the Caribbean in the sale.
But on all carriers, including American, United, Delta and T.W.A., the fares are nonrefundable, a Saturday stay is required, flights on certain days of the Thanksgiving holiday weekend are out and tickets must be bought at least 14 days ahead.
Seats on all flights are limited, and the lowest fares apply to travel on Tuesdays, Wednesdays or Saturdays.


Steinbrenner Changes A Muzzle Into a Prod
After more than six months of near silence about the baseball team that he owns, rules and cherishes, George Steinbrenner shed his muzzle today and challenged the Yankees to produce a pennant.
Questioning the character of some players, whom he did not identify, Steinbrenner said the team had to respond in the next three weeks and not simply be satisfied with being in a pennant race.
After a 25-minute meeting with Manager Buck Showalter and his coaches in the clubhouse training room, Steinbrenner spoke with reporters near a row of concession stands at County Stadium.


Dinkins's Vision for City Unveiled in 'Future-Print'
Mayor David N. Dinkins called yesterday for the merger of the city's three police departments and the creation of local school councils to replace a Board of Education that he says is "out of control."
The initiatives, part of a sweeping set of proposals that the Mayor called his "Future-Print," were contained in an impassioned speech billed as the Mayor's vision for the city.


Ryan Is Still Raring to Go
At least NOLAN RYAN did not hurt himself on Nolan Ryan Appreciation Day, and that may have been the best thing about the afternoon.
Because at this stage of his career, and with the way this season has gone, every pitch he throws could be his last.


Israelis: Searching For New Bearings
When Yitzhak Rabin shook hands with Yasir Arafat, six Israelis watching it on television together on the western outskirts of Jerusalem might as well have been struck by lightning.
They could only sigh deeply in disbelief before their throughts and emotions unscrambled themselves.
The dominant feeling, in the room and across the ocuntry, is that there is no alternative to having Israelis and Palestininans come to terms with each other, as they are now trying to do.


Dolphins Put Humphrey on Injured List
Running back BOBBY HUMPHREY was placed on injured reserve yesterday, insuring the end of his tumultuous tenure with the Miami Dolphins.
The move, made after a slight cartilage tear was discovered in Humphrey's left knee, means he can't play for the Dolphins this season.
Humphrey will undergo arthroscopic surgery and is expected to be healthy again in six to eight weeks.
The Dolphins then have the option of waiving Humphrey, which would allow him to play for another team this season.
Otherwise, he becomes a free agent after the season.


COMPANY NEWS
AER ENERGY RESOURCES INC., Smyrna, Ga., said it had acquired rights to a proprietary cathode technology through a license agreement with Westinghouse Electric Corp.
ALLIED SIGNAL INC., Morristown, N.J., said it planned to sell its wholly owned Fluid Systems Corp. unit.


United Air in Tentative Accord to Sell 15 Flight Kitchens
United Airlines said yesterday that it had reached a tentative agreement to sell 15 flight kitchens to the Dial Corporation for $119.4 million in cash.
The deal, however, could be scuttled if within 60 days the International Association of Machinists -- the union that represents 5,200 workers at the kitchens -- comes forward with a proposal to reduce United's cost of operating the kitchens.


Young And 49ers Suffer Meltdown
The Cleveland Browns found a formula tonight for beating the San Francisco 49ers that most other teams have rarely seen: grab an early lead and then watch the 49ers self-destruct trying to play catch-up.
That's what happened here before 78,218 fans at Cleveland Stadium as the Browns toppled the 49ers by 23-13 in a game filled with San Francisco miscues.


Executive Changes
APPLIED BIOSCIENCE INTERNATIONAL INC., Arlington, Va., named Stephen L. Waechter vice president for finance and chief financial officer.
GILLETTE CO., Boston, named Michael C. Hawley executive vice president of the international group, succeeding Gaston R. Levy, who will retire at the end of the year.


Robert Corrigan, Arts Educator, 65, And Drama Writer
Robert W. Corrigan, a former dean of the School of Arts and Humanities at the University of Texas at Dallas and an innovative drama educator, a critic and a writer, died on Sept. 1 in Dallas.
He was 65.
His family said the cause was Shy-Drager syndrome, a degenerative neurological disease.


Brave New Jeans Warriors
Sometime during the last year, the word "basic" began being used as a pejorative term by fashion people.
Nowhere is this new usage more evident than at the first International Jeanswear Show, which began Saturday and will end Monday at the Miami Beach Convention Center.
Blenheim Fashion Shows Inc., a leading organizer of exhibitions, staged the event and will hold another in April.


Gyor Journal; AIDS in Hungary: A Threat That Seems Unreal
On the main highway here, where trucks thunder by as they enter Hungary from Western Europe, young prostitutes in micro-skirts and boots swagger in the bright daylight looking for business.
Not far from the women, who say work is good on this stretch of road and who can be seen negotiating with potential customers through car windows, AIDS prevention billboards with bold illustrations of condoms have recently been put up by the Government.


New York City Primary Choices
This list summarizes The Times's recommendations in some contested races in the New York City Democratic primary election today.
Poll hours are 6 A.M. to 9 P.M.
Comptroller Alan Hevesi Public Advocate Mark Green Bronx CITY COUNCIL


Book Club Replaces Its Editor in Chief
The Book-of-the-Month Club announced yesterday that it was replacing its editor in chief, Brigitte Weeks, with Tracy Brown, the director of trade paperbacks at Little, Brown, who was formerly the editorial director of the Quality Paperback Book Club.
Ms.
Weeks has been the editor of the club, which has more than a million members and says it is the largest book club in the United States, since 1988.


2 Parks to Require Rescue Insurance for Climbers
Skis strapped to his back, Van Celix came bounding down a trail on the side of this ice-crowned volcano, riding the energy of a perfect day at 8,000 feet.
He carried water, food, extra clothing and his equipment.
Beginning next year, Mr.
Celix and thousands of others at two of the nation's prime mountain-climbing sites will probably need something else in their pack: an insurance policy.


CHRONICLE
How many people would want to spend an evening listening to left-handed poets read their works?
More, it seems, than one might surmise.
INDIGO, a left-handed poet with one name, who organized an evening of readings at the Nuyorican Poets Cafe in May, found that it was successful enough to warrant a repeat.
So tomorrow night, nine left-handed poets will read their poems at the cafe at 236 East Third Street.


Miscellany
*
Self magazine has joined Estee Lauder USA for the second consecutive year in supporting Breast Cancer Awareness Month in October.
Plans call for free pink ribbons and reprints of a Self section on breast cancer to be available beginning on Oct. 1 at Estee Lauder cosmetics counters at 2,000 department stores nationwide.
More than 700,000 ribbons were distributed last year.


Babylon, L.I., In Bond Offering
A $125 million offering of waste facilities general obligation bonds by Babylon, L.I., was tentatively priced yesterday through underwriters led by Smith Barney Shearson.
The financing includes $110 million of current interest bonds, with yields ranging from 3.10 percent for an issue due in 1995 to 3.80 percent in 1998, 4.50 percent in 2003, 4.95 percent in 2008 and 5.10 percent in 2011 and 2012.


Chrysler Securities Backed by Loans
The Chrysler Financial Corporation is selling $1.05 billion of three classes of certificates backed by car loans through its Premier Auto Trust 1993-5 and underwritten by a group led by Morgan Stanley &amp; Company.
The credit support behind the financing includes a subordinated class of debt equal to 4 percent of the auto loans in the pool, extra collateral equal to 4.5 percent of the assets and a reserve fund of about 1.7 percent.


Rodman to the Suns? Uh, Not So Fast
The Detroit Pistons nearly traded forward DENNIS RODMAN to the Phoenix Suns over the weekend, but, according to executives from both teams, the Pistons backed off when they heard another player in the proposed deal, Suns forward RICHARD DUMAS, was currently attending an after-care program for substance-abuse.
Although terms of the proposed trade are complex because of the salary cap, the deal would send Rodman -- the National Basketball Association's top rebounder -- to the Suns for Dumas and other players to be determined.


Classical Music in Review
'Tojin Okichi' Harmonia Opera Company Manhattan School of Music


Police Suspect Stray Bullet in the Shooting of a Lawyer
A young lawyer who was seriously wounded in a shooting as he walked on a footbridge ramp in upper Manhattan Sunday might have been the victim of a stray bullet, a top police official said yesterday.
The victim, Terence Campbell, a 26-year-old Philadelphia native, had joined the prestigious Wall Street law firm of Sullivan &amp; Cromwell only last week.
Investigators say they do not know why someone would have shot Mr.
Campbell, who was described by his former Columbia Law Review colleagues as very studious, focused and hard-working.


U.S. Seeks to Keep World Trade Talks on Track
With France waging a strenuous campaign to overturn last winter's trans-Atlantic deal on farm subsidies, top American and European officials met here today in an effort to prevent the dispute from tearing apart seven-year-old world trade talks.
Sir Leon Brittan, the European Community's vice president for external economic affairs, met twice today with Mickey Kantor, the United States trade representative, in search of concessions to offer the French without actually renegotiating the farm subsidy deal.


Canadiens Sign Roy to Four-Year Pact
Goaltender PATRICK ROY, who led the Montreal Canadiens to the Stanley Cup last June, signed a four-year contract worth $16 million yesterday.
"The most important thing is to have the chance to finish my career in Montreal," said the 27-year-old Roy.


Corrections
A picture caption in Business Day on Saturday, with an article about the coming merger of Paramount Communications Inc. and Viacom Inc., reversed the identities of the executives shown.
Martin S. Davis, the chairman of Paramount, was at the left; Sumner M. Redstone, the chairman of Viacom, was at the right.


Free-Agent Pickings Look Pretty Slim to Mets
The general manager was on the bench in the dugout.
The Mets were working out at Shea Stadium.
The scene, a disaster that Joe McIlvaine had only seen infrequently on television for the last two months, wasn't much different up close.
And so the general manager did what everyone else who has been in the dugout has done this season: he turned up his hands and shook his head.
"One of those seasons you'd like to forget," McIlvaine said of the 48-95 debacle that lurches laboriously toward a conclusion at Shea.
"Maybe it's 10 years of trouble in one season."


MIDEAST ACCORD: The Scene; President's Tie Tells It All: Trumpets for a Day of Glory
The President who loves to stay up late told his aides that he went to bed at 10 P.M. on Sunday, so he could be rested for the historic day.
They did not believe him, of course.


Questions Linger in Explosion Case: The Bomb; Powerful Device, Simple Design
New Yorkers were stunned with the potency of such a basic, easily assembled bomb.
Prosecutors had planned to try to recreate the explosion using seized chemicals and videotape it to show the jury its devastating effect.
But after strong objections from defense lawyers, they agreed yesterday to forgo the test.
Indeed, it was a powerful but cheap and simple device, investigators say -- some 1,200 pounds of common sulfuric and nitric acids used in dozens of household products and urea used to fertilize lawns.
The price tag: perhaps $400.


Music Notes; Nonesuch Makes a Deal With Glass That Looks Ahead and Into the Past
Philip Glass has signed a five-year agreement with Nonesuch Records that will guarantee the label first recordings of Mr.
Glass's new works as well as remakes of several of his classics and the first compact-disk releases of his earliest recordings.
The label is inaugurating its Glass series on Sept. 28 with what it is calling the first complete recording of "Einstein on the Beach." For the original 1976 recording, which was first released by Tomato Records and reissued by CBS Masterworks, Mr.
Glass reduced the number of times that figures within the work were repeated.
His argument, at the time, was that listening to a recording was a fundamentally different experience from attending a live performance, which also has a visual element.


Pennant Tenses: Past, Present, Future
When the Yankees make this an even dozen years that they have not won the division championship, will the ultimate joke be on George Steinbrenner?
After years of sacrificing the future for the present, Steinbrenner has stood by this season and allowed his baseball people to cling to the organization's young players while the team's chances for the American League East championship are withering under the weight of weak, inexperienced arms.


SALINAS ATTACKED ON ELECTION BILLS
In what was to be the central political reform effort of Carlos Salinas de Gortari's presidency, the governing party is pushing to change electoral laws over the objections of opposition parties.
The effort is drawing much criticism and clouding the outlook for the presidential election next year.
After a run of elections in which victories by the governing party were mired in allegations by the opposition of fraud or unfair advantage the proposed laws and changes to the constitution this month are supposed to smooth the way to a cleaner, less contentious vote in August.
The proposed changes, which were approved on Sunday by the governing party's majority in the lower house, or Chamber of Deputies, would include some limits on campaign contributions and spending, Government control of election officials and the governing party's traditional dominance of the press.


Learning the Vocabulary of Monitors
COMPUTER monitors deserve a closer look.
They may lack the technical allure of a fast microprocessor or a big hard disk, but may have a bigger effect on the user's overall satisfaction.
Some computer shoppers are willing to spend hundreds of dollars for a faster microprocessor that by the end of the day, will probably save them at most a few minutes.
Yet these same people may inadvertently choose an inferior monitor, thus condemning themselves to an extra 30 minutes a day of stress.


Sunny in the 90's Then Rain and Snow in the 30's Was All in a Day's Work for Mother Nature


Robert Borthwick Adam; Retailer, 75
Robert Borthwick Adam, a Buffalo retailer and civic leader, died on Friday in his home in Buffalo.
He was 75.
The cause of death was cancer, his family said.


Clinton Administration Echoing Bush's White House on Gay Ban
The Clinton Administration, using legal arguments that Bill Clinton the candidate had sharply criticized, appeared in court today to defend the old policy that banned homosexuals from the military.
But the Federal appeals panel here that is reviewing the policy seemed to be deeply skeptical of the Administration's position, and in its questioning strongly suggested that it would hand the gay-rights movement a significant victory.


Parking Rules
Because of Rosh Ha-Shana, alternate-side parking rules are suspended in New York City on Thursday and Friday.
Next week, alternate-side parking rules will be suspended on Sept. 25 for Yom Kippur.
Other regulations remain in effect.


Subaru Begins Review of Account
Subaru of America said yesterday that it was in the preliminary stages of a review on its estimated $70 million to $100 million account, which has been at Wieden &amp; Kennedy for the last two years.
The agency was notified in July that its contract with Subaru would not be renewed after it expires at the end of the year.


Accounts
*
Jaguar Canada Inc., Bramalea, Ontario, to Ogilvy &amp; Mather Toronto, to handle its account, previously at Kelley Advertising, Toronto.
Ogilvy, which handles the luxury auto maker's American account, was awarded the Canadian account without a review.
Billings were not disclosed. *
Radio Shack, Fort Worth, to the Botway Group, New York, to handle its network, syndicated and cable television media account, previously handled in-house.
Though billings were not disclosed, Adweek reported that broadcast spending was $14 million last year.
Radio Shack is continuing a review of the creative portion of its account.


Blunt Style On Teen Sex And Health
Six years ago, when Bill Clinton, then the Governor of Arkansas, introduced Dr.
Joycelyn Elders to the press as his newly appointed director of the State Health Department, he quickly learned what he had got himself into.
A reporter asked whether Dr.
Elders wanted to give condoms to public school children.
"Well, I'm not going to put them on their lunch trays, but, yes," she answered.


Zen of First Impressions About Being in College
FOR more than an hour, the students in English 101 had wrestled with an essay seemingly written not merely to challenge them, but to defeat them.
Now the instructor, Monica Marciczkiewicz, urged them to reflect on the author's argument.
"It's so much in the air," she said, "that it's very easy for us to agree with what she is proposing." She added, "You can think about it at home."
Home?
An abstract concept if there is one, on the campus of Rutgers University in the first weeks of the fall semester.
Several thousand 18-year-olds have left home to come here, and finding a new one in this academic community of 33,000 is likely to take a while.
They are assumed to be stunned, dazed and overwhelmed, even those who couldn't wait to get away, who endured high school like the line in a Morrissey song, "I'm just passing through here on my way to somewhere civilized."


Let's Try Limiting School Boards to Parents
To the Editor:
Ruth W. Messinger, Manhattan Borough President, mistakenly maintains that confining the electorate of New York City community school boards to parents of children in the public school system would be unconstitutional (news article, Aug. 26).


Romania's Ex-King and His Country in Art Duel
It has all the touches of a fanciful spy novel.
Just as the Communists are about to knock the crown from his head, a dashing young monarch slips out of his Eastern European homeland on the Orient Express, taking with him a collection of Old Master paintings, some of which he deposits in a Swiss vault.
More than 45 years later, the Communists' successors, who value the art at more than $500 million, want it back.
That is the story being told by the Government of Romania, which is suing the onetime King Michael, now 71, for the return of works by El Greco, Rembrandt, Caravaggio, Breughel and others.
Two suits, one filed in Switzerland and the other in New York State Supreme Court in Manhattan, could turn on questions of interpretation of a 104-year-old document: which country has jurisdiction over the matter, and, after nearly half a century, have Romania's legal rights expired?


Police Department Holds Memorial Service for Comrades Who Died in the Line of Duty


Data Link X-Rays To Distant Galaxies
TWO of the many mysteries shrouding the vast reaches of the universe may finally have been penetrated: why the entire sky is filled with X-ray radiation, and what it is that radiates a strange infrared glow in the almost empty space of Earth's galaxy.
The tentative answers, published this month in the United States and Britain, are based on new mathematical analyses of data collected by various satellites and instruments, and they are suggestive rather than conclusive.
But the astrophysicists involved are confident they have hit upon the truth.


Candidates Press Campaigning to the Wire on Eve of Primary
Stumping at subway stops and monopolizing the drive-time morning talk shows, candidates seeking the Democratic nomination for city offices played to their surest supporters yesterday in the closing hours of Democratic primary races that could hinge on who best draws out the vote.
With only a token challenge to Mayor David N. Dinkins, the bitter battle for city comptroller took center stage as two opponents, Herman Badillo and Alan G. Hevesi, vied to force the incumbent, Elizabeth Holtzman, into a runoff election on Sept. 28 by denying her the 40 percent of the vote needed for the nomination.


Judge Names Panel to Study Life on Juries
Concerned that for many people, jury service is unpleasant and a financial burden, and that juries may not adequately reflect the ethnic makeup of their areas, two of New York State's top judges yesterday named a panel to propose an overhaul of the jury system.
The marching orders that Chief Judge Judith S. Kaye gave the committee include looking into the use of unemployment rolls or other lists to broaden the pool of potential jurors, improving the chances that a person called up for a pool of potential jurors will actually serve on a panel, eliminating some exemptions from jury service, and increasing the $15 a day jurors are now paid.
She also asked the panel to look into the possibility of providing child care and work areas for potential jurors.


MIDEAST ACCORD: Arabs and Jews; Reflections on Accord: New Hopes, Old Fears
An Athlete's Widow
Ankie Rekhess-Spitzer is the widow of Andrei Spitzer, one of 11 Israeli athletes killed at the 1972 Summer Olympics in Munich by gunmen of the Black September group in the Palestine Liberation Organization.
On Sunday, a day before the signing of the Israeli-Palestinian peace accords, she joined relatives of other victims at a memorial ceremony on the Hebrew calendar anniversary of the massacre.


Observer; Mercy On Us All!
Here's a country with 90 million grown-ups who can't write a coherent letter or do simple arithmetic.
It's a country where "Everything I Need to Know I Learned in Kindergarten" inevitably becomes a huge best seller.
It's a country where 40 million people actually learn everything they know not in kindergarten but from television.
Television!
At best, on PBS, that means they are under the delusion that bugs mate to the strains of Mozart.
At worst --


THE MIDEAST ACCORD: Diplomacy; For the Unlikely Middleman From Norway, Public Thanks
Seated in the front row at the White House ceremony today was Johan Jorgen Holst, the Norwegian Foreign Minister, whose mediation played a crucial role in brokering the accord between Israel and the Palestine Liberation Organization.
Mr.
Holst, 55, known in Europe for his expertise in military and security issues, was the unlikely middleman for months of secret talks in Norway between the longtime adversaries.


Both Sides Voice Optimism About Avoiding Ford Strike
With the deadline closing in on them, officials on both sides continued to predict today that the Ford Motor Company and the United Automobile Workers union would sign a new labor contract by Tuesday night, avoiding a strike.
Even if they miss the deadline, which falls at 11:59 P.M.
Tuesday, negotiators are likely to continue talking, officials said, since they have not reached an impasse.


World Court Presses Belgrade on Genocide Issue
In an implicit rebuke to Yugoslavia, the World Court today demanded "immediate and effective implementation" of its past orders that the Belgrade Government refrain from committing or sponsoring acts of genocide in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
The Court did not, however, go as far as lawyers for Bosnia had urged.
In arguments last month, Bosnian representatives asked the court to rule that the United Nations arms embargo against their country was illegal, and that any partition of their country would also be illegal.


Ronald Parham; Bloomingdale's Executive, 48
Ronald Parham, a Bloomingdale's executive who was assistant to the department store's former chairman, Marvin Traub, from 1978 to 1993, died on Friday at Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center.
He was 48.
The center said the cause was acute lymphoma.


Public Mood Bolsters Effort To End House's Secrecy Rule
Fueled by the support of Ross Perot and conservative talk show hosts, Republicans are gaining ground in an effort to gut an arcane House procedural rule that allows members to block legislation in secret while supporting it in public.
The insurgency's progress is a measure of a skeptical public mood about the way Congress performs.
And the growing number of Democrats who are joining the effort demonstrates that members of both parties feel they must respond to the public's mood or face the consequences at the polls next year.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.00
2.94
3.22
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
2.98
2.95
2.89
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.03
3.05
2.90
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
4.86
4.87
5.80
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
5.87
5.87
7.25
TELEPHONE BONDS
6.86
6.85
8.42
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
5.43
5.43
6.24
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Q&amp;A
Dusty Fruit
Q. What is the dusty film found on fresh grapes, plums, etc.?


Hyperion to Publish Ripper Manuscript
Hyperion announced yesterday that it would publish a manuscript presented as the diary of Jack the Ripper, even though another publisher, Warner Books, asserted last week that the diary was fake and canceled its own publication plans.
"This is a fascinating document, and the questions it raises are equally absorbing," Robert Miller, the vice president and publisher of Hyperion, said in a statement.
Referring to an independent analysis saying that the diaries had been written between 1909 and 1933 -- not in the 1880's, when Jack the Ripper was terrorizing London -- Mr.
Miller said: "Certainly, if it is a hoax, it is a very old and elaborate one -- who did write this -- and why?"


There Was a Fight; The Video Proved It
Would it be overly critical to say that the announcer designated as the blow-by-blow caller should call the punches blow by blow?
Steve Albert forgot that minor detail during Friday night's Julio Cesar Chavez-Pernell Whitaker pay-per-view card on SET/KingVision.
There is no requirement that Albert identify every punch thrown, but we need to know what the crucial punches and combinations are, whether they land, whether they hurt or glance off the boxer and what patterns are developing.


MIDEAST ACCORD: Mahmoud Abbas; From Fatah to Pact Signer
Mahmoud Abbas, who signed the agreement yesterday for the Palestine Liberation Organization, is a founder of Al Fatah, the first guerrilla group in the P.L.O., and one of a handful who survived and remained behind the P.L.O. leader, Yasir Arafat, becoming his closest aide in the last two years.
Mr.
Abbas was born in 1935 in the Galilee town of Safad and fled to Syria in 1948 after the establishment of Israel.
He has specialized in Jewish affairs in the political establishment of the P.L.O., receiving a doctorate in Israeli studies from Moscow University and publishing several papers on the subject.


MIDEAST ACCORD: Lebanon; Troops in Beirut Fire on Militants And Kill 6 at Protest Over Accord
Lebanese troops fired today on Muslim militants protesting the accord between Israel and the Palestine Liberation Organization, killing six guerrillas from the Party of God and wounding 35 other people.
The demonstration in southern Beirut was one of several by Palestinian refugees and the Party of God against the agreement, which was signed later in Washington.
Thousands of Palestinians chanted "Death to Arafat!" as they marched through the alleys of their camps in Syria and Lebanon.


Not Exactly an Affair Tennis Will Remember
They came, they competed, they complained.
Then they took their record $9,022,000 in United States Open prize money and, after looking a gift horse in the mouth, the professionals traipsed off to the next best tennis watering hole.
This was not a banner Open.
Two underwhelming straight-set finals produced two matter-of-fact champions; the prospect of a women's doubles Grand Slam didn't pan out; there was insufferable heat and humidity the first week, and a series of frazzling rain delays in the second.


Eye on Olympics, China Frees Top Dissident
In a move apparently timed to influence the decision on where to hold the 2000 Olympics, China today released its most famous political prisoner after he had served all but six months of his 15-year prison term.
The Justice Ministry announced that Wei Jingsheng, a champion of free speech, was being released on parole.
Chen Ming, an official with the Ministry, told the Associated Press that he was freed "because he abided by prison regulations and obeyed the rules."


Half Full Or Half Empty for 1-1 Jets?
A day after their first victory of the season, a 24-14 triumph over Miami, the Jets are treading lightly into the bye week.
As would be expected with a 1-1 record, there is a certain amount of ambivalence.
For the next two weeks, the Jets will have to maintain a delicate balancing act.
They can't read too much into their victory or their loss.


No Headline
"Enough of blood and tears! Enough!" -- PRIME MINISTER YITZHAK RABIN.  [ A1:5. ]
"The battle for peace is the most difficult battle of our lives. It deserves our utmost efforts." -- YASIR ARAFAT.  [ A12:5. ]
"The sound we heard today, once again as in ancient Jericho, was of trumpets toppling walls, the walls of anger and suspicion between Israeli and Palestinian, between Arab and Jew. This time, praise God, the trumpets herald not the destruction of that city but its new beginning." -- PRESIDENT CLINTON.  [ A12:5. ]


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY PRISON OFFICERS BLOCK BRIDGE Two hundred correction officers, angry over working for three years without a contract, blocked the bridge to the city's huge jail complex on Rikers Island, but quietly returned to work after city officials promised to expedite contract talks.
B3.
PANEL TO STUDY JURY SERVICE Concerned that for many people jury service is unpleasant and a financial burden, and that juries may not adequately reflect the ethnic makeup of their areas, two of New York State's top judges named a panel to propose an overhaul of the jury system.
B2.
CANDIDATES FOR ADVOCATE SCRAMBLE The six candidates for Public Advocate -- their race overshadowed by a high-profile mayoral election and a contentious race for comptroller -- scrambled for attention and put into place their strategies to get voters to the polls.
B6.
HOLTZMAN MEETING WITH BANK DETAILED Executives of Fleet Securities met with New York City Comptroller Elizabeth Holtzman to lobby for a greater share of the city's underwriting 10 months before she claims she first became aware the firm was seeking city business, bank and law-enforcement officials said.
B6.
EX-KING AND COUNTRY IN ART DUEL It has all the touches of a fanciful spy novel.
Just as the Communists are about to knock the crown from his head, a dashing young monarch slips out of his homeland, taking a collection of paintings.
More than 45 years later, the Communists' successors, who value the art at more than $500 million, want it back.
B4.
The New York Times announced that it would raise the price of its Sunday paper to $2.
B3.
Metro-North trains were delayed for up to 45 minutes by the theft of copper cable from Grand Central Terminal, officials said.
B4.
A young lawyer who was seriously wounded in a shooting as he walked on a footbridge ramp in upper Manhattan might have been the victim of a stray bullet, a top police official said.
B3.
Mayor David N. Dinkins called for the merger of the city's three police departments and the creation of local school councils to replace a Board of Education that he said is "out of control." B6.
REGION SUBPOENA POWER GIVEN TO PANEL The New Jersey Assembly's Republican majority brushed aside indignant accusations of dirty politics from the Democrats as it voted to give its Appropriations Committee the power to subpoena witnesses for hearings on the Florio administration's handling of state bond business.
B8.
An opinion by the acting attorney general scuttled a Senate vote on a new term for a Superior Court judge.
B8.
FARM STAND RULES REAP RESENTMENT Officials in Southampton, L.I., say new restrictions on farm stands were prompted by alarm at the growth of many stands into more-or-less-permanent retail stores.
But some farmers say the law could force them to close their stands and even sell off their farmland.
B8.
In Buffalo, the man who has been Mayor for 16 years is not seeking re-election.
B5.
Chronicle B5 Our Towns by George Judson B8 Traffic Alert B3


CHRONICLE
Once again, PRINCESS ANNE is taking her turn as the center of attention in London.
Over the weekend, British newspapers were filled with speculation that the Princess and her second husband, Comdr.
TIMOTHY LAURENCE of the Royal Navy, expect a child in about six months.
One, The People, devoted five of its tabloid pages to the reports.
A spokesman for Buckingham Palace refused to confirm or deny the pregnancy.
"These are just tabloid newspaper rumors, and we wouldn't comment," he said, adding that such matters are private and that it is usually left to the individual members of the royal family to decide whether to divulge them.


By Design; Silky Raincoats
It is the season for raincoats, and some of the most elegant and fluid designs are now made of microfiber, a water-repellent polyester whose properties are similar to those of silk.
"It dyes like silk, drapes like silk and has the hand of silk," said Carol Cohen, the head designer for Sanyo Fashion House, a maker of raincoats.
Unlike silk, it is durable, and wrinkle-proof.


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt  *
Manatee County, Fla., is tentatively offering $41.9 million of tax-exempt refunding bonds through William R. Hough &amp; Co.
The maximum yield is 5.19 percent for an issue due 2015, with shorter-maturity serial bonds priced to yield from 2.65 percent in 1994 to 5.05 percent in 2009.
The financing is rated A-1 by Moody's Investors Service Inc. and AA- by Standard &amp; Poor's Corp.
*
Pacific Gas and Electric Co., San Francisco, is offering $300 million, down from $350 million, of 5 7/8 percent first- and refunding-mortgage bonds due in 2005 at 99.871 to yield 5.89 percent through CS First Boston and $400 million of 6 3/4 percent first- and refunding-mortgage bonds due in 2023 at 98.732 to yield 6.85 percent.
Both the noncallable 12-year issue and callable 30-year issue are rated A-1 by Moody's and A by S.&amp; P. The 30-year is callable in 10 years.


Transportation Stocks Surge; Dow Up 12.58
The lowest oil prices in three years propelled transportation stocks to strong gains on the New York Stock Exchange yesterday, as the stock market posted modest advances on the strength of a few blue chips.
The Dow Jones transportation index surged 23.30 points, to 1,634.76, while the Dow Jones industrials gained 12.58 points, to 3,634.21.


Some Doubts On Economy
A leading Administration economist said today that there were substantial risks that economic growth over the next year would fall short of the 3 percent rate the Administration has forecast.
The economist, Alan Blinder, a member of the President's Council of Economic Advisers, also said that the unemployment rate, currently 6.7 percent, would probably remain stuck near 6.5 percent at the end of 1994, helping to make life difficult for Democrats in next year's Congressional elections.


6 Clio Awards Won By DDB Needham
DDB Needham Worldwide and Colenso Communications of Wellington, New Zealand, took top honors at the Clio Awards ceremony last night at the City Center in New York.
The ceremony was the second, under its second owner, since advertising's best-known awards collapsed in 1991 amid the chaos of disrupted and canceled ceremonies.
Under James M. Smyth, who bought the rights to the awards in January, prominent agency executives were recruited to help restore some of the Clios' tarnished luster.


Patterns
They Also Wore Khakis
The current Gap advertising campaign showing famous people in khakis -- legends like like Humphrey Bogart, Gene Kelly and Pablo Picasso -- didn't take into consideration some of the less image-friendly figures with similar tastes in trousers.
But The Los Angeles Times did, in a recent satiric article in its Opinion section of Sept. 5.
The article, by Christopher Corbett, had a parody of the Gap ads, complete with a photo of Hitler and the caption "Adolf Hitler wore khakis." It was a rogue's gallery of the other scary guys who also favored the style: the entire Third Reich, miscellaneous dictators, and cult leaders like Jim Jones.


'93 Crime Bill Still Faces '92 Problems
Ensnarled in Presidential election politics, a major crime bill died last year as Republicans and Democrats refused to compromise on difficult issues like capital punishment, death row appeals and gun control.
This year was supposed to be different.
With Democrats controlling both the White House and Congress, many hoped the impasse would break.
"It's time we put aside the divisions of party and philosophy," President Clinton pleaded last month in a ceremony announcing his commitment to push for the same crime bill that failed in 1992.


Du Pont Laying Off 4,500 Domestic Employees
E.
I. du Pont de Nemours &amp; Company said yesterday that it would dismiss 4,500 employees in its domestic chemical business by mid-1994 to cut costs.
When the latest round of layoffs is completed the company will have trimmed its worldwide work force by about 9,000 people from the total of 133,000 at the beginning of the decade.
As a result, the company will take a charge of $374 million, or 56 cents a share, against third-quarter earnings to account for severance costs.


At Last, a Game That Counts (for the Phillies, That Is)
The Phillies had come, and so there was significance, if not electricity, at Shea Stadium last night.
Oh, the sounds of individual vendors could be heard, and almost any seat in absolutely every section was available.
But there was meaning in the innings, and a passion about the final result.
And when the game was over, the Phillies had reduced their magic number to 14 because the blind magic of the schedule had made the Mets their opponents.
The Phillies, with an economy of effort and a mimimum of drama, beat the Mets, 5-0.


In Auto-Making Country, Trade Accord Is the Enemy
If there is an emotional heart to the movement against the North American Free Trade Agreement, it may be here, among the auto workers who fear that the agreement would be one more devastating blow to a way of life.
The attitudes are clear-cut, concrete, utterly removed from the theoretical debates of Washington and from the certitude of the pact's advocates that free trade is inevitable and good for the American economy over the long term.


Scientists Confront Renewed Backlash on Global Warming
AS the Clinton Administration prepares to announce in the next few weeks a plan for controlling waste industrial gases that trap heat in the atmosphere, conservatives and industry groups have mounted a renewed assault on the idea that global warming is a serious and possibly catastrophic threat.
In a drum roll of criticism over the last few months they have characterized the thesis of global warming as a "flash in the pan," "hysteria," "scare talk" and a ploy by socialists to justify controls on the economy.


Raymond Burr, Actor, 76, Dies; Played Perry Mason and Ironside
Raymond Burr, the burly, impassive actor who played the defense lawyer Perry Mason and the police detective Robert T. Ironside on television, died on Sunday at his ranch in Dry Creek Valley, near Healdsburg, Calif.
He was 76.
The cause was kidney cancer, said his doctor, Paul J. Marguglio.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-17  SIGNED, SEALED AND SHAKEN
Months of secret negotiations were sealed with signatures and perhaps even more significantly, handshakes, when Israeli and Palestinian leaders met on the South Lawn of the White House.
A1  Dancing, toasts and resignation in Jericho, Israel and Syria.
A17


Corrections
An article on Sunday about New York City's 10-year plan for protecting its drinking water quoted Mayor David N. Dinkins incorrectly about the city's contacts with communities in the watershed upstate.
The Mayor said the city's approach was "a conscious rejection of the confrontation of the past" between downstate and upstate interests.


Committee Is Given Subpoena Power in Bond Inquiry
The Assembly's Republican majority brushed aside indignant accusations of dirty politics from the Democrats today as it voted to give its Appropriations Committee the power to subpoena witnesses for hearings on the Florio administration's handling of state bond business.
By voting the unusual powers to a committee better known for dividing the budgetary pie than for investigating misdeeds, the Republicans hoped to waft the scent of possible corruption toward Gov.
Jim Florio as he runs for re-election.
An early use of the subpoena may be to compel a partner at Lazard Freres &amp; Company, the investment bankers, to explain some investments it handled for the state last December.


MIDEAST ACCORD: The Overview; RABIN AND ARAFAT SEAL THEIR ACCORD AS CLINTON APPLAUDS 'BRAVE GAMBLE'
In a triumph of hope over history, Yitzhak Rabin, the Prime Minister of Israel, and Yasir Arafat, the chairman of the P.L.O., shook hands today on the White House lawn, sealing the first agreement between Jews and Palestinians to end their conflict and share the holy land along the River Jordan that they both call home.
At 11:43 A.M. on the sun-splashed South Lawn of the White House, Foreign Minister Shimon Peres of Israel and Mahmoud Abbas, the foreign policy aide for the Palestine Liberation Organization, signed a Declaration of Principles on Palestinian self-government in Israeli-occupied Gaza and the West Bank.
Three thousand witnesses watched in amazement, including former Presidents Jimmy Carter and George Bush.


Corrections
An article in the Arts and Leisure section on July 25 about the New York City Opera misstated the percentage of decline in ticket sales last season at the Metropolitan Opera.
It was 3 percent, not 5.
The Met reported the error shortly after the article appeared; this correction was delayed by an editing lapse.


Not So Fast on the Ozone Layer Celebration; Aerosol Changeover
To the Editor:
Information that the buildup of chlorofluorocarbons in the atmosphere is leveling off is truly good news -- so was your Aug. 26 front-page article's note that this is a case where science, government, industry and the public worked together.


Classical Music in Review
'Madama Butterfly'  New York City Opera New York State Theater


New Mutual Fund Tables Begin Today in The Times
The New York Times introduces new mutual fund tables today, providing more information than before and making it easier to evaluate and compare individual funds.
The tables, which begin today on page D19, will list all funds with more than $30 million in assets, providing different information about them each day.
Over the course of a week, that information will include the total return for each fund over several periods: three months, one year, three years and the year to date.
The tables will also show sales charges and a fund's relative rating, for performance and risk, against others.


Dispute Over Equality Leaves a Coach Jobless
Before the bitterness, this was going to be a season of decision.
Marianne Stanley, approaching her fifth year as the basketball coach at the University of Southern California, had assembled a group of players that seemed capable of attempting a bold step toward the Final Four of the national women's tournament and a long-awaited return to prominence.
But that combination has been changed, perhaps forever, by an emotionally charged series of circumstances and a decision that arrived long before the season did.


INSIDE
Primary Candidates Work on Voter Turnout
Appearing at subway stops and centers for the elderly and monopolizing the talk shows, candidates in the Democratic primaries for New York City offices played to their surest supporters in the closing hours of the campaign.
The races could hinge on voter turnout.
Page B1.


Schools Chancellor Orders Emergency Asbestos Lists
The agency inspecting for asbestos in the New York City schools failed yesterday to provide the new Chancellor with a report he had ordered to determine which classrooms could open and which would have to remain closed next week.
Saying he was frustrated and disappointed, Schools Chancellor Ramon C. Cortines announced he was sidestepping the agency, the School Construction Authority, and ordering new committees to prepare emergency room-by-room reports by this afternoon, something that the asbestos inspectors had been unable to do in the last five days.


Clinton Takes 2d Step to Ease Ban on Trade With Vietnam
In its second easing of the economic embargo against Vietnam in the last two months, the Clinton Administration said today that American companies could bid for construction and development projects there that were financed by the World Bank and other international lending institutions.
The Administration cited Hanoi's cooperation in helping to determine the fate of the more than 2,200 American servicemen who never came home from the war in Southeast Asia.


Mullen: Heart Surgery
Brian Mullen, the scrappy Islander forward who suffered a stroke at his Long Island home on Aug. 11, underwent surgery yesterday to repair a hole between the smaller left and right chambers of his heart.
The operation, which was performed by Dr.
Craig R. Smith at Columbia Presbyterian Medical Center in Manhattan, was described as successful.


Blood Labs Agree to Pay $39.8 Million
Two of the nation's largest blood testing laboratories agreed today to pay the Federal Government $39.8 million to settle charges that they submitted false Medicare claims for unnecessary blood tests.
Metpath and Metwest, which are divisions of Corning Lab Services Inc., a subsidiary of Corning Inc., admitted no wrongdoing in settling the case, which is a result of a two-year Federal investigation into the marketing and billing practices of the diagnostic testing industry.


Review/Pop; From Brazil, A Hybrid Of Sexuality
American pop has never had a star who explores the polarities of machismo and effeminacy with the fierce hauteur of the Brazilian pop star Ney Matogrosso.
The singer, who performed at Town Hall on Saturday evening and who will open a two-week engagement tonight at the Ballroom (253 West 28th Street, Chelsea), has been a major star in Brazil for two decades.
Although he has been compared to David Bowie and Elton John, he is really more like a hybrid of Prince (in his defiant, poker-faced lubricity) and Peter Allen (in his playfulness).





Palestinians: Glee And Flag-Waiving
Palestinians took to the streets of the West Bank and Gaza Strip today in rapturous and noisy celebrations of the Palestine Liberation Organization accord with Israel and what they said was the cornerstone of their future state.
In the sleepy city of Jericho, the seat of the future Palestinian self-governing authority, it looked as thorugh every one of the 15,000 residents was in the streets.


Mexico City Restoring Area Tilled by Aztecs
AS they crested the mile-high mountains ringing the Aztec settlement of Mexico in 1519, the first Spanish conquistadors gasped.
Spread out below them was a huge city shimmering in shallow waters, a city, they later wrote, that surpassed the glory of Venice.
The Spaniards marveled at how the native people used the waters of the five ancient lakes of the Valley of Mexico as highways.
And they were amazed when, traveling around the southern edge of the valley, they encountered a remarkably productive area of floating gardens that provided much of the food consumed by the 200,000 people living in the city.


Review/Dance; Ports of Call in One Room
Saz Dance Theater called its program "Out of Time." But the fascinating assortment of brief pieces that it offered on Sunday afternoon at the Ohio Theater could just as easily have been titled "Across Space." The varied works drew upon American modern-dance styles and traditional dance forms from Spain, India, the Caribbean and the Middle East.
There were several vivid solos.
"Herosi Bar," choreographed and performed by Lynn Sherry, who co-directs the company with Roberta Koch, began languidly, then grew increasingly intense.
Ms.
Koch was sultry and passionate in Richard Gonzales's "Rhumba Fuego." In Ms.
Koch's "Manazir," Sharon Oliensis was wrapped in gold fabric that shimmered alluringly while her arms rippled and her body whirled.


MIDEAST ACCORD: The Reaction -- Israel Israelis Are Transfixed; Palestinians Run From the Rapturous to the Furious; 'With Hope And With Worry'
It didn't matter whether they were young or old, whether they leaned politically to the left or the right, whether they were assertively secular or, like one of the men, wearing a yarmulke.
When Yitzhak Rabin shook hands today with Yasir Arafat, six Israelis watching it on television together here on the western outskirts of Jerusalem might as well have been struck by lightning.
Each stared at the set, jaws slightly lowered, and could only sigh deeply in disbelief for a few moments before thoughts and emotions unscrambled themselves.


Questions Raised On New Technique For Appendectomy
MINIMALLY invasive surgery performed with the aid of tiny camera threaded into the abdomen has transformed gallbladder surgery virtually overnight.
Four years ago, most surgeons were dismissing the idea, but today 80 to 90 percent of gallbladder operations are done using the method, known as laparoscopy.
Now a number of doctors are using the same techniques to remove the appendix and to repair hernias, the two most common general surgical operations in this country.
And while some doctors believe that soon almost all abdominal operations will be done by a surgeon using a scope, others say this increasingly popular technique has overstepped its proper bounds.


Viacom Bid Lifts Paramount's Stock
The shares of Paramount Communications Inc. surged yesterday in reaction to its agreement to be taken over by Viacom Inc. and partly on the expectation that another bidder might emerge.
On the New York Stock Exchange, Paramount shares jumped $3.375, to $64.50.
Analysts said there was a premium in Paramount's stock price relative to where it would be selling even with the news of a takeover by Viacom because of the possibility that another company might make a higher offer.


Price Increase Is Announced By The Times
The New York Times announced yesterday that it would raise the suggested newsstand price of its Sunday paper in the New York City area to $2 from $1.50 starting Sept. 26.
In a statement announcing the price change, the publisher, Arthur Sulzberger Jr., said: "The New York Times is committed to offering its readers the finest journalism available. We seek to constantly improve the newspaper and provide good value for readers and advertisers alike. This price increase is necessary to help fund these improvements and to offset rising production and distribution costs." To Maintain Commitment
In the last few years, The Times has increased its coverage of metropolitan news and sports; introduced two new sections, Styles of The Times and The City, and begun printing the Book Review and Real Estate sections in color.
The Times plans to add color to the Travel section this fall and to Arts and Leisure early next year.


U.N. Still Struggling With Somali General's Militia
Nearly three months after the United Nations began a military campaign against the militia of Gen.
Mohammed Farah Aidid in the southern part of Mogadishu, the capital of Somalia, the area is still a battleground awash with heavy weapons.
United Nations peacekeeping troops are regularly ambushed on patrols and subjected to mortar fire in their compounds, interclan gun battles rage for hours without any attempts by peacekeepers to intervene, and young children block off entire neighborhoods with burning tires and makeshift roadblocks.


Lester S. Block; Executive, 76
Lester S. Block, a retired senior vice president for R. H. Macy &amp; Company, died at his home in Princeton, N.J., on Sept. 1.
He was 76.
The cause was heart disease, a family spokesman said.


MIDEAST ACCORD: News Analysis; The Next Challenge for the U.S.
As he himself said, this was not Bill Clinton's day.
It was not he who brought together the sober old soldier and the grinning guerrilla fighter in the leafy calm of the South Lawn of the White House, far from the battlefields of the Middle East, for a paean to peace.
However deft, however sagacious, he was but the master of ceremonies.
He thanked those who had labored to bring about the latest in a series of once-inconceivable changes that have remade the world in five short years.
He bestowed the congratulations of the world's only superpower.
And he gave Yitzhak Rabin a timely little nudge when he seemed reluctant to grasp the outstretched hand of Yasir Arafat.


Mellon Seeking to Stem Smith Barney Cost Cuts
Efforts by Smith Barney, Harris Upham and Company to cut costs since its merger with the Shearson brokerage system have run afoul of the Mellon Bank in Pittsburgh, owner of a company providing back-office services to Shearson's mutual funds.
In suits filed Friday, Mellon contended that Smith Barney and its parent company, Primerica, had violated an agreement that called for Mellon's affiliate, the Boston Company, to provide back-office services for Shearson's mutual funds until 1999.


Working-Class Parents Face Shortage of Day Care Centers, a Study Finds
Working-class parents face some of the worst shortages of preschools in the country, according to a new study made public yesterday by the Harvard Graduate School of Education.
The study also suggests that many working-class families are caught in a double bind.
In many cases both parents have to work, but then earn too much money to get subsidies that poor parents receive to pay for preschool programs like Head Start.


On My Mind; Now, What Arabs Can Do
So now it is up to the Arabs, Arabs in the new Palestine being created, and Arabs far beyond.
On Feb. 15, 1993, Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin of Israel said that the more the Palestine Liberation Organization lost its authority the better it would be for progress toward peace.


Not So Fast on the Ozone Layer Celebration
To the Editor:
Re "Good News, for Once, on Ozone" (editorial, Aug. 30): While it is good news that concentrations of ozone-destroying chemicals have been measured at a somewhat lower concentration than previously projected, this should not be the basis for unwarranted euphoria.


Statements by Leaders at the Signing of the Middle East Pact
Following is a transcript of remarks by President Clinton, Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin of Israel, Foreign Minister Shimon Peres of Israel, Yasir Arafat, chairman of the Palestine Liberation Organization, and Mahmoud Abbas, a P.L.O. negotiator, at the signing of the Israeli-Palestinian agreement yesterday in Washington, as recorded by the New York Times.
Mr.
Arafat and Mr.
Abbas spoke in Arabic, and portions of remarks by Mr.
Rabin and Mr.
Peres were in Hebrew.
Mr.
Clinton's closing remarks were recorded by the Federal News Service, a private transcription service, and provided by Reuters.
"For too long the young of the Middle East have been caught in a web of hatred not of their own making. For too long they have been taught from the chronicles of war; now we can give them the chance to know the season of peace." -- PRESIDENT CLINTON


Retirees Figure Big in Detroit Math
If one man reflects the hopes of the nation's automobile workers and the fears of its auto makers as they haggle over this year's labor contract, he could well be J. D. Dotson.
Mr.
Dotson, 92, has richly enjoyed himself since retiring from the General Motors Corporation in 1967.
Come hunting season, he still bags his limit of deer, or at least claims to.
He still travels, to northern Michigan or to visit his son in Los Angeles.


Steinbrenner Talks, Yanks Listen (for a Night)
George Steinbrenner must be a genius.
Hours after he met with Manager Buck Showalter and his coaching staff, meandered through the clubhouse with a stern look and told reporters that the Yankees must respond to the pennant-race challenge, they actually did for a night.
Of course, Jimmy Key's magnificent pitching had more to do with the Yankees taming the Brewers, 3-1, tonight at County Stadium than any words Steinbrenner uttered.
After an 88-minute storm delayed the first pitch, Key stifled Milwaukee on four hits over six innings.
After a second delay of 62 minutes, Steve Farr and Lee Smith notched the last nine outs and helped the Yankees win for the second time in seven games on this dangerous road trip.
A few hundred of the 11,125 fans stayed for all nine innings.
Steinbrenner was one of them.


Review/Film; The Godly Child Of 2 Families United By a Stacked Deck
After Nancy Savoca made "True Love," her wonderfully funny and candid-looking film about a Bronx wedding, she surely could have taken the traditional route to Hollywood.
"True Love" was so promising that it could have allowed Ms.
Savoca to make films much bigger and blander, but instead she has retained her idiosyncratic tastes.
Her third film, after the 1990 "Dogfight," is "Household Saints," a warm, rueful, thoroughly peculiar tale set in Little Italy.
The story is filled with strange, homespun miracles, and this single-minded little film could be counted as one of them.


A Record Flight: Satellites Steer A Civilian Plane
Guided only by radio signals from four satellites 11,000 miles in space, a civilian aircraft today followed the contours of the Potomac River for 12 miles and then returned down river to a perfect landing at National Airport.
Federal officials hailed the demonstration as a milestone in the history of aviation.
The new system of navigating by satellite signal will be cheaper, more precise and more flexible than the present system of land-based radio signals, they said.


Policy Blueprint Ready For Data Superhighway
After months of jittery internal debate, the Clinton Administration will disclose a broad blueprint for policies to foster a nationwide information superhighway on Wednesday.
Vice President Al Gore and Secretary of Commerce Ronald H. Brown, will present a plan that emphatically gives private business most of the responsibility for building an advanced network.
It would also establish a special task force to craft policies to promote industry competition and call for policies to protect privacy and insure that the benefits of advanced networks reach all citizens.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-19  ISRAEL AND JORDAN SIGN  Basking in the afterglow of the accord between Israel and the Palestinians, Israel and Jordan signed an agreement that provides the basis for resolving 45 years of hostility between them.
A1  PHASED ACCORDS TO BEGIN  Senior Jordanian officials said that they intended to begin a phased implementation of agreements outlined in the agenda signed with Israel in Washington and that the process could lead to virtual normal relations before a peace treaty is formalized.  unthinkable relationships with predominantly Muslim countries, both in the Arab world and outside.


MIDEAST ACCORD: The Economy; Israelis Expect Peace in Mideast Would Bring Big Dividends
Many Israeli economists and business analysts are confident that a settlement with the Palestinians and normalization of relations with the more conservative Arab countries will lead to a burst of growth not experienced by Israel since the 1960's.
Their aplomb is unrelated to any immediate opportunity to beat swords into plowshares.
Nor is it linked to visions of oil wealth flowing from the Persian Gulf.
The most important peace dividend, experts widely agree, is probably the least tangible: an end to the outcast status that has blocked closer trade and investment links with the advanced industrial powers.


Regarding Barney
A new syndrome must now be added to the myriad afflictions that dog the baby-boom parent: Barney Ambivalence.
Only the staunchest, still living without television in principled simplicity, can have escaped the toddler anthem of the 90's, taught to their offspring by a nightmarish magenta plush creature claiming to be a dinosaur, to the tune of "This Old Man":
I love you


Kruk and Season Aren't Shaping Up
He was the poster boy of the feckless but feared Phillies: comically out of shape, entertainingly out of his mind, definitely on the tear of a lifetime.
John Kruk, the man who made the most of being a mess, hit .340 the first half of the season.
He was the No. 3 man in the order who chased Lenny Dykstra around the bases hitting ropes into the alleys.
He was the first baseman with the shape for softball and the attitude that was all hardball, the stream-of-consciousness spokesman for the club that was stomping the rest of the National League East.


No Headline
"I thought that was a very eloquent statement by President Clinton, and now I understand why he's inside looking out and I'm outside looking in." -- GEORGE BUSH, speaking after President Clinton at a White House ceremony.  [ B12:4. ]


Support Groups and Cancer Survival
PRELIMINARY evidence with breast-cancer patients has suggested that those who take part in support groups have a better survival rate.
Now a new study, on patients being treated for early stages of skin cancer, suggests that being part of a support group increased their chance of survival threefold over a five-year period.
Among 34 patients who participated in a psychological support group, there were seven recurrences of melanoma with three deaths after five years.
In a comparison group of 34 patients there were 13 recurrences with 10 deaths, according to results of a study published yesterday in The Archives of General Psychiatry.
The study was led by Dr.
Fawzy I. Fawzy, a psychiatrist at the University of California at Los Angeles medical school.


For Returning Teachers, First Lesson Is Asbestos
On a day he should have been preparing lessons for a new school year, Bob Haupt found himself walking the halls of Public School 63 yesterday, peering behind pipes, peeking into bathrooms and staring at ceilings, as he tried to tell the difference between peeling paint and flaking asbestos.
It was hardly a task he had been trained for.
But Mr.
Haupt and his colleagues said they would do whatever it took to assure that come Monday, their students would be able to return to the only school they know.


Around the Region
Pleasant Supervisor 89% Reporting Robert F. Meehan 1,624 - 63% Phillip A. Grimaldi 959 - 37% x - Winner.


Sports of The Times; Yankee Chieftain Returns
BOB LEMON walked into Buck Showalter's office in Yankee Stadium on a recent afternoon.
Lemon is one of the many veterans on the firing line of George Steinbrenner -- that is, one of those who have experienced a firing by him.
Lemon had been fired twice as manager by Steinbrenner.
Not a record, but a nice round number.
Showalter has not been fired even once, even though he has spent nearly two full seasons as a Yankee skipper.
Lemon plopped on a couch and said to Showalter, "Things have been a little quiet around here, haven't they?" Showalter smiled from behind his desk.
"It's just a phone call away," he said.
He looked at his telephone.
Lemon nodded in understanding.
That telephone is a line to one upstairs, which has the Boss's ear, and lips.


L.I. Agency Drops Plan to Ship Shoreham Fuel Via New York
The Long Island Power Authority, bowing to pressure from New York City officials, yesterday dropped a plan to ship radioactive fuel from the Shoreham nuclear power plant by rail through Queens and the Bronx to Pennsylvania, and said instead that the fuel would go by barge.
But the plan is likely to raise the cost of shutting down the plant by $25 million or more.
The new plan is for the barge to go around Montauk Point into the open ocean, and then up the Delaware River to a port near the Philadelphia Airport, where a shipping cask will be loaded on a Conrail train for the rest of the journey to the Limerick Generating Station, near Pottstown.


Doping Official Blasts Rumors
Track's top doping official lashed out at accusations made by several Western coaches that the recent world records set by China's female distance runners were the result of performance-enhancing drugs.


At Ease in Courtroom Hosting Explosion Case
When the four defendants in the World Trade Center bombing trial walked into the courtroom yesterday morning, their hands shackled behind them but their spirits apparently high, it seemed as though Middle Eastern politics had made its second remarkable, but inconsistent visitation on American soil in two days.
Monday was the signing of an accord in Washington promising peace in the Middle East.
Yesterday was the trial of four men accused, in essence, though not as a matter of legal technicality, of extending the Middle Eastern war to American soil by engaging in an act of spectacular terrorism.


U.A.W. and Ford Bargain Past Deadline for a Strike
Unable to resolve issues that have dogged labor negotiations for months, leaders of the United Automobile Workers continued talking with the Ford Motor Company early today as they passed a midnight deadline, rather than striking its plants.
For days, union and company officials had predicted they would sign a new labor agreement before the deadline.
But in a marathon session on Tuesday negotiators found they still could not agree on answers to such thorny questions as how to control health care costs, how long the contract should run and how to preserve and create more jobs at Ford.


Cowboys Book Passage to Island of Lost Super Souls
You are waiting for your ship, a luxury liner, to come back in.
It does.
But before you can jump on board, it sinks.
Is this what is happening down here?


Executive Changes
CONTINENTAL BANK N.A., Chicago, appointed Marcus W. Acheson 4th, David W. Halstead and Wilma J. Smelcer executive vice presidents.
GTECH CORP., West Greenwich, R.I., named Leonard J. LeBlanc senior vice president and chief financial officer.


Frederick Ungeheuer, Journalist, 61
Frederick Ungeheuer, a senior correspondent covering the financial industry for Time magazine, died yesterday after a fall from his 12th-floor apartment on East 70th Street in Manhattan.
He was 61.
Police Officer Scott Bloch said an investigation into the death had not been completed.


Advertising; Reebok and Chiat/Day Part Ways
Reebok International Ltd. dealt a stunning blow to Chiat/Day Inc. yesterday, unexpectedly dismissing the agency's New York office and consolidating its $140 million worldwide Reebok brand account at the Leo Burnett Company of Chicago.
"Burnett had the resources; Chiat didn't," Dave Ropes, Reebok's vice president of marketing services worldwide in Stoughton, Mass., said.


Chevrolet Makes a Clean Break
Chevrolet said yesterday that it would end its agreement with Ilmor Engineering Ltd. to build race engines for the PPG Indy Car World Series at the end of the 1993 season.
JIM PERKINS , general manager of General Motors Chevrolet division, said escalating costs prompted the decision.


Pier 1 Plans to Open Shops At Sears Stores in Mexico
Pier 1 Imports Inc., the specialty store chain that sells home furnishings and knickknacks from around the world, plans to open Pier 1 stores within Sears stores in Mexico later this year.
Clark A. Johnson, the chairman and chief executive of Pier 1, said in an interview yesterday that the company would open in at least two Sears Mexican stores before Christmas and would eventually have Pier 1 shops in all 44 stores operated by Sears de Mexico, a publicly traded subsidiary of Sears, Roebuck &amp; Company.


MIDEAST ACCORD: Lebanon; Guerrillas Step Up Raids on Israeli 'Security Zone'
The pro-Iranian Party of God stepped up its attacks on Israeli positions in southern Lebanon today while thousands of other militants vowed to topple the Lebanese Government over the killing of eight party followers in a clash with the army in a demonstration on Monday.
The party said its guerrillas had carried out six attacks on the border strip that Israel calls its security zone in southern Lebanon, wounding an Israeli officer and five members of an Israeli-backed militia.
The attacks took place hours after the Israel and the Palestine Liberation Organization signed an agreement in Washington.


Guatamalan to Examine Plight of Burmese
The Nobel Peace Prize winner Rigoberta Menchu arrived in Thailand today, saying she wanted to examine the plight of minority groups from neighboring Myanmar, formerly known as Burma.
She told reporters she was also very interested in Daw Aung San Suu Kyi, another Nobel peace laureate, who has been detained by the Burmese military rulers since 1989.


Public Lands Belong to All Americans, Pardner
To the Editor:
"Ranchers Can't Afford Grazing Fee Plan" (letter, Sept. 1) by William G. Meyers of the National Cattlemen's Association omits many things and stretches the truth about others.


Campus Journal; For Learning Disabled, a Door Opens
Like their colleagues across the country this fall semester, the new students at Landmark College greeted their classmates, listened to a convocation address and stood in line to register for classes.
But here, engaging in such rites represented something of an achievement for the students.
Many of them had to struggle through their studies at other schools and colleges, where they were misunderstood because of their learning disabilities.


Bridge
Two years ago Iceland finished fourth in the European Championships, earned the last qualifying spot in the Bermuda Bowl and went on to win the world title in Yokohama, Japan.
This year the pattern was repeated: The Netherlands finished fourth in the European in Menton, France, and won the Bermuda Bowl in Santiago, Chile, last week.
One of the stars of the Dutch team is Bauke Muller, who helped his team with well-judged play on the diagramed deal in Menton.
As South, he landed in a shaky three no-trump after West had shown the major suits with a passed-hand takeout double.


Review/Music; Where Prewar Innovation Meets Today's Ferment
Henry Brant is a significant composer in the American experimental tradition, and the Catskill Chamber Players' 80th-birthday tribute on Monday night at Weill Recital Hall came not a moment too soon.
Mr.
Brant links the prewar innovations of Charles Ives, Henry Cowell, George Antheil and Edgard Varese with the Cage-inspired ferment of today.
He is a pioneer in the field of "spatial music," taking musicians off the stage and spreading them throughout the hall.
Mr.
Brant entered the experimental fray in the early 1930's, while still in his teens.
From the start, he specialized in unexpected groups of instruments: "Angels and Devils" for flute ensemble was first heard more than 50 years ago in Weill Recital Hall, or Carnegie Recital Hall as it was then known. ("It used to be beat up and funky," Mr. Brant commented before Monday's concert, looking funky himself in black sweatclothes and a visor.) He also wrote pieces for kitchen utensils and other "plebeian contraptions."


Iva Patcevitch, 92, Retired Chairman Of Magazine Firm
Iva Sergei Voidato Patcevitch, who for many years served as president and chairman of Conde Nast Publications, died yesterday at his home in Southampton, L.I.
He was 92.
Mr.
Patcevitch, who came to the United States from Russia in 1923, initially worked for a Wall Street brokerage and was doing well there when he met Conde Nast at a Manhattan party.
Mr.
Nast was taken with him and in 1928, named Mr.
Patcevitch as his personal assistant.
Mr.
Nast's last wish before dying in 1942 was that Mr.
Patcevitch be named his successor as president.
He became chairman of the executive committee in 1942 and retired in 1971.


The Pop Life
Meat Loaf Time Again
When it comes to Meat Loaf, the best advice may be to catch him while you can.
He's starting an international tour -- sorry, fans, his New York shows on Friday, Saturday, Monday and Tuesday at the Hudson Theater are sold out -- and just yesterday released a new album, "Bat Out of Hell II: Back Into Hell" (MCA).
He says that the title is intended as a signal that, like his hugely successful 1977 album, "Bat Out of Hell," the new release is a collaboration with Jim Steinman, the album's songwriter, arranger and producer.
The first single, "I'd Do Anything for Love (but I Won't Do That)," entered Billboard's album rock chart at No. 25 last week and was at No. 21 this week.


Democrats Pick Brodsky To Challenge O'Rourke
Richard L. Brodsky, an outspoken six-term assemblyman, captured the Democratic nomination for Westchester county executive today and with it a chance to topple the Republican incumbent, Andrew P. O'Rourke.
After weeks of nasty crossfire over personal ethics and tax policy, the 47-year-old Mr.
Brodsky defeated Andrew J. Spano, County Clerk for the last 11 years.
His victory, by 51 percent to 49 percent, came even though the county's Democratic leaders supported the 57-year-old Mr.
Spano.
He immediately turned his fire on Mr.
O'Rourke.


THE 1993 PRIMARY: The Overview; Hevesi Outpolls Holtzman, Forcing a Runoff Vote
Battered by questions about a loan to her abortive 1992 Senate campaign, Comptroller Elizabeth Holtzman was forced into a runoff election last night by Assemblyman Alan G. Hevesi, barely salvaging her candidacy.
Mr.
Hevesi, of Queens, confounded expectations and took the lead in a race in which he has pounded away at Ms.
Holtzman's integrity.


Showalter Insists He's Undeterred Amid the Sudden Steinbrenner Tumult
We interrupt this pennant race to bring you the latest manager update.
Pause.
Buck Showalter, the 37-year-old manager of the Yankees, is not about to resign.
Repeat.
Showalter does not want to and does not expect to quit the position he has held for more than 22 months.


Wine Talk
THREE men are working in an E.&amp; J. Gallo Winery vineyard in Sonoma County in Northern California.
One is steadily pulling leaves off healthy vines, another is planting weeds among the vine rows, and the third is releasing clouds of predatory bugs.
Twenty years ago, the three might have been considered saboteurs, from a rival wine maker, perhaps, sent in to harass the competition.
Today, they are Gallo vineyardists, putting into practice the most modern agricultural methods.


Splintered on Trade; 2 Unusual Political Alliances Reflect Long-Term Gain and Short-Term Fear
Seldom in American politics have there been such strange bedfellows.
Bill Clinton, George Bush, Ronald Reagan and Jimmy Carter stand together in favor of the North American Free Trade Agreement.
Ross Perot, Jesse Jackson, Patrick J. Buchanan and Ralph Nader are lined up against it.


Yes, Even Lamb Chili Can Have a Light Side
LAMB chili probably sounds like a dish for the deepest winter, but a 1990's version is not as heavy as you might think.
There is far less meat: the emphasis is on tomatoes, beans and other vegetables.
Today's chili is, in fact, like poor people's meals of long ago when meat was an expensive treat.
And now, while plum tomatoes are as good as they get, is the time to make chili with all fresh ingredients.
Use the leanest cut of lamb; trim it and grind it yourself.


Mexican Shifts Tone on Trade Accord
After months of promoting the virtues of a free trade agreement with the United States and Canada, President Carlos Salinas de Gortari shifted his tone today, telling Mexicans that the troubled accord is not "a panacea."
Moments after President Clinton used his signing of side agreements to the pact as the occasion to launch his uphill campaign for Congressional approval, Mr.
Salinas took the same opportunity to deflate expectations that until now he has steadily pumped up.


Food Notes
At the New Barneys Store
Mad.61, the sleek and inviting food complex on the lower level of the new Barneys store at Madison Avenue and 61st Street, is a combination restaurant, cafe, espresso bar, wine bar and takeout shop with some novel aspects: all the food, both packaged and prepared, is available for tasting, and all of the wines bear numerical ratings.
"If anyone sees something on the shelves they want to taste, we'll crack it open and let them taste," said Steven Jenkins, a consultant who has selected the cheeses and packaged foods at Mad.61.
Italian Parmigiano-Reggiano is priced at $10 a pound, reblochon is $13.50 and St.-Nectaire is $11; in fact, very few of the carefully selected cheeses on display are priced at less than $10 a pound.


Parental Leave for Dad Has to Do With Sharing
To the Editor:
Someone should tell Colin Harrison ("Here's Baby, Dad Stays Home. Dad Gets Antsy," Op-Ed, Aug. 31) that parental leave for fathers is not meant as a means of experiencing "transcendent joy," and it isn't expected to be welcomed by co-workers.
It's about partnership and responsibility -- something he seems to value in the workplace, but not at home.


Disney Considers Move Into Times Sq.
The Walt Disney Company is talking to city and state officials about occupying a landmark theater on 42d Street at Times Square, city and state officials say.
The talks center on the New Amsterdam Theater, a graceful 10-story Art Nouveau building that was the home of the Ziegfeld Follies from 1913 to 1927 but has fallen into disrepair.
Disney's representatives have discussed using the theater for live shows, said Carl Weisbrod, President of the New York City Economic Development Corporation.


Rival Bid for Paramount Is Seen as Unlikely
Paramount Communications Inc.'s stock retreated yesterday amid some skepticism on Wall Street that another bidder would top Viacom Inc.'s proposed $8 billion takeover offer for the big entertainment company.
And shares of Viacom slipped for a second day.
Meanwhile, questions were being raised about Sumner M. Redstone's recent purchases of the stock, which had helped push up the price.
Mr.
Redstone is the chairman and controlling shareholder of Viacom.


CHRONICLE
Never in his wildest dreams did JOHN WALLACH imagine that the program he organized this summer -- to bring together Israeli, Palestinian and Egyptian boys at a camp in Maine -- would end the way it did: front and center at the historic ceremony for the signing of the peace pact on the White House lawn on Monday.
In T-shirts with the logotype "Seeds of Peace," 46 boys from the program, ranging in age from 11 to 14, were acknowledged by President Clinton when he said in his speech, "In this entire assembly, no one is more important than the group of Israeli and Arab children who are seated here with us today."


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.00
3.05
3.20
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
2.97
2.98
2.91
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.07
3.03
2.92
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
4.98
4.86
5.86
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
5.97
5.87
7.30
TELEPHONE BONDS
7.00
6.87
8.42
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
5.45
5.43
6.32
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Currents Leave Divers Adrift


China Says Dissident Is Freed, but Family Waits
Friends, family and neighbors of Wei Jingsheng gathered today under the ginko trees outside his parents' tiny apartment here, waiting for China's most famous political dissident after the Government announced that he had been released from prison.
But he never appeared, and the hours passed with increasing speculation that China's Sakharov might not be truly free.


THE 1993 PRIMARY: The Voters; Casting Their Ballots, Looking for a Better City
Talking of the need of the city and reflecting on Mayor David N. Dinkins's term at City Hall, voters went to the polls yesterday to cast their ballots and their hopes like pennies in a wishing well.
They could not predict the outcome, they said, nor could they be sure that they would influence it much.
But the act itself felt good.
As they cast their ballots in the Democratic primary for citywide offices, and in local races, many voters reflected on their years in the city and on how it has both changed and stayed the same.
Some spoke with praise of Mayor Dinkins; others expressed contempt for his record.


THE 1993 PRIMARY: Lessons Offered; Primary Shows Dinkins's Weaknesses
The sizable protest vote that dented Mayor David N. Dinkins's comfortable renomination last night may have been been mostly a comment on how little he worked to turn out his core supporters against token opposition.
But it also pointed up weaknesses in his candidacy that he will have to work hard to overcome in November.
In white neighborhoods, from Midwood and Bath Beach in Brooklyn, to Forest Hills, Long Island City and Howard Beach in Queens, Roy E. Innis, the idiosyncratic chairman of the Congress of Racial Equality, beat Mr.
Dinkins by margins of as much as 2 to 1.
That such Democrats would be moved to vote for a black political gadlfy who has often espoused extreme views was not a happy augury for Mr.
Dinkins, the first black to be the city's Mayor.


American Airlines to Cut 5,000 Jobs and Trim Fleet
American Airlines said yesterday that it would eliminate 5,000 jobs by the end of 1994 and ground more planes to reduce capacity.
The cuts punctuated American's strategy for achieving long-term profitability by shedding uncompetitive routes, a plan its employees have criticized.
Robert L. Crandall, the chairman of American's parent, the AMR Corporation, said yesterday at a meeting with securities analysts that the eight 727's the airline planned to retire in 1995 would be retired next year, and it would ground four DC-10's next year, and seven more in 1996 and 1997.


2 at The Times in New Posts
Richard H. Gilman, vice president for systems and technology at The New York Times, has been appointed senior vice president for operations.
His promotion was announced yesterday by Russell T. Lewis, president of the newspaper.
Mr. Gilman will direct production and systems and technology for the newspaper.


U.N. Should Create a Somali Government
To the Editor:
Re "Somalia: Time to Leave?" (editorial, Aug. 30): Here is a formula that will help the United Nations accomplish its mission in Somalia: Recognize the interim administration of Mohammed Ali Mahdi and create the legal and political skeleton of the Somali state.
Such a step will complement, not contradict the United Nations effort there and would be a catalyst to political reconciliation.


Hampton Is at Zenith As Giants Begin to Rise
Everybody likes Rodney Hampton.
Well, not everybody, not the defenders who so often grab at air as the Giants' tailback dips here and twists there and leaves them emptyhanded.
Hampton is a major reason the Giants have won their first two games of this young National Football League season.
He rushed for 76 yards against the Chicago Bears and 134 yards, the highest in his four pro seasons, against the Tampa Bay Buccaneers.
League statistics announced today showed that Hampton's 210 yards ranked second in rushing to 238 by Barry Sanders of the Detroit Lions.


For Leo Burnett, A Reorganization
The Leo Burnett Company of Chicago announced a reorganization yesterday that involves a geographic realignment, the promotions of several top executives and the formation of a global management group.
The announcement came as the agency was awarded the $140 million worldwide Reebok brand account by Reebok International Ltd.
Under the realignment, separate operating divisions, like Leo Burnett U.S.A. and Leo Burnett International, are being reorganized into a single worldwide unit of five regions.


YACHT RACING: Sailing on Troubled Waters; First U.S. All-Female Crew Is Challenged by a High-Tech Boat and a Low Budget
Above the brick wall at Higgs Beach stands a chain-link fence.
Behind it, a scraggly tropical garden grows as if in defiance of time.
Nance Frank, dressed in a bright blue city dress and high heels, scaled a crumbling embankment.
She had a meeting at 10 o'clock with a city commissioner, but she made time for a visit to the place where she played as a child.
Through the fence, she peered at Spanish almond and sandbox trees, and at the effusive royal poinciana, her favorite blossom.


Narrow House Victory For S.&amp; L. Cleanup Bill
Ending months of debate and delay, the House of Representatives narrowly passed legislation today to complete the cleanup of the savings and loan industry.
Earlier this year, the Senate passed its own version of the legislation with $34 billion in total financing, compared with the $26.3 billion of the House version.
A House-Senate conference committee will try to resolve the differences.


Sanchez Vicario Is Moving Up
With her semifinal finish at the United States Open last week, ARANTXA SANCHEZ VICARIO became the first player in nearly three years to break into the top two in the women's tennis rankings.
After MONICA SELES was stabbed on April 30, she dropped off the tour and lost her No. 1 spot to STEFFI GRAF on June 7.
Seles is now No. 4.


Orchestras Sound Loud Notes Of Strife Over Money Matters
The managers of America's symphony orchestras have complained increasingly in recent years that the rising incomes of musicians and the trend toward extended concert seasons, coupled with cuts in government subsidies, have had a devastating effect on the bottom line.
Now the managements of several small and medium-sized orchestras are fighting back, demanding salary and roster cuts and shaving the number of guaranteed performing weeks.
These moves, combined with the contract talks in progress at some of the larger orchestras, are making for a decidedly unharmonious concert season.


A Roadblock on Road Less Traveled
YOU did not have to be Janet Malcolm to see the moral implications of the secret of Fort Lee looming up ahead in this story like a traffic jam to be challenged, or maybe just skirted at the earliest exit.
On the surface, the issue seemed simple enough: I would write a column about Joshua B. Isaacson and the unusual book he has written and published under the title, "No Time for Tie-Ups." The work, containing more than 300 pages of maps, shows in detail how alternate roads and local streets can be used to evade bottlenecks wherever they may arise on major highways in the metropolitan region.


Stuart Linnick Is Dead; Labor Lawyer Was 55
Stuart Linnick, a labor lawyer and former legal counsel of the Patrolmen's Benevolent Association of New York, died in Cedars-Sinai Hospital in Los Angeles on Saturday.
He was 55 and lived in Los Angeles.
The cause was cancer, his family said.


MIDEAST ACCORD: Arafat; Arafat Shifts Quest From Peace to Funds
Visiting old haunts like the United Nations and new, previously forbidden ones like the halls of Congress, Yasir Arafat today appealed to the United States and the world community to provide funds to help build the new entity he says will lead to a Palestinian State.
"We are in need of the help," Mr.
Arafat, chairman of the Palestine Liberation Organization, said during an appearance at the National Press Club in Washington.
"Our infrastructure has been completely destroyed." He said that unemployment in some areas of the West Bank and Gaza was about 56 percent and that "there is real starvation in Gaza."


Secrecy Sideshow in the House
An emotional battle rages in the House over an obscure device known as the discharge petition.
Ordinarily, a bill must go through committees before reaching the floor.
The discharge petition allows a member to move a bill directly to the floor by getting a majority of members to sign a petition.
The names of the signers are kept secret from the public until the magic number of 218 is reached.


Book Notes; An Editor's Dismissal Raises Talk of a Clash Of Art and Commerce
Brigitte Weeks's abrupt dismissal as editor in chief of the Book-of-the-Month Club, which apparently took her by surprise, seems to have resulted from a combination of personality clashes, a changed landscape that has made bookselling increasingly competitive, and -- at least in the view of some people -- a growing emphasis on marketing at the company, a division of Time Warner.
Ms.
Weeks, who left her office after the announcement on Monday and did not return yesterday, did not respond to several telephone messages.
But people within and outside the club said yesterday that her tenure had been characterized by rocky spells and by tensions with executives at the Book-of-the-Month Club, most notably Juanita James, who in April was promoted to a senior vice president of the club and its sister, the Quality Paperback Book Club, making her one of Ms.
Weeks's bosses.


MIDEAST ACCORD: News Analysis; Dividing a Homeland
And now for the hard part.
The importance of Monday's handshake between Yasir Arafat, the P.L.O. chairman, and Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin of Israel is that with one gesture it transformed the problem between them from an ideological struggle over who is the rightful owner of historic Palestine into a practical one over how to share the same living space.


MIDEAST ACCORD: Morocco; Rabin Meets Hassan, Reporting Step Toward Ties
Pushing quickly to build Israel's peace agreement with the P.L.O. into a new relationship with Arab countries, Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin held talks today with King Hassan II of Morocco and described them as "a step toward diplomatic relations."
The surprise visit to Morocco, a one-day layover on Mr.
Rabin's return to Jerusalem from Washington, underscored the Israeli Government's determination to obtain the support of moderate Arab nations for the plan for Palestinian self-rule in the Gaza Strip and the West Bank town of Jericho.
It also signaled Israel's conviction that the way should now be open for the rapid establishment of diplomatic ties between Israel and Arab countries.


MIDEAST ACCORD: Gaza; Dedicated Extremists Present Twin Threat to Mideast Peace
On the first morning of the peace between Israel and the P.L.O., 19-year-old Bahaa al-Din al-Najr rose early for dawn prayers in this fetid refugee quarter beside the Mediterranean.
He bathed, shaved his head, shook hands with his friends and went to pray again at the Majd Abbas, a large mosque in Gaza City.
Then he tried to blow up the central police station.


Personal Health; Women and alcohol: heart benefit versus cancer risk.
THE Janus faces of alcohol have emerged once more, this time throwing health-conscious women into what could be a life-and-death quandary.
Should they drink to protect their hearts or not drink to reduce their risk of breast cancer?
As evidence mounts for the protective effect of moderate drinking against heart disease in both men and women, it is also accumulating for the potential hazards of even one drink a day to the breasts.
To decide how to reconcile these opposing effects, it helps to understand the nature of the evidence and the relative risks of the two diseases.
The Heart
More than half a dozen very large long-term studies have linked moderate alcohol consumption to a reduced risk of suffering a heart attack and dying of coronary heart disease.
While most of the studies involved men or mostly men, a recent report from the continuing Nurses' Health Study of 89,000 middle-aged women at the Harvard School of Public Health found that women who typically consumed three to nine drinks a week were 40 percent less likely to develop heart disease than nondrinkers.


Senate Blocks Plan To Increase the Fees For Cattle Grazing
The Senate voted today to block temporarily the Administration's plan to raise the fees ranchers pay to graze cattle on Federal land in the West.
The move threatens President Clinton's proposals to change how public lands are managed.
Western Democrats joined with Republicans to pass an amendment, 59 to 40, that would prevent the Administration from increasing the grazing fee for a year.


COMPANY BRIEFS
MARK CONTROLS CORP., Skokie, Ill., has agreed to purchase all outstanding shares of Westad Industri A.S., a unit of Bird Technology of Oslo, for about $7 million in cash and assumed debt.


Mets, Franco and Scoreboard Put Out Lights for Phils
The Shea Stadium scoreboard went dark for a moment in the middle of the game.
The reprieve for the Phillies, though, was brief.
Power was restored, the electronic readout of Montreal's latest unfolding triumph was burning bright.
The heat of the faraway lights became more intense by the inning.
It was anyone's guess how hot it felt at the moment John Franco got the game's final out and the Mets were 5-4 victors over the Phillies.


MIDEAST ACCORD: Jordan; Jordanians Ready to Begin Carrying Out Israel Accords
Senior Jordanian officials said that they intended to begin a phased implementation of agreements outlined in the agenda signed with Israel in Washington today, and that the process could lead to virtual normal relations before a peace treaty is formalized.
"Everything is possible," Prime Minister Abdel Salem al-Majali said in a meeting with foreign journalists today.
"We have to agree on each other item and evaluate the good effects on both sides."


MIDEAST ACCORD: Egypt; Militants Warn Arab Countries About the Pact
The Muslim militant group that assassinated Anwar el-Sadat after the Egyptian President concluded a peace treaty with Israel denounced the P.L.O.-Israeli agreement today as a betrayal of Palestinians and warned Arab governments that accept it.
In a statement delivered today to The Associated Press, the group said: "We warn the regimes that are kneeling down in front of American might against the repercussions of this blatant sellout of the historic Muslim rights in Palestine. This accord is a betrayal of the hopes of the Palestinian people, a sellout of its legitimate rights, an assertion of the Zionist hegemony and a beginning of a new campaign against Islam and the Muslims."


AT LUNCH WITH: Betty Friedan; Trying to Dispel 'The Mystique Of Age,' at 72
IT is the day after Labor Day, and the old white house with the black shutters on Glover Street is asleep in the warm September sun.
Even rudely repeated bangings on the front door cannot shake the quietude.
Surreptitious peeks through the front parlor windows finally make it quite clear that no one is home.
Then Betty Friedan arrives.
But hardly with the frenzy and the fanfare that greeted her arrival at our first interview 23 years ago.
On that day, surrounded by cheering women warriors in a Des Plaines, Ill., hotel, she sounded the call to arms for a general strike by women to celebrate the 50th anniversary of the 19th Amendment, which gave women the vote.
Now, on this sleepy summer day, she simply lurches into the driveway in a fusty old maroon Dodge.


CHRONICLE
MOTHER TERESA was taken to the B. M. Birla Heart Research Center in Calcutta on Monday to undergo a coronary angioplasty, a procedure to clear a blood vessel in her heart, but specialists postponed the surgery yesterday because the 83-year-old nun had developed fever, The Associated Press reported.


Zwirn Wins Nomination In County Executive Race
Benjamin L. Zwirn, the Democratic Supervisor of North Hempstead who has built a political reputation on his ability to appeal to Republican voters, today resoundingly won the Democratic nomination for Nassau County Executive.
Mr.
Zwirn received 60 percent of the vote, which many party regulars said was a clear sign that voters thought he was more likely than his opponent, Richard M. Kessel, to unseat the incumbent, Thomas S. Gulotta.


When the Spice Is Right, Ethiopians Feel at Home
FOR at least the last decade, Ethiopia has been known for its famine.
But nibble by nibble, it is becoming known to Americans for its cuisine.
Since 1974, when Lieut.
Col.
Mengistu Haile Mariam overthrew Emperor Haile Selassie of Ethiopia, Ethiopians have been fleeing their country, which is in the horn of Africa.


Other Election News
IN WESTCHESTER, Richard L. Brodsky, a six-term assemblyman, won the Democratic nomination for county executive and a chance to topple the Republican incumbent, Andrew P. O'Rourke.
Page B8.


R. T. Gatchell Memorial
A memorial service for R. Tyler Gatchell Jr., who produced musicals for Andrew Lloyd Webber, is to be held on Tuesday at 5 P.M. at the Shubert Theater, 225 West 44th Street, Manhattan.
Mr.
Gatchell died on July 1.


Tourist Killed in Florida, Prompting New Patrols
A British tourist driving in Florida was shot to death in an apparent robbery attempt today, the second such slaying in less than a week.
Hours later Gov.
Lawton Chiles, facing reports that frightened vacationers are canceling their travel plans, ordered state law-enforcement agencies to begin guarding all Interstate highway rest areas across Florida.
The Governor's action came only hours after a British tourist, 34-year-old Gary Colley, was shot to death at a rest stop on Interstate 10, about 35 miles east of Tallahassee, becoming the ninth foreign tourist killed in Florida in the last year.
His companion, Margaret Ann Jagger, 35, was wounded in the early morning attack.


One Thing Is Clear: Milwaukee Is Yanks' Country
The tourism department might not want to hear the news, but it is not a wonderful time to visit County Stadium or Milwaukee.
The rain has been pouring for two straight days, the temperature is plummeting and the Brewers are entrenched in last place.
Not much fun to be had.
But the Yankees are having fun in these conditions.
They might even make a donation to the tourism folks because Milwaukee has been the perfect place for them to salvage part of their road trip and stay close in the pennant race.


60-Minute Gourmet
WHEN it comes to outdoor barbecuing, my motto is, "The season ends when the snow covers my shoelaces." Even if your dedication is less fanatical, there is no reason to store the barbecue grill in September.
Plenty of fine days remain.
And if your barbecue grill has a lid to retain heat, all the better.
I have seen some good-looking swordfish steaks in the market in recent weeks and have made them the centerpiece of quick, healthful meals.
Swordfish, with its firm, lean flesh, is ideal for grilling.
It is not as forgiving of overcooking as some fatty fish, like tuna and black sea bass, so extra care is needed.
I usually remove swordfish from the fire when the center is still slightly pink; by the time it gets to the table it should be cooked through.


Data Spur Inflation Concerns
Government reports today showed that both retail spending and consumer prices were a bit more vigorous in August than had generally been expected and the bond market promptly seized on the figures as an excuse to sell.
The Commerce Department reported that $173.5 billion passed across retail counters last month, two-tenths of 1 percent more than in July, as merchants racked up their fifth consecutive advance since the late-winter blizzard that crippled much of the East Coast.
A large part of the gain reflected the automotive sector, though the contribution was less than in July.


Doris G. Ross, Children's Advocate, 74
Doris G. Ross, a volunteer worker for children's welfare for half a century and former national president of the Girls Clubs of America, died on Friday at White Plains Hospital.
She was 74.
A family member said the cause was heart disease.


Review/Pop; Crosby and Nash Evoke A Former Era's Promise
It was "The Lee Shore" that brought out the contradictions that plagued David Crosby and Graham Nash's show at Carnegie Hall on Monday night.
Musically, it's a beautiful song, full of ambiguous harmonies and strange melodies.
And although the tune is credited to Crosby, Stills, Nash and Young, it has all the trademarks of Mr.
Crosby's best work, a dreamy surrealism and an expansive harmonic background that owes more to jazz than either folk or rock.
Then came the words, sentimental, clumsy and trite.
And so went the show.
Rarely has a concert been so divided between pop invention and thorough pop disaster.
On pieces like "Guinnevere," Mr.
Crosby's experimental side was a pure statement of the potential promised by the 1960's.
A tune like "Military Madness," written by Mr.
Nash, conflated the political and the general with the private and the specific, and got away with it.
This was music meant to be personal, celebrating not the constraints of show business, but pop music as a popular art for a like-minded generation.


THE 1993 PRIMARY: City Council; Freed Wins Primary; Most Incumbents Advance Easily
City Council incumbents facing challenges in the Democratic primary overwhelmingly won renomination yesterday, the only exception being a Bronx Council member facing a 704-count indictment, according to unofficial election results early this morning.
Of 16 Democratic incumbents in primary contests, only one, Rafael Castaneira Colon, the veteran Council member from the Bronx, was defeated.
Mr.
Colon was indicted two weeks ago and accused of stealing $383,000 from his city expense budget over the last six years by writing checks in the names of three phantom employees and then cashing the checks.


Changes in Store for Marchiano
SAL MARCHIANO , WNBC-TV/Channel 4's weekend sports anchor since 1984, was shunted yesterday to the station's Saturday and Sunday morning "Today in New York" programs, where he is expected to stay through the end of the year.
"I'm keeping my options open because my new situation enables me to do cable and radio," Marchiano said.


Kevorkian Charged a 2d Time Under Suicide Law
Dr.
Jack Kevorkian was charged today for a second time with violating Michigan's new law against assisting in a suicide, but he stayed out of jail when a judge refused to set an unusually steep bond.
The Wayne County Prosecutor, John D. O'Hair, charged Dr.
Kevorkian with assisting in the suicide on Thursday of Donald O'Keefe, 73, of the Detroit suburb of Redford Township.
Mr.
O'Keefe's death came only hours after Dr.
Kevorkian, a retired pathologist, was ordered to stand trial for aiding in the Aug. 4 suicide of 30-year-old Thomas W. Hyde Jr. in Detroit.


Robert Josephy, Environmentalist And Fruit Grower, Is Dead at 90
Robert S. Josephy, an influential freelance book designer who became a leading fruit grower, environmentalist and political advocate in Connecticut, died on Saturday at his home in Hamden.
He was 90.
For three decades, beginning in the 1920's, Mr.
Josephy was one of the leading freelance book designers in the country.
His taste was reflected in the style of many books published in the 1920's and 30's.


Review/Television; A Self-Mocking Newcomer to Late-Night
He's cute.
He's goofy.
And when he grows up, he's going to look just like William F. Buckley Jr.
Taking over David Letterman's old slot on NBC's "Late Night," Conan O'Brien stepped eagerly and smartly into his new job early yesterday morning, just 35 minutes past midnight.
Despite nervous network dithering throughout the day about scheduling and then canceling press previews, "Late Night With Conan O'Brien" survived its debut with more than enough offbeat charm to merit further sampling.


Croats and Muslims Agree to Cease-Fire in Bosnia
After a daylong meeting in Geneva that kept alive hopes for a resumption of talks to end the Bosnian war, the President of Croatia and the head of Bosnia's Muslim-dominated Government today announced a new cease-fire.
The truce is between the Muslim and Croatian forces fighting in central Bosnia and Herzegovina.


Amoco Wins Bid for Rich Siberian Field
The Amoco Corporation announced yesterday that one of its subsidiaries had been chosen to develop, together with two Russian companies, a huge field in western Siberia that Amoco estimated could contain up to five billion barrels of oil.
The Amoco Eurasia Petroleum Company, the subsidiary, beat out a joint effort by Mobil and Exxon in the competitive bidding.


German Slayings Incite Attack on Politicians
A lawyer representing relatives of Turks killed in a firebomb attack last year has asserted in court that senior German politicians share responsibility for the attack.
The lawyer singled out Defense Minister Volker Ruhe, who was formerly chairman of the governing Christian Democratic Union.
He asserted that Mr.
Ruhe had fomented hatred of foreigners and thereby encouraged German youths to commit acts of violence.


Corrections
An article on July 18 about the high reversal rate for cases handled by Acting Justice Jerome Hornblass of New York State Supreme Court in Manhattan -- tallied on the occasion of his most recent reversal -- referred incorrectly to the reversal rate for another judge, Acting Justice Edward J. McLaughlin.
Justice McLaughlin was reversed on seven cases between February 1990 and July 1993, though one case had four co-defendants and the judge's ruling was reversed on each.
Of the seven cases, two were initially upheld by the appeals court. (This correction was delayed by an editing lapse.)


A New Crowd in NASA's Space
When aerospace contractors from across the globe gather in Phoenix on Thursday to begin work on one of the most ambitious space programs of the decade -- Motorola Inc.'s $3 billion Iridium project -- the biggest force in the space industry will not be there.
NASA, whose checkbook for more than three decades has kept many American space contractors in business, has not been invited.
Motorola conceives Iridium as a network of 66 low-orbit satellites that by the end of the decade is to provide wireless telephone service anywhere on earth.
The National Aeronautics and Space Administration is not participating because the project is being financed by private industry -- a fact that many experts see as a fundamental shift in the country's approach to space.
Long the nation's biggest public works project, the space program is rapidly becoming a commerical affair.
Where the Profits Are
Some space businesses, like building and operating the commercial communications satellites used for telephone calls and television programs, have been making money for more than a decade.
A newer business, the private launching of satellites and space-based geographic sensing systems, may soon become modestly profitable for companies like McDonnell Douglas and General Dynamics.


How They Spent the Last Day of Summer Vacation in Chicago


Accounts
*
U.S.
Gold, San Francisco, to Pedone &amp; Partners, New York, as the first agency to handle the video game software marketer's account in the United States.
Billings were estimated at $7 million to $10 million. *
Pfizer Inc., New York, to Cline, Davis &amp; Mann, New York, to handle its Unisom sleep aid account, which had been at Avrett, Free &amp; Ginsberg, New York, for 13 years.
A Pfizer spokesman, Andy McCormick, confirmed a report this week in Adweek of the brand's move to Cline, Davis, which already handles professional advertising for some Pfizer products.
Billings were estimated at $7 million.


People
*
John C. Jay was named to the new position of creative director at Wieden &amp; Kennedy, Portland, Ore.
He was previously a senior vice president and creative director at J. Crew, New York.


Head of Haitian Rights Inquiry Quits After Threats
The man investigating a spate of killings that diplomats believe are linked to the Haitian police has resigned after receiving death threats, Prime Minister Robert Malval said today.
In an interview Mr.
Malval said other new ministers, who took office less than two weeks ago to replace the military government, have also been the target of death threats.
The intimidation has prevented Information Minister Herve Denis from going to work, he added.


THE 1993 PRIMARY: Comptroller; For Holtzman, a Campaign With Echoes of Past Battles
With her career on the line and her credibility under furious attack after 20 years in public office, City Comptroller Elizabeth Holtzman turned to a poem, Marge Piercy's "For strong women(cq)," as a morning bracer on the most harrowing Election Day she ever faced with the voters.
"It's more a description than an inspiration," Ms.
Holtzman explained, crossing a Brooklyn street to woo sleepy-eyed voters at a subway stop while pondering the poem's description of just how embattled life can get:


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball American League  AL -- Suspended George Bell, Chicago White Sox outfielder, for two games for charging Aaron Sele, Boston Red Sox pitcher, in a game on Sept. 6.
MINNESOTA TWINS -- Purchased the contract of Derek Parks from Portland of the Pacific Coast League.
National League  NL -- Suspended Mariano Duncan, Philadelphia Phillies second baseman, and Frank Castillo, Chicago Cubs pitcher, for three games for fighting in a game on Sept. 9.
HOUSTON ASTROS -- Recalled Jeff Juden and Shane Reynolds, pitchers, and Scooter Tucker, catcher, from Tucson of the Pacific Coast League.
Purchased the contracts of Mike Brumley and Jim Lindeman, outfielders, from Tucson.
Moved Rob Mallicoat, pitcher, from the 15- to the 60-day emergency disabled list.
PITTSBURGH PIRATES -- Acquired Stanton Cameron, outfielder, and Terry Farrar, pitcher, from the Baltimore Orioles to complete the Lonnie Smith trade.
Football National Football League  DALLAS COWBOYS -- Waived Lin Elliott, placekicker.
Signed Eddie Murray, placekicker.
GREEN BAY PACKERS -- Placed Brian Noble, linebacker, on injured reserve.
Signed Keith Traylor, linebacker.
Hockey National Hockey League  DALLAS STARS -- Signed Derian Hatcher, defenseman, to a multiyear contract.
American Hockey League  SPRINGFIELD INDIANS -- Named Blaine Stoughton assistant coach.
College  BROWN -- Named Bob Kenneally assistant athletic director.
DARTMOUTH -- Named Bill Bjorness men's assistant lacrosse coach.
FORT LEWIS -- Named Chris Aaland sports information director.
LEMOYNE -- Named Christopher Downs men's assistant basketball coach and Paul James men's assistant soccer coach.
MANKATO STATE -- Named Beth Sullivan women's cross country and track and field coach.
MERRIMACK -- Named Steve Curran men's assistant basketball coach.
PITTSBURGH -- Named Larry Anderson women's assistant basketball coach.
ROSE-HULMAN -- Named Tony Seay men's assistant basketball coach.
ROWAN -- Named Bill Fritz men's and women's track and field coach.
ST.
JOHN'S -- Named Tim Becker assistant athletic director; Julie Harris men's and women's assistant track and field coach; and Steven Pritchard assistant trainer.
SOUTHEAST MISSOURI -- Named Kirt Cochran men's assistant basketball coach.
WICHITA STATE -- Named Bill Belknap athletic director.
YALE -- Named Paul Schlickmann assistant athletic director; Adrienne Amato women's assistant tennis coach; Ron Carbone assistant football coach; Debbie Hagie assistant field hockey coach; Donna Hornish women's assistant soccer coach and Joe Levatino interim equipment manager.


Eating Well
THE recent criticism of Chinese restaurant food by nutrition experts seems to be just one more reason for people to throw up their hands in frustration and vow to return to steak and french fries.
This could bode well for all the new steakhouses opening in New York City this year, but not for the arteries.
After years of being sold on the healthful quality of Asian cooking, it's annoying to be confronted with what looks like another nutritional about-face -- this time, from the Center for Science in the Public Interest.
The center, a consumer advocacy group in Washington, analyzed popular foods from Chinese restaurants and found most of them to be very high in fat and sodium.


METRO DIGEST
CLOSE, AND NOT-SO-CLOSE, RACES
As City Comptroller Elizabeth Holtzman was forced into a runoff, Mark Green prevailed over five other candidates to win the Deomcratic nomination for Public Advocate and Mayor Dinkins swept to an easy victory.
A1.
RUNOFF IN COMPTROLLER RACE
In the narrowest of primary vote outcomes, Ms.
Holtzman barely kept her chances for re-election alive last night, an incumbent coming in second to a relatively unknown Assemblyman, Alan Hevesi.
This forced a Sept. 28 runoff.
A1.


At White House, A Slumber Party
President Clinton hosted a virtual slumber party for two members of the world's most exclusive men's club on Monday night when Jimmy Carter and George Bush spent the night at the White House.
Mr.
Clinton, long noted as a devotee of the early morning hours, stayed up late talking to Mr.
Carter.
Mr.
Bush, he said, turned in early.


CHRONICLE
CLAUDETTE COLBERT turned 90 on Monday, so 14 of her friends from New York and Paris as well as Barbados went to her home on the Caribbean island to celebrate with her favorite dinner: copious amounts of caviar, rack of lamb, coffee ice cream and, of course, Champagne and cake.
The original plan was to celebrate her birthday with 90 guests at Mortimer's in New York, but the actress had a stroke last year and is recovering in Barbados.


PREMIER OF QUEBEC TO QUIT IN JANUARY
Premier Robert Bourassa, who has governed Quebec for almost three decades and has struggled against cancer for the last three years, announced today that he would retire after the Liberal Party leadership convention in January.
His decision means the loss of a strong voice in favor of keeping Quebec within the Canadian federation and alters the political balance in the province, which continues to show strong support for independence.
Critical provincial elections, which could set a separatist course, must be held before the fall of 1994.


Stormy Times Bringing Bright Spots for Yanks
When the Yankees arrived at Milwaukee County Stadium yesterday, they saw more rain and more puddles on the field.
The forecast, someone mentioned to Wade Boggs, was lousy.
"Perfect," the third baseman said. "We're used to it."
He was not altogether serious.
"It's a distraction," Boggs said of the miserable weather.
"Rain pouring down. It's dripping off the bill of your cap. They're throwing diamond dust all over the place and it's not working. It's a definite distraction."


Vatican and Beijing
To the Editor:
"Seeking Thaw, Vatican Sends Aide to China," a Sept. 3 news item from Rome, reports that the Vatican has sent a senior diplomat, Roger Cardinal Etchegaray, to a sporting event in Beijing.


Leon A. Katz, City Councilman, 62
Leon A. Katz, who represented the Flatbush, Marine Park and Sheepshead Bay sections of Brooklyn in the City Council from 1969 to 1982, died on Monday in Englewood Hospital in New Jersey.
He was 62 and lived in Manhattan.
The cause was a heart attack, his family said.


Review/Television; A Youthful Epidemic Of Gunfire
Tonight's season opener of "48 Hours" has nothing to add to what every news viewer has long since learned about the availability of guns in America's cities and the readiness of many youngsters to use them.
But it presents the evidence in an explosive way.
Most of "Our Kids, Armed and Dangerous" focuses on Chicago.
The camera enters a hospital emergency room, the homes of young killers and their victims, and a West Side church whose priest is trying to teach children that fights can be settled without guns.
The camera does most of the work here, especially as it moves in close on hospital trauma teams trying to save lives of youngsters who have scarcely started to live, like the paralyzed 14-year-old who was just in the wrong place at the wrong time.


Parking Rules
Because of Rosh ha-Shanah, alternate-side parking rules are suspended in New York City tomorrow and Friday.
Next week, alternate-side parking rules will be suspended on Sept. 25 for Yom Kippur.
Other regulations remain in effect.


Review/Music; Industrial-Strength Guitars
The guitarist and composer Elliott Sharp brought the sound of industry into the 313 Gallery at CBGB on Sunday night.
Mr.
Sharp clanged away with three other guitarists, filling the room with squiggles of sound, drones, pounding high-volume noise and other side effects of the marriage of electricity and mechanization.
Mr.
Sharp's group, one of the several he's involved in, featured Roger Kleir, David Mecionis and John Myers; they wallowed in the sound of the electric guitar and all its possibilities.
The compositions Mr.
Sharp brought to the show were built around one or two ideas.
One number had all the guitarists strumming away together, raising a cloud of overtones that hung in the room and shimmered.
Another separated the guitarists, giving them distinct ideas that when heard together sounded vaguely like a country shuffle played by Chet Atkins during a particularly bad dream.
A third varied chunky accents, dropping them loudly.


Public Lands Belong to All Americans, Pardner; Maligned Black Bear
To the Editor:
While hunters routinely kill about 21,000 black bears a year in the United States for the frivolous purpose of sport or trophy collection, in "Too Many Bears" (Op-Ed, Sept. 2), Alston Chase blames the victim and argues that bears are guilty of an invasion into human-occupied areas


FORMER COMMUNIST FAVORED IN POLAND
Aleksander Kwasniewski, a smooth-talking former Communist Party official, appears to have as good a chance as any other candidate in Poland's weekend election to be the nation's new Prime Minister.
A junior minister in the pre-1989 Communist Government and an editor of the party's youth newspaper, the 39-year-old Mr.
Kwasniewski heads the Democratic Left Alliance, the successor to the Communists.
His party is leading in the polls.


KOHL TURNS RIGHT TO FACE ELECTIONS
As Germany looks forward to a tumultuous election year, Chancellor Helmut Kohl set a conservative course this week that he hopes will result not only in his own re-election but also in victories for his Christian Democratic Union in cities and states throughout the country.
At the end of a three-day Christian Democratic convention in Berlin, Mr.
Kohl assured the 1,000 delegates that they would emerge triumphant from the "super election year." Although latest polls show that only one in four Germans think Mr.
Kohl is doing a good job, the opposition Social Democrats are weak and divided.


A Kentucky Issue Yields Up to 5.3%
A $416.2 million tax-exempt bond issue by the Kentucky Property and Building Commission was initially priced yesterday with a maximum yield of 5.30 percent for a revenue refunding bond due in 2013.
Underwriters led by Merrill Lynch &amp; Company priced the shorter-maturity serial bonds to yield from 2.60 percent for an issue due in 1994 to 4.10 percent in 1998, 4.70 percent in 2003 and 5.25 percent in 2010.


Reviews/Film; American Comes of Age Amid India's Old Ways
"Praying With Anger" is a standard male rites-of-passage film with one fascinating difference: Dev Raman (M. Night Shyamalan), a hotheaded exchange student who endures assorted trials on his way to responsible manhood, is an American-born Indian who goes all the way to Madras to grow up.
The film, which opens today at the Village East, is the cinematic debut of Mr.
Shyamalan, a 22-year-old director, who wrote and produced the movie in which he also plays the leading role.
Sumptuously photographed on location in Madras, it offers a vision of contemporary life strikingly different from that shown in most films set in modern India, which tend to dwell on the mystical and the exotic.


Investor Edginess Sends Dow Down 18.45
The edginess of stock market investors was on full display yesterday, as bad news about inflation pummeled the bond market and stocks quickly followed, though they found some equilibrium later in the day.
Hugh A. Johnson, chief investment officer at First Albany, said the day began with nervousness among investors that "we'd get some bad news for the bond market, and we'd see the bond market decline sharply, and that would touch off a decline in stock prices." He added, "Those worries became a reality at 8:30 this morning." A Jolt to the Market
The jolt to the market was administered when the Labor Department said consumer prices had risen three-tenths of 1 percent in August, while expectations had been that the number would be no higher than two-tenths.
The announcement revived fears of inflation, which had considerably abated.


Ivy League Preview
The Ivy League begins its 38th season on Saturday with several distinctions.
Freshmen will be eligible for the first time, although the coaches do not think that their initial effect will be dramatic.
Except for Brown, all the teams have experienced quarterbacks.
Three are likely to be exceptional: Dartmouth's Jay Fiedler, Harvard's Mike Giardi and Cornell's Bill Lazor.


Kmart Is Sued by 43 Workers in a Privacy Case in Illinois
Workers at a Kmart Corporation distribution center in Illinois sued the retailer yesterday, saying it had violated the state laws on privacy and jeopardized their job security and opportunities by hiring a private investigation company to gather personal information about employees.
The lawsuit, filed in Cook County Circuit Court by 43 workers at the Manteno, Ill., center, seeks compensatory and punitive damages for each plaintiff and asks the court to stop Kmart from further investigation of its employees' private lives.


Livery-Cab Driver Is Killed With Shotgun
A fight between two men in an upper Manhattan intersection early yesterday forced Momodou Manneh to stop his cab.
That is when a teen-ager with a sawed-off shotgun appeared at the driver's door and demanded money.
But Mr.
Manneh never had the chance to hand it over.
As two female passengers cowered in the back seat, the shotgun went off, blasting buckshot into the left side of Mr.
Manneh's chest, the police said.


Islanders' Turgeon Gets Prize Today: $3 Million-a-Year Pact
The Islanders have called a news conference for today at which they will make a major announcement.
They wouldn't disclose the nature of the news, but it will surely be to announce a new four-year contract for Pierre Turgeon, their superstar center.
He won the Lady Byng Trophy last season when he led the team with 132 points on 58 goals and 74 assists.
The Byng is awarded for a combination of skill and sportsmanship.
Turgeon, who is scheduled to make $900,000 this season on the option year of his current contract, will earn an average of $3 million per year, a figure that includes bonuses, according to a source with knowledge of the contract.
Turgeon's agent, Pierre Lacroix, wouldn't confirm details, but said the news conference "concerns Pierre Turgeon's signature." Bewitching Hour Nears
There's no strike talk yet, but it's a fact nevertheless that the collective bargaining agreement between the National Hockey League players union and the owners expires at 11:59 P.M. today.
Gary Bettman, the league commissioner, and Bob Goodenow, the executive director of the union, met last week in London and have scheduled four bargaining sessions for October.


Suffolk Votes Fingerprinting For Welfare
Defying state authorities, the Suffolk County Legislature unanimously approved a plan today to fingerprint welfare recipients to combat fraud.
Supporters said the system could eventually save the county millions of dollars a year in fraudulent claims.


Unsigned Beukeboom Shows
Although he has not signed a new contract, Rangers defenseman JEFF BEUKEBOOM reported to the team in Glens Falls, N.Y., last night, in time to participate in today's opening of training camp.
Beukeboom was paired with BRIAN LEETCH last season on the team's No. 1 defensive line.
He was absent last weekend on the team's trip to London, where the Rangers swept a two-game series from Toronto.


Public Lands Belong to All Americans, Pardner; To Save Ecosystems
To the Editor:
I was disappointed that "As Easterners Try to Save West, Western Senators Blanch" (front page, Aug. 29) emphasizes the reaction of Western senators to environmental legislation far more than the merits of the legislation itself.


The Primary Races, District by District
BRONX
Reporting
Dinkins
Innis
Melendez
74 Mott Haven, Hunts Point
100
6,567
598
1,174
75 Clasons Point, West Farms, East Tremont
100
6,700
606
1,131
76 Union Port, Parkchester
100
5,754
923
990
77 High Bridge, Morris Heights
100
6,999
284
760
78 University Heights, Fordham
100
4,007
510
621
79 Tremont, Morrisania
100
7,491
420
712
80 Morris Park
100
3,591
3,442
711
81 Riverdale
100
4,921
3,787
732
82 Throgs Neck, Eastchester, Baychester
100
17,838
8,774
1,651
83 Williamsbridge, Wakefield
100
8,396
726
510
Total
100
72,264
20,070
8,992
Badillo
Hevesi
Holtzman
Alter
Green
Halperin
Paterson
Ramierz
Reale
4,847
1,222
3,471
407
1,835
298
1,642
4,254
279
4,541
1,201
2,503
347
1,525
277
1,723
2,868
158
3,962
1,621
2,500
439
2,064
282
1,680
2,939
163
2,662
1,464
3,188
371
2,021
254
1,990
2,211
188
2,662
945
1,764
255
1,303
155
1,054
2,332
77
2,942
1,235
3,245
355
1,670
235
2,183
2,373
176
3,962
2,345
2,076
982
3,972
671
810
1,223
262
4,406
3,544
2,731
1,326
5,826
745
743
1,158
197
10,578
7,367
7,219
2,089
9,835
2,805
5,375
3,714
554
2,032
2,350
5,030
485
2,659
334
3,868
1,259
186
42,594
23,294
33,727
7,056
32,710
6,056
21,068
24,331
2,240
BROOKLYN
Reporting
Dinkins
Innis
Melendez
39 Flatlands, Canarsie, Mill Basin
100
2,509
4,858
611
40 East New York, Brownsville
100
8,718
211
417
41 Canarsie, Gravesend
100
5,028
4,635
522
42 Midwood
100
4,527
866
193
43 Crown Heights, Flatbush
100
7,305
986
243
44 Flatbush, Park Slope
100
5,964
3,449
551
45 Midwood, Manhattan Beach
100
2,294
5,970
628
46 Coney Island, Brighton Beach
100
4,256
3,623
643
47 Gravesend, Bensonhurst
100
1,557
3,574
518
48 Borough Park
100
1,137
4,593
451
49 Bath Beach
100
944
2,592
351
50 Greenpoint, Williamsburg
100
4,032
2,138
548
51 Sunset Park
100
3,952
1,130
847
52 Bay Ridge, Red Hook, Brooklyn Heights
100
5,157
2,912
586
53 Bushwick
100
4,169
811
838
54 Cypress Hills
100
3,874
384
729
55 Crown Heights
100
16,891
247
440
56 Bedford-Stuyvesant
100
10,609
213
680
57 Fort Greene, Prospect Heights
100
10,270
439
389
58 Canarsie, Flatbush
100
8,319
402
201
Total
100
111,512
44,033
10,386
Badillo
Hevesi
Holtzman
Alter
Green
Halperin
Paterson
Ramirez
Reale
3,629
3,112
2,388
2,040
3,691
2,172
399
295
248
1,452
1,575
4,731
644
1,994
459
3,419
685
186
3,292
3,917
4,184
2,510
3,785
3,069
2,152
206
150
990
1,353
2,972
1,103
1,581
318
1,843
330
86
1,402
1,818
5,234
1,222
2,482
265
3,009
768
89
2,799
4,288
2,812
2,204
5,229
889
677
403
154
4,112
4,251
2,729
2,453
3,424
4,063
147
131
143
3,772
2,798
3,310
1,314
4,257
2,859
1,240
506
209
3,136
2,137
1,481
1,430
2,794
1,478
114
189
284
3,920
2,008
1,784
3,556
1,566
832
128
298
239
2,344
1,195
899
1,538
1,572
398
91
135
374
2,301
1,430
3,641
2,360
2,279
285
1,169
893
258
3,271
1,132
1,783
518
1,913
267
579
1,787
181
2,801
4,458
2,341
1,299
5,825
633
642
574
249
3,782
814
1,596
351
1,266
198
598
2,707
186
2,881
676
1,902
286
1,188
144
823
1,969
107
1,476
1,894
5,299
8,084
3,320
415
3,528
808
232
2,023
2,018
6,602
746
3,183
437
4,308
977
320
1,078
2,860
5,479
542
4,954
248
3,864
533
125
883
1,782
4,658
867
2,413
252
3,401
309
82
51,344
45,516
65,825
35,067
58,626
19,681
32,131
14,503
3,902
Manhattan
Reporting
Dinkins
Innis
Melendez
62 Lower Manhattan, City Hall, Chinatown
100
4,793
2,656
817
63 Lower East Side
100
8,190
2,843
891
64 Chelsea, Flatiron District
100
6,771
2,114
581
65 Yorkville, Gracie Mansion
100
5,625
2,387
494
66 West Village, SoHo, TriBeCa
100
9,576
2,560
544
67 West Vill, Chelsea, Clinton, Up Wst Side
100
8,471
2,609
659
68 East Harlem
100
9,159
687
1,073
69 Upper West Side
100
9,612
1,744
572
70 Central Harlem
100
11,981
396
639
71 Manhattanville, Morningside Heights
100
8,981
1,342
617
72 Inwood, Washington Heights
100
3,593
858
630
73 Upper East Side
100
4,968
2,141
415
Total
100
91,720
22,337
7,932
Badillo
Hevesi
Holtzman
Alter
Green
Halperin
Paterson
Ramirez
Reale
3,423
3,244
2,378
1,166
4,378
356
669
1,518
136
4,067
5,301
3,658
1,106
8,271
479
756
1,446
153
2,370
4,461
3,115
892
6,555
390
834
616
93
2,119
5,248
2,061
1,010
6,274
394
453
243
66
2,368
6,832
4,297
1,192
10,198
509
673
498
91
2,402
7,097
3,362
1,369
8,830
471
1,185
524
147
4,607
2,005
4,169
531
2,646
340
3,144
2,609
178
2,420
5,728
4,162
881
7,011
301
3,263
845
108
1,834
2,701
7,084
355
2,261
474
7,688
582
191
2,359
3,104
4,759
746
3,468
525
4,357
972
231
2,251
1,169
1,786
390
1,538
295
896
1,533
120
1,675
4,862
1,671
1,229
6,269
363
365
152
66
31,895
51,752
42,502
10,867
67,699
4,897
24,283
11,538
1,580
QUEENS
Reporting
Dinkins
Innis
Melendez
23 Rockaways, Howard Beach, Ozone Park
100
2,559
5,040
732
24 Oakland Gardens, Douglaston
100
3,830
4,820
629
25 Flushing
100
2,113
1,506
360
26 Whitestone
100
3,221
3,973
549
27 Utopia, Hillcrest
100
3,333
3,799
531
28 Forest Hills, Rego Park
100
3,450
4,200
613
29 St. Albans, Cambria Heights
100
8,440
594
276
30 Woodside
100
1,824
2,442
538
31 South Ozone Park, Locust Manor
100
6,861
639
339
32 Jamaica, South Jamaica
100
8,383
552
285
33 Queens Village, Hollis, St. Albans
100
9,098
861
262
34 Elmhurst
100
1,579
1,164
425
35 Corona
100
4,053
677
336
36 Jackson Heights
100
2,275
1,979
478
37 Sunnyside, Long Island City
100
2,804
1,211
459
38 Long Island City, Woodside, Elmhurst
100
1,310
2,375
506
Total
100
65,133
35,832
7,318
Badillo
Hevesi
Holtzman
Alter
Green
Halperin
Paterson
Ramirez
Reale
3,429
4,118
1,671
2,057
4,725
842
396
439
410
2,842
5,864
1,832
1,664
6,886
1,152
291
288
192
1,420
2,146
972
545
2,520
264
329
377
159
2,943
4,951
1,612
1,457
5,550
787
249
251
254
2,310
4,875
1,500
1,791
4,826
657
519
425
154
2,032
6,703
1,117
1,797
6,039
859
194
393
137
1,137
3,963
3,747
438
3,370
351
3,254
932
111
2,059
2,694
756
739
3,075
394
229
482
225
1,344
2,656
3,441
612
3,005
302
2,239
964
145
1,112
4,037
3,519
535
2,903
315
2,718
1,593
140
1,237
4,735
3,785
604
3,464
357
3,648
1,384
159
1,481
1,667
603
508
3,180
182
228
666
87
1,181
2,526
1,330
363
1,854
244
1,158
1,062
114
1,899
2,258
765
629
3,337
327
164
475
191
1,869
2,049
1,181
440
2,245
290
478
762
130
1,964
2,315
534
730
3,016
645
149
330
237
30,259
57,557
28,365
14,909
59,975
7,986
16,243
10,823
2,845
STATEN ISLAND
Reporting
Dinkins
Innis
Melendez
59 North Shore
100
3,259
2,487
505
60 Mid-Island
100
1,429
2,715
440
61 South Shore
100
864
2,398
396
Total
100
5,552
7,600
1,341
CITYWIDE TOTAL
100
346,181
129,872
35,969
Badillo
Hevesi
Holtzman
Alter
Green
Halperin
Paterson
Ramirez
Reale
2,627
2,162
1,715
818
3,484
487
733
428
275
2,261
1,777
879
1,076
2,447
489
211
202
392
2,138
1,315
511
711
1,975
382
86
134
428
7,026
5,254
3,105
2,605
7,906
1,358
1,030
764
1,095
163,118
183,373
173,524
70,504
226,916
39,960
94,755
61,959
11,662


Televisa Plans Stock Split In Advance of U.S. Listing
Grupo Televisa S.A., the Mexican media company that sends its Spanish-language soap operas around the world, is planning a 3-for-1 stock split that could coincide with its initial listing on the New York Stock Exchange later this year, according to plans submitted to the Government on Monday.
Analysts said the proposed split would give Televisa stock greater visibilty and would provide an opportunity for more foreign investors to buy it without exceeding the 50 percent limit on foreign investment for media companies in Mexico.


Bond Market Staggered by Price Data
It was like two good jabs late in a fight.
Not enough to knock someone down.
But enough to get a fighter worried.
That was the impact the Government's reports on consumer prices and retail sales had yesterday on traders and investors.
The increases in both were surprises, although it could be said that the bond market set itself up to be caught off guard by a three-tenths of 1 percent increase in the Consumer Price Index.


Mideast: Now, a People's Peace
The leaders of Israel and the Palestine Liberation Organization have signed their historic peace agreement, but it will be up to millions of Israelis and Palestinians to make peace.
The essential requirement, transcending even the delicate details of territorial jurisdiction and the need for emergency development aid, is to replace the long-entrenched rhetoric and psychology of demonization on both sides with a new vocabulary.
Israel's leaders have already made a brave start in this direction.
The P.L.O. still has not.


As School Staffs Return to Work, Asbestos Remains Today's Lesson


Books of The Times; Abroad in the 50's, Finding the Way to Be a Poet
A Different Person A Memoir By James Merrill Illustrated. 271 pages.
Alfred A. Knopf. $25.
Memoirs are becoming the folk and fairy tales of our age.
Where else can we record our quest for love, truth, honor or beauty so artfully and so nakedly?
Where else can we sum up, so thoroughly, the risks taken, the losses mourned, the price paid?


Clinton Seeks to Regulate Medical Specialties
In an effort to create more family doctors, President Clinton's health plan would empower the Federal Government to decide how many doctors should be trained each year as family practitioners, radiologists, surgeons, neurologists and other specialists.
The proposal is provoking intense debate among medical educators and other experts.


Murdoch Plan to Buy The Post Wins a Judge's Approval
Despite opposition from a union and the creditors of the bankrupt New York Post, a bankruptcy judge yesterday approved Rupert Murdoch's plan to purchase the newspaper.
The ruling opened the way for Mr.
Murdoch to complete his purchase by Sept. 30, ending a long period of instability for the newspaper founded in 1801.
A series of near-death experiences that drew national attention began for the newspaper last winter, when The Post's last owner, Peter S. Kalikow, backed away from ownership because of financial problems.


Corrections
An article in Science Times on Aug. 24 about people with chronic symptoms attributed to Lyme disease misstated the first name of a researcher and reported his opinion incompletely.
The researcher is Dr.
Allen C. Steere; he says that the small percentage of Lyme patients who have inflammation of the brain or nerves despite standard antibiotic treatment do have persistent infection.


Clinton Aims to Redirect School Aid to the Poor From Wealthy Districts
The Clinton Administration proposed today to redirect Federal aid from prosperous school districts to poorer ones, which would have to raise mathematics and reading standards to qualify for the extra money.
The renewed effort to rescue students considered most likely to fail by providing them with concentrated daily tutoring is a central feature of the Administration's plan to overhaul the Government's principal school program for poor children.
Tens of millions of dollars in additional education aid would be diverted to cities like New York, Los Angeles and Detroit, where poverty, crime and the breakdown of families have led to delinquency and poor study habits, putting extra burdens on local schools.


Shifting Burdens: Business and the Health Plan - A special report.; Companies Big and Small Tally Effects of Clinton Health Plan
President Clinton's plan for reshaping the health care system would cause a vast shift in financial burdens among American corporations.
Health costs would ease for companies, most of them manufacturers, that now offer generous benefits, and rise for those that do not, among them not only small neighborhood shops but also corporate giants like Wal-Mart, Sears and Wendy's.
How those burdens would be reapportioned emerges from a look at insurance costs and prospects at four companies representing the variety of corporate experiences: Ford Motor Company, an older manufacturer; Apple Computer, a young high-tech company; Lehigh Valley Racquet and Fitness Centers, a small Pennsylvania business that uses part-time instructors, and Manpower Inc., the nation's biggest supplier of temporary workers.


Plan for 'New' Military Doesn't Meet Savings Goal
Defense Secretary Les Aspin said today that the Administration's new plan for shaping the post-cold war military fell $13 billion short of the White House's five-year goal for Pentagon savings.
But Mr.
Aspin said the shortfall amounted to only about 1 percent of the military's $1.2 trillion budget from 1995 to 1999, and he outlined several ways to achieve the savings while preserving the new recommendations.


No Level of Asbestos Exposure Is Safe for Children or Adults
To the Editor:
A Sept. 4 article minimizing the risks of asbestos ignores epidemiological research and uses a fictive asbestos exposure level.


Presidents Unified in Support of North America Free Trade Agreement
At a White House ceremony yesterday, three former Presidents, Gerald R. Ford, Jimmy Carter, and George Bush, joined President Clinton to show support for the free-trade pact.
Page B12. (Associated Press)


Oudtshoorn Journal; The Ostrich Cartel Could Be Staring at Disaster
Smirk, if you like, at the ostrich-egg lamps and ostrich jerky on sale in the curio shops, the ostrich jockeys at the Safari tourist farm, the South African flag composed of ostrich feathers, the ubiquitous low-cholesterol ostrich steak platter, the ostrich crossing sign posted on Langenhoven Street.
Go ahead, roll your eyes at the Feather Inn, the Early Bird television repair shop and Chez L'Austriche.
But be advised that in Oudtshoorn, which bills itself without exaggeration as the world's ostrich capital, they take their ostriches seriously.


U.S. Petroleum Data
In millions of barrels except refinery utilization
Sept 10
Sept 3
Sept 11
1993
1993
1992
Gasoline production, daily
7.5
7.1
6.9
Distillate production, daily
3.2
3.3
3.0
Gasoline stocks
201.4
202.9
204.2
Distillate stocks
128.6
126.3
129.5
Crude imports, daily
6.5
6.2
6.6
Product imports, daily
1.9
1.5
2.3
Crude stocks
341.1
339.6
325.6
Crude production, daily
6.8
6.8
7.0
Refinery utilization (%)
92.9
92.3
90.5
Source: American Petroleum Institute


It's Clear That Ewing Wants Oakley in His Court
Speaking publicly about the Knicks for the first time since June, Patrick Ewing said trading Charles Oakley would be a mistake.
But Ewing added that the Knicks should try to acquire another player to help dethrone the Bulls.
Ewing spoke yesterday after conducting a basketball clinic in the Bronx.
The Knicks' All-Star center usually declines off-season interviews, but his brief comments were candid.


Jury Selection Starts in World Trade Center Case
The trial of four men charged in the bombing of the World Trade Center opened yesterday with a plea from the judge to potential jurors to focus only on what takes place in the courtroom instead of being swayed by the intense publicity and emotion surrounding one of the most violent terrorist acts in American history.
In a studied effort to defuse the tension in a Manhattan Federal courthouse ringed by police barricades, Judge Kevin Thomas Duffy exhorted about 50 prospective jurors to remain narrowly centered on the Government charges, which he summarized from the indictment.


Greenwich
Greenwich Pharmaceuticals stock lost 52 percent of its value in Nasdaq trading yesterday after the Food and Drug Administration refused on Monday to license the company's most important drug, Therafectin, a treatment for rheumatoid arthritis.
The company has been trying to get approval for Therafectin for more than a decade.


Philharmonic Opening
The New York Philharmonic opens its 1993-94 season next Wednesday at 8 P.M. at Avery Fisher Hall with Kurt Masur, the orchestra's music director, conducting.
On the program are Beethoven's "Fidelio" Overture and Violin Concerto, with Itzhak Perlman, soloist, and Shostakovich's Symphony No. 1.
Tickets are $75; benefit tickets, which include a preconcert cocktail reception, the concert and a dinner dance, are $150 to $1,000.
Regular subscription concerts begin on Sept. 23, with Mr.
Masur conducting the program, in which Beethoven's First Symphony replaces the Violin Concerto.
Information: (212) 721-6500.


THE 1993 PRIMARY: Mayor; Dinkins Defeats 2 Opponents By 2-to-1 Margin in Primary
With the primary election warm-up behind him at last, Mayor David N. Dinkins roared into an attack on his general-election opponent, Rudolph W. Giuliani, the Republican-Liberal candidate, who lost no time firing back.
The Mayor, who had run a low-key campaign against token opposition, easily won the Democratic mayoral primary yesterday against two challengers and used his victory speech to rally his supporters against what is expected to be a close and bitter rematch with Mr.
Giuliani on Nov. 2.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
Retail spending and consumer prices rose more vigorously in August than had been expected.
Retail sales rose two-tenths of 1 percent and consumer prices rose three-tenths of 1 percent, signaling a spurt of inflation and hurting bond prices.  [ Page D1. ]
President Clinton's health care plan would cause a vast shift in financial burdens among American corporations.  [ A1. ]


Pierce Paley, 56, A Corporate Lawyer
Pierce Paley, a corporate lawyer and real-estate developer, died on Sunday at Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center in Manhattan.
He was 56.
The cause was stomach cancer, a family member said.
Mr.
Paley was a counsel to the firm of Hall, Dickler, Lawler, Kent &amp; Friedman and a contributing editor to The New York Law Journal and Real Estate Weekly.
He wrote frequently about his specialty, the conversion of commercial and private buildings into cooperatives and condominiums.


Review/Film; Intricate, Melodious Echoes of African Childhoods
A story that is heard more than once in Laurent Chevalier's "Djembefola," a documentary portrait of the African master drummer Mamady Keita, tells of how as a baby he cried so much that his father took him to a witch doctor.
After predicting a great future in which the baby would grow up to overshadow everybody else in the village, the doctor washed the infant's hands in a rare herbal potion.
Mr.
Keita became a prodigy who at 14 was one of five percussionists selected for membership in the National Djoliba Ballet.
His instrument, the djembe, is a large drum that is made of goat's hide tautly stretched over yoroko wood and is beaten with the hands.
Depending on which part of the instrument is touched, it yields three distinctive tones.
Even now, the 43-year-old drummer marvels at how, after hours of playing, his hands never become stiff or blistered.


Corrections
An article yesterday about the Public Advocate's race in New York City misstated the first name of Councilwoman Susan D. Alter's campaign manager.
He is Samuel H. Intrator.


2 Die as Plane Crashes In Landing at Warsaw
A Lufthansa Airbus carrying 70 people crashed and burst into flames while landing in a heavy rain here early this evening.
Polish television reported that two people died in the crash and five were still missing.


Irma Lazarus, 80, A Longtime Patron Of the Arts in Ohio
Irma Lazarus, a patron and an advocate of the arts, died on Aug. 26 at her home in Cincinnati.
She was 80.
The cause was amyloidosis, a cancer-causing blood disorder, a family spokesman said.


MIDEAST ACCORD: The Overview; JORDAN AND ISRAEL AGREE ON A BASIS FOR FINDING PEACE
Basking in the afterglow of the accord on Monday between Israel and the Palestinians, Israel and Jordan signed an agreement today that provides the basis for resolving 45 years of hostility between them.
Although on paper the Israeli-Jordanian agreement merely sets out a formal agenda for negotiations, it represents the most important step the two countries have taken toward making peace.


Declining a Draw, Short Loses to a Kasparov Counterattack
Nigel Short bravely brushed off the opportunity to force a draw early in Game 4 of his world championship match yesterday in London, but all his ambitions and efforts to attack were riddled by Gary Kasparov's trenchant counterattacking play.
The Russian, confident and cruelly efficient, won in good stride.
The score of the 24-game series is getting one-sided, now at 3 1/2- 1/2 in favor of Kasparov.
Short started the encounter bristling with aggression, putting on the board one of the most demanding speculative attacks known to the game.
There was defiance in that: Kasparov is the foremost exponent of the defensive and counterattacking methods of shooting down such bold enterprise.
But the Englishman refused to retrench.
He knows that he cannot win this contest by making draws, and he is showing no signs of quitting.


Metropolitan Diary
ERIKA ADES is browsing through the clothing racks at a new uptown store when she overhears the conversation between a young dad and the 2- or 3-year-old boy atop his shoulders.
Boy: Dad, you said this was Barney's house, but I don't see him anywhere.


Clinton Recruits 3 Presidents to Promote Trade Pact
President Clinton stepped directly into the fray over the North American Free Trade Agreement today, recruiting three former Presidents to help him promote a pact that has alienated him from other Democrats, who believe it will cost the country jobs.
The trade agreement would create a common market in North America by gradually removing trade barriers among the United States, Mexico and Canada over 15 years.


German Health Plan Cuts Prescription Costs
Using some of the same methods of controlling health care costs as those proposed in President Clinton's plan for a national system, Germany's Government-supervised plan has succeeded in drastically cutting the amount spent on medicine and prescriptions this year, official figures show.
Health care in Germany, where the vast majority of the population is required to buy health insurance whose costs are shared equally by employers and employees, has also been getting steadily more expensive.
Premiums have risen to a national average of 13.4 percent of net pay in western Germany and 12.6 percent in the east.


Miscellany
*
Manning, Selvage &amp; Lee, New York, and Matlock &amp; Associates, Atlanta, a public relations agency specializing in marketing to black consumers, formed an affiliation. *
Porter/Novelli, New York, acquired Brodeur &amp; Partners Inc., a public relations agency specializing in computer-based technology, with offices in Boston and Santa Clara, Calif.
Terms were not disclosed.


MIDEAST ACCORD: Israel; Pact With P.L.O. Is Expected to Open the Way for Ties to Muslim Countries
Israeli officials and foreign policy experts predicted today that the breakthrough agreement with the Palestinians would enable Israel to build once-unthinkable relationships with predominantly Muslim countries, both in the Arab world and outside.
Israel's first target is Morocco, where Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin spent much of the day on a visit that officials said was not quite the surprise that it seemed at first.
They said it had been arranged with King Hassan II before the weekend.


The Races for City Council
Results at 11:45 P.M.


Texas Project Is Seized After HUD Finds Bias
The Department of Housing and Urban Development took control of the Orange County Housing Authority in Vidor today and said 10 to 12 black families would be moved into the all-white community near the Louisiana border.
The announcement by Secretary Henry G. Cisneros comes two weeks after the last two black men trying to desegregate the housing project moved out because of the harassment and intimidation in the town of 10,000, long a stronghold of the Ku Klux Klan.


Parental Leave for Dad Has to Do With Sharing
To the Editor:
Someone should tell Colin Harrison ("Here's Baby, Dad Stays Home. Dad Gets Antsy," Op-Ed, Aug. 31) that parental leave for fathers is not meant as a means of experiencing "transcendent joy," and it isn't expected to be welcomed by co-workers.
It's about partnership and responsibility -- something he seems to value in the workplace, but not at home.


Four A's President To Retire in January
John O'Toole, president and chief executive at the American Association of Advertising Agencies in New York, announced plans yesterday to retire at the end of his five-year contract, effective Jan. 17.
Mr.
O'Toole, 64, has headed the association since 1989 and previously served as director of the Four A's Washington office for two and a half years.
He joined the association after a career at Foote, Cone &amp; Belding during which he rose to chairman.


Start of School in Doubt After Review of Asbestos
A portrait of a school system in disarray emerged yesterday as teams surveyed all of New York City's public schools, leading several superintendents and the teacher's union to question whether schools could open on Monday as planned.
But the new Schools Chancellor, Ramon C. Cortines, said in an interview that he would recommend again in a Board of Education meeting today that the schools open on Sept. 20.


Detroit Mayoral Candidates Face Runoff
A former Michigan Supreme Court justice and a division chief in the Wayne County prosecutors' office were the top two finishers today in Detroit's mayoral primary.
With 59 percent of the precincts reporting, former Justice Dennis Archer, who managed the successful campaign of Mayor Coleman A. Young in 1977, led the runner-up, Sharon McPhail, by 53 percent to 27 percent of the vote.


In America; Injustice And Ice Cream
As crimes go, it was not one of the great ones.
No gunshots, no victims writhing in pain, no hysterical witnesses.
Supposedly a box of ice cream bars was taken.
But weary investigators, perspiring in the Southern heat, were uncertain even about that.
Some of the evidence melted.
The rest of it, presumably, was eaten.


Esiason's Personal Battle Goes Past N.F.L. Boundaries
Back in March when Boomer Esiason found out that he had been traded from the Cincinnati Bengals to the New York Jets, he was overjoyed.
For the East Islip, L.I., native, it was both a homecoming and a dream come true.
Two months later, Esiason's world was turned upside down when he learned that his 2-year-old son, Gunnar, had cystic fibrosis, a fatal genetic disease that attacks the respiratory and digestive systems.
There is no cure for the disease.


INSIDE
Shifting Health Burden
Companies large and small are looking at how the Clinton health plan will affect them, and some are finding potentially major savings.
Page B14.
Jury Selection in Bomb Case
The judge in the World Trade Center bombing trial warned potential jurors to focus only on the evidence in the highly publicized case.
Page B1.
Guiding Planes by Satellite
In what was hailed as an aviation milestone, a plane flew 12 miles and made a perfect landing with the help of signals from space.
Page A20.
Shift in School Aid Proposed
The Administration proposed overhauling the main program for poor students by diverting aid from suburban to city districts.
Page B15.
Vitamins and Cancer
Vitamin supplements can reduce the risk of cancer under some circumstances, say the authors of a large human study.
Health, page C13.
Fingerprints for Welfare
Defying New York State authorities, the Suffolk County Legislature approved a plan to fingerprint welfare recipients to combat fraud.
Page B1.


COMPANY NEWS: More Than Just a Phone Call; Video Conferencing And Photocopies, Too
For years, video conferencing has been the Ferrari of telecommunications -- rare and expensive, but fun.
Now, a nationwide chain of photocopy stores wants to make video conferencing more accessible to average consumers, if the average consumer can afford, say, a Lincoln Town Car.
Kinko's, the photocopy chain based in Ventura, Calif., said yesterday that it planned to offer video conferencing service at its shops, enabling callers to see and talk to each other over special telephone lines.


Berlin Buys Collection Of Dietrich Memorabilia
Marlene Dietrich's collection of 100,000 possessions -- diaries, books, costumes, traveling trunks and memorabilia -- has been bought by the city of Berlin for $5 million.
It is to be housed in a film museum opening in 1998.
"I wanted the collection to be kept together," said Maria Riva, Miss Dietrich's daughter, in announcing the purchase yesterday at Sotheby's in New York.
"An auction would have been awful -- people bidding on pairs of eye lashes and stage dresses."
Sotheby's, which helped the family negotiate the sale to Miss Dietrich's native city, where she is buried, is exhibiting 350 of these items through Sept. 20.
A Change of Heart
Miss Dietrich, who left Berlin in the early 1930's when its democratic government collapsed and the Nazi dictatorship began, later renounced her German citizenship to become a United States citizen.
But she had a change of heart after its reunification in August 1990.
She told her daughter then that she wished to be buried near her mother in Berlin.
She died at the age of 90 in May 1992.


MIDEAST ACCORD: Golan; Syrian Front Is Quiet but Is Big Peace Hurdle
There is a kind of peace here already, alongside the 220-yard-wide no man's land that separates the Syrian and Israeli checkpoints on the rocky, dun-colored plain beneath the Golan Heights.
The hot, dry wind carries few sounds: the distant rumble of a United Nations jeep, the faint fragments of an Arabic song from a soldier's transistor radio.
Of all the old battlefronts of the Middle East, the Golan may be the quietest.
On this side of the frontier, there are few people.
Quneitra itself is a ghost town, street after street of empty or smashed buildings, left just as they fell, the Syrians say, after Israeli troops pulled them down before returning the village and a narrow strip of land to Syria after the 1973 war.


Japan's G.N.P. Shrivels, Dashing Recovery Hope
Japan's economic output shrank in the second quarter, dashing any lingering hopes for a quick recovery and confirming fears that the world's second-largest economy is heading back into recession.
Gross national product in the April-June quarter fell five-tenths of a percent from the previous quarter, or at an annualized rate of 2 percent, the Economic Planning Agency said today.


Corrections
Because of a production error, an article in Science Times yesterday about migraine headaches included a scrambled passage.
Any reader wishing a corrected copy may write to Production Quality Control, The New York Times, 229 West 43d Street, New York, N.Y. 10036.


THE 1993 PRIMARY: Public Advocate; Green Scores Big Victory Over His Five Opponents
Bolstered by a well-financed campaign that increased his wide name recognition, Mark J. Green swept past a field of five opponents to win a resounding victory in the campaign to be New York City's Public Advocate, the position formerly known as City Council President.
Mr.
Green, a longtime colleague of Ralph Nader, the consumer advocate, had long been considered the front-runner in the crowded field of candidates.
But the strength of his victory came as a surprise to many political analysts and the other candidates because it had widely been expected that in a field of six candidates, Mr.
Green would have great difficulty amassing the 40 percent minimum to avoid a runoff.


Who Silenced Mr. Quayle's Accuser?
Just before the 1988 election, a Federal prison inmate was slapped into "the hole" when he tried to tell reporters that he had once sold marijuana to Dan Quayle, the Vice-Presidential candidate.
For this outrageous intervention on orders from Washington, the Justice Department now concludes that no one is really responsible and the deed not even worthy of denunciation.
Admitting only that the prisoner, Brett Kimberlin, received "disparate treatment" because of his attempt to publicly accuse Mr.
Quayle, the Justice Department's Office of the Inspector General finds "no evidence" that the Bush-Quayle campaign had anything to do with squelching the inmate.
This despite abundant evidence that the campaign was deeply interested in the case and fully informed about it.


Vitamins Cut Cancer Deaths In Large Study in Rural China
Researchers said today that they had the first evidence from a large human study that vitamin supplements could reduce the risk of cancer.
The study of nearly 30,000 residents of an area of north-central China where cancer death rates are among the highest in the world showed that nutritional supplements could reduce the risk of dying from cancer and other diseases.


THE 1993 PRIMARY: Surprise Showing; 'Alan Who?' No Longer So Obscure
Six weeks ago, Alan G. Hevesi was considered the irrelevant candidate in a three-way race for comptroller.
Known by barely 10 percent of the electorate, the soft-spoken, scholarly State Assemblyman from Queens tried to turn his obscurity into a campaign gimmick with commercials that began, "Alan who?"
Tonight, Mr.
Hevesi was the surprise first-place finisher in the Democratic primary, winning 35 percent of the vote to 33 percent for the incumbent, Elizabeth Holtzman, and 31 percent for Herman Badillo.


Sledder Goes Uphill Against Avalanche
Brian Shimer, a Floridian with Winter Olympic gold on his mind, has come to accept the effort necessary to achieve it.
"In the winter, I train and slide on ice," said Shimer, the world's top-rated bobsled driver.
"In the summer, I train and fund-raise."


Bond Deal Is Reviewed By G.O.P.
Searching for evidence that the Florio administration was incompetently, and perhaps even corruptly, being taken to the cleaners by a crafty Wall Street banking house, Assembly Republicans today opened their formal investigation of the state's bond-issuing practices.
The hearings, invested with the Republican majority's newly acquired power to subpoena witnesses, are focusing on a complicated, $1.8 billion deal entered into by the state with Lazard Freres &amp; Company last December to refinance old debt at high interest rates, turning it into new debt at lower rates.


Chavez-Whitaker: A Judge Now Denies He Said He Deducted a Point
Several lawyers -- one of them not even representing the combatants -- got into the act yesterday in the still simmering controversy of the draw that Julio Cesar Chavez was awarded against Pernell Whitaker in the World Boxing Council welterweight championship fight last Friday night.
Adding to boxing's latest zany development, one of the judges who was quoted as saying he had taken a point away from Whitaker for a low blow -- a point that cost Whitaker the decision -- now says he never said it.
If Judge Mickey Vann of England did, in fact, deduct the point for the low blow, and he admits it, it could be the basis for a reversal since only a referee is empowered to take a point away for an infraction.


Market Place; Technology investors get a lesson in looking before leaping.
WHEN the computer industry gets a cold, the semiconductor industry gets pneumonia -- or so goes the old cliche of investors in technology stocks.
But what if the ailments are just a case of hypochondria?
Investors got the answer to that question yesterday, when semiconductor stocks slumped amid widespread concerns that the industry was poised for a shakeout.
The fears were touched off late Monday when an executive at the Compaq Computer Corporation appeared to predict at an industry conference that computer sales in the North American market would be flat for the rest of the year, after almost a year of explosive growth.


Turnout Is Low For the Primary
Fewer people voted in yesterday's Democratic primary then in any other Democratic primary since World War II.
Only about 520,000 voters bothered to vote, or 23 percent of the city's 2.3 million registered Democrats.
That was fewer even than in 1981, when 578,000 Democrats, or 32 percent of those registered, voted in a race between then-Mayor Edward I. Koch and Frank J. Barbaro that was confused by a 12-day delay in the primary caused by court actions over a re-districting plan for the City Council.


Lead Paint Worse Than Asbestos, Report Says
Too few schools and day-care centers across the country have taken proper steps to protect children from the possibility of lead poisoning, according to a Congressional General Accounting Office report to be presented today before a House subcommittee on the environment.
In New York City, one in six classrooms appears to present a danger of lead poisoning, a more immediate hazard than the asbestos that has delayed the opening of school for nearly two weeks, according to the testimony.
The New York report, by the city Schools Chancellor's Task Force on Lead Hazard Reduction, is being presented to illustrate the problems faced by schools nationwide.


Child Injured in Crown Heights Traffic Accident
A 9-year-old boy was struck by a van in Crown Heights yesterday, and the police arrested the driver after they found that he had 10 license suspensions.
The accident occurred only a few doors away from the spot where a car accident that killed a black child in 1991 set off four days of violence, the police said.
In yesterday's accident, the victim was a Hasidic child and the driver was a black man.


Women's College Programs Are Enjoying Boom Times
Soccer for men at the collegiate level is on its way to a leveling period, especially among Division I schools, despite the enormous explosion of women's programs in Division I in all parts of the country.
The emergence of 28 new programs for women in Division I colleges and universities this season has increased the number to 131, while the men's programs in Division I total 194 for the third year in a row.


Unleashing the Winner Within; Knicks Coach Pursues Lucrative Side Job as Corporate Cheerleader
"How ya doing, everybody?" thundered Pat Riley, the dauntless New York Knicks coach.
"I know there's not anybody here from Chicago, and if there is, you'll get over it."
His eyes swept over the Imperial Ballroom of the New York Sheraton, choked with 350 corporate managers.
In his stylish blue suit and slicked-back hair, with a baby's smile of happiness, the coach radiated that high-energy, I-can-do-it style of the motivational circuit.


Review/Music; Tchaikovsky Calling Card, Then Intense Elaboration
Unheralded debut recitals rarely draw large crowds, so it can be helpful for a visiting performer to have a friendly organization beating the drum behind the scenes.
The Armenian General Benevolent Union did that for Vardan Mamikonian on Tuesday evening, not only drawing on its constituency (there was a waiting list for seats), but also luring management and record-company talent spotters to Weill Recital Hall.
They were not wasting their time.
Mr.
Mamikonian, a 23-year-old Armenian pianist who has studied with Jorg Demus and Lazar Berman -- polar opposites, one would think -- demonstrated a technique that combines power and gracefulness, an ear for stylistic nuance and flashes of interpretive ingenuity.
If there was one quality consistent in his playing, it was an intense concentration that gave the music a sense of forward pressure, not only in extroverted passages, but in gentler ones as well.


Universal to Expand Park in Florida
Universal Studios Florida will get a 10-year, $3 billion expansion, which will include a second theme park and five hotels and allow it to compete head-on with Walt Disney World.
"We have demonstrated that we can have our own place in the sun," Sidney J. Sheinberg, president of MCA Inc., a co-owner of Universal Studios Florida, said today at a ceremony.


Books of The Times; Divergent Views of Rape As Violence and Sex
Sexual Violence  Our War Against Rape  By Linda A. Fairstein  Illustrated. 288 pages.
William Morrow &amp; Company. $23.
The Morning After  Sex, Fear and Feminism on Campus  By Katie Roiphe  180 pages.
Little, Brown. $19.95.


COMPANY BRIEFS
HANCOCK TIMBER RESOURCE GROUP, Olympia, Wash., bought about 32,700 acres of timberland in Canada from Toronto-based Shieldings Inc.
Terms were not disclosed.
TRIBUNE CO., Chicago, has completed the purchase of Compton's Multimedia Publishing Group, a developer and distributor of interactive multimedia software, from Encyclopedia Britannica Inc. for $57 million in cash.


Emanuel Zacchini Sr. Human Cannonball, 84
Emanuel Zacchini Sr., who with his four brothers made a career out of performing a circus human cannonball act, died on Monday in Sarasota, Fla., where he lived.
He was 84.
Mr.
Zacchini's 175-foot cannonball jump at 54 miles an hour in 1940 was a world record and made the act famous.
Mr.
Zacchini ended his jumping career after suffering a broken neck in an accident in 1951.


Senate Hands Clinton Setback on Grazing Fee
The Senate voted today to delay the Administration's plan to raise the fees that ranchers pay to graze cattle on Federal land in the West.
The move threatens to undo President Clinton's proposals to change how public lands are managed.
Western Democrats joined with Republicans to pass an amendment, 59 to 40, that would prevent the Administration from increasing the grazing fee for a year.


There's a Blue Jay Who Looms Over New York
The numbers are digested daily by both the Yankees and the Mets.
To the Yankees, Tony Fernandez's offensive assault for the Blue Jays could be killing their title hopes.
When the Mets read the box scores -- Fernandez drove in five runs in a 9-5 victory over the Tigers on Tuesday night -- a fury and disgust of a different sort apparently sets in.


The Primary Races, by Assembly District
BRONX
Reporting
Dinkins
Innis
Melendez
74 Mott Haven, Hunts Point
100
6,567
598
1,174
75 Clasons Point, West Farms, East Tremont
100
6,700
606
1,131
76 Union Port, Parkchester
100
5,754
923
990
77 High Bridge, Morris Heights
100
6,999
284
760
78 University Heights, Fordham
100
4,007
510
621
79 Tremont, Morrisania
100
7,491
420
712
80 Morris Park
100
3,591
3,442
711
81 Riverdale
100
4,921
3,787
732
82 Throgs Neck, Eastchester, Baychester
100
17,838
8,774
1,651
83 Williamsbridge, Wakefield
100
8,396
726
510
Total
100
72,264
20,070
8,992
Badillo
Hevesi
Holtzman
Alter
Green
Halperin
Paterson
Ramierz
Reale
4,847
1,222
3,471
407
1,835
298
1,642
4,254
279
4,541
1,201
2,503
347
1,525
277
1,723
2,868
158
3,962
1,621
2,500
439
2,064
282
1,680
2,939
163
2,662
1,464
3,188
371
2,021
254
1,990
2,211
188
2,662
945
1,764
255
1,303
155
1,054
2,332
77
2,942
1,235
3,245
355
1,670
235
2,183
2,373
176
3,962
2,345
2,076
982
3,972
671
810
1,223
262
4,406
3,544
2,731
1,326
5,826
745
743
1,158
197
10,578
7,367
7,219
2,089
9,835
2,805
5,375
3,714
554
2,032
2,350
5,030
485
2,659
334
3,868
1,259
186
42,594
23,294
33,727
7,056
32,710
6,056
21,068
24,331
2,240
BROOKLYN
Reporting
Dinkins
Innis
Melendez
39 Flatlands, Canarsie, Mill Basin
100
2,509
4,858
611
40 East New York, Brownsville
100
8,718
211
417
41 Canarsie, Gravesend
100
5,028
4,635
522
42 Midwood
100
4,527
866
193
43 Crown Heights, Flatbush
100
7,305
986
243
44 Flatbush, Park Slope
100
5,964
3,449
551
45 Midwood, Manhattan Beach
100
2,294
5,970
628
46 Coney Island, Brighton Beach
100
4,256
3,623
643
47 Gravesend, Bensonhurst
100
1,557
3,574
518
48 Borough Park
100
1,137
4,593
451
49 Bath Beach
100
944
2,592
351
50 Greenpoint, Williamsburg
100
4,032
2,138
548
51 Sunset Park
100
3,952
1,130
847
52 Bay Ridge, Red Hook, Brooklyn Heights
100
5,157
2,912
586
53 Bushwick
100
4,169
811
838
54 Cypress Hills
100
3,874
384
729
55 Crown Heights
100
16,891
247
440
56 Bedford-Stuyvesant
100
10,609
213
680
57 Fort Greene, Prospect Heights
100
10,270
439
389
58 Canarsie, Flatbush
100
8,319
402
201
Total
100
111,512
44,033
10,386
Badillo
Hevesi
Holtzman
Alter
Green
Halperin
Paterson
Ramirez
Reale
3,629
3,112
2,388
2,040
3,691
2,172
399
295
248
1,452
1,575
4,731
644
1,994
459
3,419
685
186
3,292
3,917
4,184
2,510
3,785
3,069
2,152
206
150
990
1,353
2,972
1,103
1,581
318
1,843
330
86
1,402
1,818
5,234
1,222
2,482
265
3,009
768
89
2,799
4,288
2,812
2,204
5,229
889
677
403
154
4,112
4,251
2,729
2,453
3,424
4,063
147
131
143
3,772
2,798
3,310
1,314
4,257
2,859
1,240
506
209
3,136
2,137
1,481
1,430
2,794
1,478
114
189
284
3,920
2,008
1,784
3,556
1,566
832
128
298
239
2,344
1,195
899
1,538
1,572
398
91
135
374
2,301
1,430
3,641
2,360
2,279
285
1,169
893
258
3,271
1,132
1,783
518
1,913
267
579
1,787
181
2,801
4,458
2,341
1,299
5,825
633
642
574
249
3,782
814
1,596
351
1,266
198
598
2,707
186
2,881
676
1,902
286
1,188
144
823
1,969
107
1,476
1,894
5,299
8,084
3,320
415
3,528
808
232
2,023
2,018
6,602
746
3,183
437
4,308
977
320
1,078
2,860
5,479
542
4,954
248
3,864
533
125
883
1,782
4,658
867
2,413
252
3,401
309
82
51,344
45,516
65,825
35,067
58,626
19,681
32,131
14,503
3,902
Manhattan
Reporting
Dinkins
Innis
Melendez
62 Lower Manhattan, City Hall, Chinatown
100
4,793
2,656
817
63 Lower East Side
100
8,190
2,843
891
64 Chelsea, Flatiron District
100
6,771
2,114
581
65 Yorkville, Gracie Mansion
100
5,625
2,387
494
66 West Village, SoHo, TriBeCa
100
9,576
2,560
544
67 West Vill, Chelsea, Clinton, Up Wst Side
100
8,471
2,609
659
68 East Harlem
100
9,159
687
1,073
69 Upper West Side
100
9,612
1,744
572
70 Central Harlem
100
11,981
396
639
71 Manhattanville, Morningside Heights
100
8,981
1,342
617
72 Inwood, Washington Heights
100
3,593
858
630
73 Upper East Side
100
4,968
2,141
415
Total
100
91,720
22,337
7,932
Badillo
Hevesi
Holtzman
Alter
Green
Halperin
Paterson
Ramirez
Reale
3,423
3,244
2,378
1,166
4,378
356
669
1,518
136
4,067
5,301
3,658
1,106
8,271
479
756
1,446
153
2,370
4,461
3,115
892
6,555
390
834
616
93
2,119
5,248
2,061
1,010
6,274
394
453
243
66
2,368
6,832
4,297
1,192
10,198
509
673
498
91
2,402
7,097
3,362
1,369
8,830
471
1,185
524
147
4,607
2,005
4,169
531
2,646
340
3,144
2,609
178
2,420
5,728
4,162
881
7,011
301
3,263
845
108
1,834
2,701
7,084
355
2,261
474
7,688
582
191
2,359
3,104
4,759
746
3,468
525
4,357
972
231
2,251
1,169
1,786
390
1,538
295
896
1,533
120
1,675
4,862
1,671
1,229
6,269
363
365
152
66
31,895
51,752
42,502
10,867
67,699
4,897
24,283
11,538
1,580
QUEENS
Reporting
Dinkins
Innis
Melendez
23 Rockaways, Howard Beach, Ozone Park
100
2,559
5,040
732
24 Oakland Gardens, Douglaston
100
3,830
4,820
629
25 Flushing
100
2,113
1,506
360
26 Whitestone
100
3,221
3,973
549
27 Utopia, Hillcrest
100
3,333
3,799
531
28 Forest Hills, Rego Park
100
3,450
4,200
613
29 St. Albans, Cambria Heights
100
8,440
594
276
30 Woodside
100
1,824
2,442
538
31 South Ozone Park, Locust Manor
100
6,861
639
339
32 Jamaica, South Jamaica
100
8,383
552
285
33 Queens Village, Hollis, St. Albans
100
9,098
861
262
34 Elmhurst
100
1,579
1,164
425
35 Corona
100
4,053
677
336
36 Jackson Heights
100
2,275
1,979
478
37 Sunnyside, Long Island City
100
2,804
1,211
459
38 Long Island City, Woodside, Elmhurst
100
1,310
2,375
506
Total
100
65,133
35,832
7,318
Badillo
Hevesi
Holtzman
Alter
Green
Halperin
Paterson
Ramirez
Reale
3,429
4,118
1,671
2,057
4,725
842
396
439
410
2,842
5,864
1,832
1,664
6,886
1,152
291
288
192
1,420
2,146
972
545
2,520
264
329
377
159
2,943
4,951
1,612
1,457
5,550
787
249
251
254
2,310
4,875
1,500
1,791
4,826
657
519
425
154
2,032
6,703
1,117
1,797
6,039
859
194
393
137
1,137
3,963
3,747
438
3,370
351
3,254
932
111
2,059
2,694
756
739
3,075
394
229
482
225
1,344
2,656
3,441
612
3,005
302
2,239
964
145
1,112
4,037
3,519
535
2,903
315
2,718
1,593
140
1,237
4,735
3,785
604
3,464
357
3,648
1,384
159
1,481
1,667
603
508
3,180
182
228
666
87
1,181
2,526
1,330
363
1,854
244
1,158
1,062
114
1,899
2,258
765
629
3,337
327
164
475
191
1,869
2,049
1,181
440
2,245
290
478
762
130
1,964
2,315
534
730
3,016
645
149
330
237
30,259
57,557
28,365
14,909
59,975
7,986
16,243
10,823
2,845
STATEN ISLAND
Reporting
Dinkins
Innis
Melendez
59 North Shore
100
3,259
2,487
505
60 Mid-Island
100
1,429
2,715
440
61 South Shore
100
864
2,398
396
Total
100
5,552
7,600
1,341
CITYWIDE TOTAL
100
346,181
129,872
35,969
Badillo
Hevesi
Holtzman
Alter
Green
Halperin
Paterson
Ramirez
Reale
2,627
2,162
1,715
818
3,484
487
733
428
275
2,261
1,777
879
1,076
2,447
489
211
202
392
2,138
1,315
511
711
1,975
382
86
134
428
7,026
5,254
3,105
2,605
7,906
1,358
1,030
764
1,095
163,118
183,373
173,524
70,504
226,916
39,960
94,755
61,959
11,662


Developer DeBartolo Is Going Public
The shopping center empire of Edward J. DeBartolo, one of the nation's biggest, will join the rush of real estate owners turning to Wall Street for money by becoming a real estate investment trust with a $600 million public offering.
The deal, announced yesterday, is the biggest REIT equity offering ever.
With the conversion, Mr.
DeBartolo's company will become yet another real estate developer to break from traditional sources of capital, like banks and insurance companies.


MIDEAST ACCORD: Reporter's Notebook; For Every Arab, There's a Handshake
At center stage, there was The Handshake.
Then, off to the side and hardly noticed, was a series of lesser handshakes that were also felt around the world.
In a bit of spinoff diplomacy cooked up by Martin Indyk, the National Security Council's Mideast specialist, Israel came a bit closer to acceptance by the Arabs.
As Yasir Arafat, the Palestinian leader, President Clinton and Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin of Israel left the platform on the White House lawn after Monday's ceremony they went forward and began to shake hands with guests in the front row.


Haiti Gunmen Menace Government Workers
In the second incident of its kind in two days, a group of heavily armed men descended on Haiti's Finance Ministry today and threatened staff and a United Nations team for more than two hours, a Government official and witnesses said.
In a repeat of Tuesday's events, when Finance Minister Marie Michele Rey had to be escorted from her office, more than 50 men, many carrying automatic weapons, pistols and clubs, entered the building and harassed workers, a Government official said.


A Health Proposal Headed for Failure
President Clinton's health care proposal relies heavily on a new competitive market to drive national health care toward high quality and low costs.
But political timidity and exaggerated savings estimates may doom the market to failure.
Competition needs incentives to work.
Buyers must reap a sizable saving if they choose lower-cost policies; and without consumer demand, health plans would have little reason to cut premiums.
On this crucial score -- incentives -- the President's proposal comes up short.


Kings Make Hurley 2d-Best Paid on Team
Point guard BOBBY HURLEY signed a $16.5 million, six-year contract yesterday with the Sacramento Kings, making the 22-year-old Duke standout the team's second-highest paid player.
"I've always played because I loved to, but now the stakes are so much higher," he said.
"I think it's a tough transition in general for a point guard."


Bridge
There are several stock situations in which a player may bid a three-card suit, but some like to improvise.
One of them is Len Kapler, who has been playing the game for only a year.
His imaginative three-heart rebid on the diagramed deal would normally be safe, since a strong jump shift response tends to deny a secondary suit.
But North had four-card support and drove to slam in the suit.


Peaceful Prayers on the Eve of the New Year


BUSINESS DIGEST
Companies
The U.A.W. and Ford agreed on a new three-year labor contract covering 96,000 U.S. workers.
The union fought off demands that workers pay more for health care.  [ Page D1. ]  Organized labor has emerged as a force behind both the drive to stop Nafta and the campaign to overhaul health care.  [ A21. ]
Wang Laboratories is about to emerge from bankruptcy protection as a smaller computer maker that could surprise a few in the industry who had written it off for dead.  [ D1. ]


Sheffield Sidelined
Florida Marlins third baseman GARY SHEFFIELD might not play again this season because of a sore right shoulder that has bothered him most of the year.
Sheffield was examined by Dr.
FRANK JOBE when the Marlins were in Los Angeles last week, and the injury was diagnosed as inflamed muscles around the rotator cuff.
Jobe said surgery wasn't necessary.
"I don't want to do anything to turn what doesn't need surgery into something that does need it," Sheffield said.
"I'd like to play again because I think the team has a chance to win 70 games, but it's not worth risking the short-term gain for the future."


Calendar: Crafts to Go
Talks on Gardens  Horticultural Society of New York, 128 West 58th Street; (718) 817-8747.
The society and the New York Botanical Garden are offering a lecture series starting on Sept. 30 with an illustrated talk on American border gardens.
Other topics will include Japanese gardens in America (Nov. 11) and backyard ecology (Dec. 2).
All lectures start at 6:15 P.M.
Fee for the series, $81 (members, $71); single lecture, $15 (members, $13).
Advance registration is suggested.


Leticia Ide Service
A memorial service for Leticia Ide, a dancer with the Jose Limon Dance Company and with the Humphrey-Weidman troupe in the 1930's and 40's, is to be held at 6:30 P.M. today at St.
Mark's Church, Second Avenue and 10th Street, in the East Village.
The service, which is open to the public, is to include film, speakers and a reception.
Miss Ide died on Aug. 29 at the age of 84.


Corrections
An article in Business Day last Thursday, about an announcement by Baxter International Inc. that it expects lower third-quarter earnings, misstated an action taken to cut costs.
Baxter is freezing the hiring of salaried workers in the United States and Puerto Rico, not freezing their pay.


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt  *
James River Corp., Richmond, filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission for a shelf offering of up to $400 million of debt securities to be issued from time to time. *
Massachusetts Health and Educational Facilities Authority is tentatively offering $80 million of tax-exempt revenue bonds for Saints Memorial Medical Center.
The issue, which carries a maximum yield of 6.10 percent for a bond due in 2023, was priced through underwriters led by CS First Boston.
Serial bonds with shorter maturities yield from 3.75 percent in 1994 to 5 percent in 1998, with other long maturities priced to yield from 5.50 percent in 2003 to 5.75 percent in 2008.
Underwriters said the issue was rated Baa by Moody's investors Service.


Argentina Doesn't Let Bad News Get Out
To the Editor:
Re "Peronist Backsliding" (editorial, Sept. 4): While in Argentina recently, I was surprised by the bleak economic picture described by ordinary Argentines and in the mainstream news media.
Foreign investors are understandably excited at being able to pick up choice revenue-producing properties, like the oil and phone monopolies, at good prices, and well-off Argentines can travel abroad spending their fully convertible (and probably overvalued) pesos.


Investigators' Findings in Holtzman Loan Inquiry
Following is the concluding passage of a New York City Department of Investigation report summarizing the findings of an inquiry into a campaign loan to the City Comptroller, Elizabeth Holtzman:  Subject to Ethics Rules
Fleet Bank's $450,000 loan to the Holtzman Senate Campaign Committee is not excepted from the Charter's ethics proscriptions because it was not made to Holtzman and was, by the bank's definition, an "undesirable" loan, which could be made only by certain designated bank officers for a "justifiable business reason."


Coffee Group's Export Curb
Latin American, African and Asian coffee producers completed their ambitious plans today to hold back up to 20 percent of their coffee exports to push up depressed prices.
Jorge Cardenas, general manager of Colombia's National Coffee Growers Federation, said at a news conference that the retention plan, as it is known, would be administered by a new Association of Coffee Producing Countries based in Brazil, the world's largest coffee producer.


Morocco Walks a Tightrope On Diplomatic Ties to Israel
Having accorded de facto recognition to Israel by welcoming Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin to his summer palace, King Hassan II of Morocco now faces a delicate problem: Should the two countries merely live together or has the time come to exchange rings?
The King's choice on whether to establish diplomatic relations with Israel is crucially important because it will be a guide to the degree of political support Arab states are prepared to give Mr.
Rabin in the bid for peace with the Palestine Liberation Organization.
But Westerners here believe the decision for the King will be particularly difficult, and therefore long pondered, because it involves a clash of personal instinct and pragmatic considerations.


Bank Branch as High-Tech Boutique
With an eye on securities firms and mutual fund companies that have attracted bank customers by the droves and another on the selling skills of retailers like Nordstrom or the Limited, bankers are trying to create a new image for their branches.
At Citibank, which this month introduced its branch of the future on Park Avenue and 53d Street in Manhattan, the new look includes advertising kiosks and smudge-resistant walls, as well as changes in how branch workers are deployed and how they use the bank's computer system.


Fearful of Tourism Decline, Florida Offers Assurances on Safety
As law-enforcement authorities here stepped up their search for the killers of a British tourist, Florida tourism officials today issued new pledges intended to make the state's streets and highways safer and to limit damage to the state's vital tourism industry.
Galvanized by the blizzard of negative publicity around the world that followed the shooting death of 34-year-old Gary Colley early Tuesday at a highway rest stop east of here, the authorities in Jefferson County, where Mr.
Colley was killed, began a dragnet aimed at young blacks with criminal records, a move that immediately generated controversy.


Rally Erases Bonds' Early Losses
Where do we go from here?
That was the question of the day in the bond market yesterday morning.
Following a sharp selloff on Tuesday that was sparked by an higher-than-expected inflation report, prices slumped sharply for the second day and yields jumped as trading opened in New York.


Around the Region
Pleasant Supervisor 89% Reporting Robert F. Meehan 1,624 - 63% Phillip A. Grimaldi 959 - 37% x - Winner.


Underground Economy
To the Editor:
Re "Immigrants: A Cost or Benefit?" (Op-Ed, Sept. 3): The young Mexicans who toil long hours in corner fruit stands, the operators who sew clothes ("Made in U.S.A.") in Chinatown sweatshops and the Senegalese who hawk accessories on the streets all contribute to making our dollars go further.
If you eat in a restaurant, stay in a motel or have the cleaner press your clothes, you may contribute to the underground economy and benefit from it.


Goalie's Medical Mystery Baffles Devils
The National Hockey League received such conflicting medical reports from the Devils and the Ottawa Senators about Peter Sidorkiewicz's condition that it ordered an independent physician to examine the goaltender's right shoulder.
Charging that they were misinformed about Sidorkiewicz's condition when they acquired him from Ottawa in a trade June 20, the Devils asked the league last Thursday to intervene and readjust the deal.


Rome Journal; They Still Try to Make a Turbulent Tiber Behave
Obscured by the start of the Italian soccer season and the latest arrests in the country's long corruption scandal were recent reports of a crude rock and sand dike that for the first time in anyone's memory dammed up an entire channel of the Tiber, creating a sort of lake along the shore of Trastevere, the old bohemian quarter across the river from Rome's historic center.
It happened at the point where the river divides around the Isola Tiberina, the tiny island in the Tiber.


AIR FRANCE TO CUT 4,000 JOBS AND 30 ROUTES
Air France said yesterday that it planned to eliminate 4,000 jobs by the end of 1994 as part of a cost-cutting package that also included abandoning 30 unprofitable routes.
The job cuts amount to 10 percent of the state-owned airline's 40,000 employees.
The airline said it expected a loss of $691 million for the first half of 1993, compared with a full-year 1992 loss of $593 million.
The cost-cutting plan is intended to save the airline $927 million by the end of 1995.
In the last three years, Air France has eliminated 5,000 jobs.(AP)


Corrections
A front-page picture caption in some copies yesterday, about the primary election for New York City Comptroller, misspelled the name of Alan G. Hevesi's niece.
She is Ana.


In San Francisco, Some Remains Still Remain


POLITICAL MACHINE FALTERS IN DETROIT
A former State Supreme Court Justice handily outpolled two other candidates on Tuesday in a fight to become the city's first mayor in two decades, delivering a blow to the once-powerful political machine of the retiring Mayor, Coleman A. Young.
The former justice, Dennis Archer, won 53 percent, or 95,962 votes, according to complete but unofficial returns.
Sharon McPhail, an assistant Wayne County prosecutor who will face him in a nonpartisan runoff on Nov. 2, gathered 36 percent, or 47,733 votes.
No woman has ever been mayor of Detroit.


Pirates Relent on New Alignment
The Pittsburgh Pirates, in a sudden turnaround, willingly have agreed to play in the National League's Central Division and have willed their Eastern Division spot to the Atlanta Braves.
The decision, announced yesterday, completes the realignment of the league under the three-division format that will be implemented next season, assuming the owners reach agreement on it and an extra round of playoffs with the Players Association.


35 Are Indicted as Members Of a Hyper-Violent Drug Gang
Thirty-five people were charged yesterday with running an unusually violent drug gang in the South Bronx and Washington Heights that law-enforcement officials said had committed a series of murders in three boroughs, while their operation grew into a $16 million-a-year business.
The officials said that the gang, known on the street as the Wild Cowboys, began in 1986 as a group of classmates at George Washington High School, and expanded, primarily through intimidation and the calculated use of violence, into a sophisticated operation for processing and distributing crack.


Knick Summer Riddle All About Point Guard
Publicly, Knicks management has developed this perfectly understandable party line that it won't be disappointed to begin the season with the cast that lost five of its seven playoff road games last spring, that a championship window of opportunity remains open to them.
Privately, the Knicks are scrambling about to make an 11th-hour pre-camp deal that would upgrade, if not completely resolve, their point-guard problem.
Barring some serious manipulation of the salary cap that would bring them a marquee player, whatever they do won't change the preseason perception that the Knicks have lost ground standing still.
As tough a guy as Scott Skiles is, he can't dance to Pat Riley's defensive tune.
As athletic a player as Gary Grant is, where are the Knicks going with Mark Jackson's backup?
As dependable a performer as Derek Harper has been, the Knicks should have learned their lesson when it comes to acquiring aging guards, as both Rolando Blackman and Doc Rivers, albeit to a lesser extent, broke down during the grueling run to 60 victories and the Eastern Conference finals.
If they even consider surrendering Hubert Davis for Harper, they're nuts.


Military's Drug Interception Is Labeled Failure by Study
An Administration review has recommended that United States military efforts to cut the flow of illegal drugs be changed from the interception of smugglers to military aid for dismantling cocaine labs and disrupting trafficking operations in South America, The Washington Post said today.


Treasures and Trek: A Brimfield Diary
DEAR Diary,
Just spent two days at Brimfield.
It was my third trek to what is considered one of the premier antiques markets in the country.
Thousands of dealers, acres of stuff to rummage through in more than 20 fields, each with upward of 300 dealers.


No Headline
"Europeans can go on vacation and be robbed or mugged anywhere. The big difference is that when they come here they can also end up looking down the barrel of a gun. That simply does not happen in European vacation resorts. Europeans are not used to guns, and they are frightened." -- BRYN RODEN, a British travel agent in Miami Beach.  [ A14:5. ]


Rivals Sound Themes in New York Mayoral Battle
Bracing for the political fight of his career, Mayor David N. Dinkins yesterday used the moment after his easy renomination to wrap himself in the support of top Democratic politicians at a pep rally, even as his Republican-Liberal rival, Rudolph W. Giuliani, pulled hard for the crossover Democratic voters he will need to win in November.
Surrounded by Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo, Lieut.
Gov.
Stan Lundine, Labor Secretary Robert Reich and David Wilhelm, chairman of the Democratic National Committee, the Mayor marched to a lectern on the steps of City Hall, took off his suit coat and tie, and undid the top two buttons of his white shirt.
Then he lit into the Republican policies that he said Mr.
Giuliani represents and that he contends have hurt New York.


Andretti Returning
Michael Andretti has cut short his disappointing Formula One rookie season and will return to the Indy car circuit next year, sources told The Associated Press yesterday.
Andretti, ineffective on the international circuit through the first 13 races of 1993, will leave Team McLaren without competing in the final three races of the season.


Events: Art, Talks
Architect's Exhibition  Architectural League of New York, the Urban Center, 457 Madison Avenue (51st Street); (212) 980-3767.
An exhibition of drawings, photographs and models of residences and commercial buildings designed since 1980 by Franklin D. Israel starts Monday and continues through Oct. 27.
Mr.
Israel will give a talk on Sept. 23 at 7 P.M.
Admission to the lecture is $7; members, no charge.
The gallery is open Monday through Saturday, 11 A.M. to 5 P.M. (closed Thursday).
No charge.


Bucks Sign Baker
The Milwaukee Bucks are willing to give VIN BAKER plenty of time.
The Bucks on Tuesday signed their first-round pick to a 10-year contract -- ample time, the team believes, to show he was a wiser choice than a bruiser from a big-name program.
No other terms were disclosed about the longest contract ever given by the franchise.
A published report put it at $1.5 million a year.
League officials must approve the pact.
Baker, a 6-foot-11-inch, 243-pound forward, was the eighth player selected in the June draft. (AP)


Dr. Barbara Biber Bodansky, 89, Child-Development Expert, Dies
Dr.
Barbara Biber Bodansky, a leading researcher in child psychology and early education for nearly half a century, died on Tuesday at the Jacob Perlow Hospice of Beth Israel Medical Center.
She was 89.
Her family said she had had a long illness.


CHRONICLE
Need a break from worrying about when, where and if John F. Kennedy Jr. and Darryl Hannah will marry?
Here's something else to ponder.
Another Presidential child, AMY CARTER, the 25-year-old daughter of former President Jimmy Carter and Rosalynn Carter, also has wedding plans, and she is being almost as secretive as Mr.
Kennedy.


Fed Fears a Market Bubble If It Lowers Interest Rates
Seeking to forestall pressures to cut interest rates to lift the still-sluggish economy, several Federal Reserve officials have put forward a new -- and surprising -- reason why it would be unwise to lower rates: It could encourage a speculative bubble in stocks and bonds.
In interviews this week, two central bank officials voiced fears that lower rates could cause runaway investment that would push financial markets to unjustifiable levels, setting the stage for an inevitable plunge.


Arafat Says Palestinians Have a 'Friend in the White House'


Ex-Officer Is Sentenced in Bank Robberies
A model New Jersey detective turned armed bank robber was sentenced to 13 years in prison today after a Federal judge told him he had jeopardized many lives during his two-year robbery spree.
"Facing the end of the barrel of a gun is a significant event," the judge, Nicholas H. Politan, said after rejecting an appeal for leniency for Allen R. Schott, a highly regarded officer for 17 years in Howell Township, N.J., until his arrest and resignation in October 1991.


Mr. Cisneros Marches on Vidor
Earlier this week Henry Cisneros, the Secretary of Housing and Urban Development, stormed into the town of Vidor, Tex., took over the local public housing authority and announced that the long-delayed integration of Vidor's subsidized housing would proceed forthwith.
This marks the first time that HUD has seized control of a local housing authority for violating civil rights laws.
Mr.
Cisneros' use of those laws to open up subsidized housing to blacks is deeply gratifying.
Last fall a Federal judge ordered the desegregation of 170 housing projects, some all white and some all black, in 36 counties across east Texas.
The order, which concluded a 12-year-old court case, was unusual in its breadth and was especially dramatic in Vidor, which once was home to a half-dozen branches of the Ku Klux Klan.


G.O.P. Promises Help on Medical Care
Congressional Republicans and the American Medical Association vowed today to cooperate with President Clinton in revamping the nation's health care system, but they said Mr.
Clinton's proposals relied far too much on Government regulation to control costs.
Excitement and anxiety about Mr.
Clinton's plan, to be unveiled on Sept. 22, produced a dozen news conferences around town today.
Even critics of the Clinton plan said they assumed that Congress would, by the end of next year, pass a bill to guarantee medical care for all Americans.


Clubs Are Now Dialing For an Eager Tanana
Call it panic.
Call it professional gamesmanship.
Whatever you call it, contenders are calling the Mets.
One club official said yesterday that two clubs had made serious inquiries regarding Frank Tanana, and that he wouldn't rule out a deal being completed by late last night.
One club is the Phillies.
The other is believed to be the Yankees.


A Good Demand For Guam's Bonds
Guam priced $175 million of general obligation bonds yesterday through underwriters led by Lehman Brothers.
Strong investor demand for the issue allowed managers to reprice some of the issue, lowering yields about 1.5 basis points for a bond due in 2013 and about three basis points for another due in 2018.
A basis point is one-hundredth of a percentage point.
Serial bonds with shorter maturities were offered at a price to yield 3 percent in 1994 to 4.35 percent in 1998, 4.90 percent in 2003 and 5.30 percent in 2008.
For investors in a 31 percent bracket, the taxable equivalent yield would be about 4.35 percent for an issue due in 1994, 6.30 percent in 1998, 7.10 percent in 2003 and 7.68 percent in 2008.


AST TO PAY REDUCED PRICE FOR TANDY PC OPERATIONS
AST Research Inc., a business computer maker, said yesterday that it would pay only $105 million for its recent acquisition of the Tandy Corporation's personal computer manufacturing operations, down from $160 million, the purchase price that AST quoted in July.
The lower price stemmed from an audit that showed AST had acquired fewer assets and assumed more trade accounts payable than originally expected, AST said.


Cyanamid Plans Spinoff In Chemicals
The American Cyanamid Company said yesterday that it would spin off its Cytec Industries chemical unit into a public company and that it would take a $420 million after-tax charge in the third quarter as a result.
American Cyanamid, based in Wayne, N.J., disclosed the charges and details of the spinoff after filing a registration statement with the Securities and Exchange Commission late Tuesday.


Gelb's Successor Picked To Lead Bristol-Myers
Bristol-Myers Squibb announced yesterday that its president, Charles A. Heimbold Jr., would succeed Richard L. Gelb as chief executive, effective next Jan. 1.
Mr.
Gelb will remain active in running the company until he retires as chairman at the May 1995 annual shareholders meeting.
Company policy requires retirement of executives at the first shareholders meeting following their 70th birthday.
Mr.
Gelb will be 70 next June.


For a Less Restrained Era, a Restored 'Streetcar'
More than 40 years after the release of the classic film "A Streetcar Named Desire," the movie is being quietly rereleased with dialogue and sections that had been cut because of their sexual content.
Four minutes of the 1951 film, which was directed by Elia Kazan and starred Vivien Leigh, Marlon Brando and Kim Hunter, has been restored.
The full original version will be released for the first time, executives at Warner Brothers said, at the Nuart Theater in West Los Angeles on Oct. 1.
The studio plans to release this version in New York and possibly other major cities if the revival succeeds in Los Angeles.
The film is to be shown on Oct. 23 at the Hamptons International Film Festival in East Hampton, L.I.


Transactions
Football  National Football League
KANSAS CITY CHIEFS -- Signed Sammy Walker, cornerback.
Re-signed Erick Anderson, linebacker.
Waived Muhammad Oliver and Garry Lewis, cornerbacks.
NEW ENGLAND PATRIOTS -- Re-signed Steve Gordon, center.
NEW ORLEANS SAINTS -- Placed Lorenzo Neal, running back, on injured reserve.
Agreed to terms with Rickie Shaw, offensive tackle.
PHOENIX CARDINALS -- Activated Chuckie Johnson, defensive lineman.
Waived Mark Tucker, offensive lineman, then signed him to the practice squad.
PITTSBURGH STEELERS -- Agreed to terms with Barry Foster, running back, on a contract extension through the 1996 season.


Longtime Friends With Stars In the Eyes
At the University of Pittsburgh, Sean Gilbert and Keith Hamilton were good friends and teammates.
The defensive linemen have tried to stay in touch since leaving college, but both are busy men.
However, Gilbert, with the Los Angeles Rams, and Hamilton, with the Giants, will definitely see each other when they walk onto the field on Sunday at Giants Stadium.
They have both reached the top -- and they have to be amazed at the different way they got there.
Hamilton was supposed to be the blue-chip draft pick.
Going into his final year at Pitt in 1991, he was considered one of the top pass rushers in college, but something happened on the way to becoming a first-rounder.
He was tagged as a problem child, a big-time talent minus the work ethic.
None of these labels were ever really confirmed, but the whispers resulted in Hamilton's slipping to the fourth round of the 1992 draft, where the Giants snapped him up.


REFUGEES ON MOVE IN AZERBAIJAN WAR
On a 90-mile stretch of highway in southwestern Azerbaijan, tens of thousands of people are on the move, fleeing as the war with Armenians over the disputed territory of Nagorno-Karabakh spills ever deeper into Azerbaijan.
The new wave brings the total number of displaced people in this former Soviet republic to almost one million -- more than 10 percent of the population.
Beat-up cars, piled high with rugs, pots and pans, clunk down the road on wheels with no rubber on the rims.
Trucks overloaded with mattresses and bed frames try to pass tractors pulling wagons built to carry tons of cotton, but now filled with clothes, children and ducks.
Heavy construction vehicles like cranes and road graders carry refrigerators and stoves.


Mets Take Time Handing This One Over
Preservation: It is the urgent demand of the moment for the Phillies.
Stay confident.
Hold the club together even as players drop daily.
Don't forfeit opportunity.
Hold on to the National League East.
The Phillies made good on every aspect of the challenge last night.
They overcame a deficit.
They beat the Mets, 6-3, at Shea Stadium.
They stared at the scoreboard and the Montreal score, and they didn't blink.


Rangers Enjoying Brutal Workouts
A group of rookies was leaving this morning's practice session at the Glens Falls Civic Center on the opening day of Rangers camp when a friend asked how it had gone.
"Brutal," was the unanimous one-word answer.


AFTER THE PRIMARY: News Analysis; A Shaky 68 Percent
If Mayor David N. Dinkins's 68 percent showing to win renomination in Tuesday's Democratic primary seems quite respectable at first glance, a closer look at the returns reveals a mixed message.
Although Mr.
Dinkins won overwhelmingly in predominantly black neighborhoods, the relatively small number of blacks who bothered to vote does not bode well for him.
Overall, about half as many voters turned out Tuesday as in the 1989 primary, when Mr.
Dinkins defeated the three-term incumbent, Edward I. Koch.


Corrections
An article and a chart in some copies yesterday about the Westchester County elections misstated the first name of the Supervisor of the Town of Greenburgh.
The Supervisor, who won the Democratic primary, is Paul J. Feiner.


Eye on Olympics, China Pursues Air Safety
Worried that its effort to become the host to the 2000 Olympic Games could be undermined by safety concerns among foreigners who fly on China's airlines, Chinese aviation authorities have announced a major crackdown on safety violations.
For anyone who has flown in China, the new safety drive is much overdue.
China's economic takeoff has produced a boom in air travel -- and accidents -- with the increase in new domestic airlines last year allowed by the breakup of the state air monopoly in 1988.


Islanders Sign Turgeon To a 4-Year Contract
By making Pierre Turgeon one of hockey's 10 highest-paid players today, Don Maloney and the Islanders hope they sent a signal across Long Island and through the National Hockey League, a message that carries beyond the payroll.
In agreeing to pay Turgeon an average of $2.75 million per season on a four-year contract, the Islanders hope they have begun to shed a negative reputation that surrounded the franchise during its Great Recession of the late 1980's and early 1990's.


New Idea on Titanic Sinking Faults Steel as Main Culprit
A new analysis by maritime experts has concluded that the disastrous loss of the Titanic was caused not so much by an iceberg as by structural weaknesses in the ship's steel plates that caused them to fail catastrophically.
A better grade of steel, the analysis concludes, would have reduced the extensive fracturing and allowed the ship to remain afloat or to flood more slowly, perhaps saving many lives if rescue ships had arrived before the sinking.
About 1,500 people died when the Titanic went down in the North Atlantic in 1912 on her maiden voyage.


HARCOURT GENERAL TO SPIN OFF GENERAL CINEMA
Harcourt General Inc. said yesterday that it planned to spin off its General Cinema theater operations in a tax-free distribution to shareholders.
The new entity, which will be named the GC Companies, will operate General Cinema theaters and pursue investment and acquisition opportunities.


AFTER THE PRIMARY: Westchester; Democrats Vow United Front In Effort to Unseat O'Rourke
With occasional flashes of discomfort, the victor and the vanquished in the Westchester County Democratic primary came together today to declare a united front against County Executive Andrew P. O'Rourke, whom they hope to unseat in November.
Richard L. Brodsky, the 47-year-old Assemblyman from Greenburgh who squeezed out a 920-vote victory in a contest in which 32,000 votes were cast, and his defeated opponent, Andrew J. Spano, the County Clerk, embraced each other at what was billed as a Democratic unity rally.
It was held on the steps of the County Office Building, where Mr.
O'Rourke has had his offices for the last 11 years.


School Crime Rises 16%, Prompting Security Moves
Reported crime and other violent incidents rose again last year in New York City public schools, and Schools Chancellor Ramon C. Cortines responded yesterday by expanding the use of metal detectors to more high schools and even some middle schools.
The number of violent incidents reported in the city's public schools rose by more than 16 percent, to 5,761 last year.
That equals one incident for every 173 public school students, though officials said that many of the incidents were concentrated in a small number of troubled schools.


INSIDE
Ford and Union in Labor Pact
Ford and the U.A.W. agreed on a new three-year labor contract, settling health care issues and averting a threatened strike.
Page D1.
Abortion Bill Falters
Legislation to ban most state restrictions on abortion appears to be dead, with Congress squabbling about the breadth of the bill.
Page A18.
New Vision for 42d Street
Manhattan's West 42d Street would be renovated to capitalize on its honky-tonk character under plans announced by state officials.
Page B1.
Many Schools to Open
New York City's Board of Education voted to open schools Monday, even though some buildings and many classrooms will be closed.
Page B1.
Ultrasound Use Questioned
A large new study questions the value of the routine use of prenatal ultrasound screening in low-risk pregnancies.
Page A17.


No Penalties for Black Students Who Took Newspapers at Penn
Trying to wrap up an embarrassing episode involving the University of Pennsylvania's handling of racial tensions and free speech on campus, the university's officials dismissed disciplinary proceedings against nine black students on Tuesday.
The students had confiscated all copies of the student newspaper last spring as a protest against the newspaper's policy and a conservative columnist's writing.


Market Place; Being nearly worthless, Wang shares, of course, sell briskly.
WELL, another company with a well-known name is about to emerge from Chapter 11 bankruptcy, so another favorite Wall Street ritual is under way: Pros are selling the company's virtually worthless stock to foolish retail investors, while the exchanges stand by and let it happen.
The company, Wang Laboratories, the one-time giant maker of computers, is expected to emerge next week from more than a year of reorganization as a smaller, humbler company.


Wang Labs Is All Set To Make Another Try
Battered, bruised and humbled, Wang Laboratories Inc. is about to get something rare in the high-technology wars: a second chance.
The once mighty computer giant, which at its zenith in 1988 had sales of nearly $3 billion, 32,000 employees and competed head to head with I.B.M. in minicomputers and word-processing systems, hopes to emerge from bankruptcy protection the week of Sept. 20 after more than a year of operating under Chapter 11.
The new, smaller Wang, having little in common with its past except its name, may just surprise a few in the industry who wrote it off for dead.


Wellco
The stock of Wellco Enterprises rose more than 30 percent yesterday after the maker of military boots declared a $6 cash dividend on Tuesday.
A Wellco spokesman said the company found it had extra money, studied various uses and decided that the best use was to turn over part of it to shareholders in the form of the special dividend.


Economic Scene; Judging Lorenzo, air regulators are where they didn't want to be.
IS Frank Lorenzo, devil to organized labor and hero to the budget traveler, fit to run an airline?
The legal battle to certify ATX, Mr.
Lorenzo's carrier modeled on the successful Southwest Airlines, was expected to be fought over the issue of whether previous bankruptcies and a blemished aircraft maintenance record should keep the Houston entrepreneur's planes on the ground.
But the drama abruptly veered toward farce last week, when a Federal administrative law judge decided he did not like the tactics or manners of Mr.
Lorenzo and his lawyers and recommended that the former boss of Continental and Eastern airlines be sent packing.
Now the onus rests firmly on the Department of Transportation, which must decide whether Congress really, truly meant to deregulate the market for air transportation.


Argentina Doesn't Let Bad News Get Out; For Press Freedom
To the Editor:
"Peronist Backsliding" (editorial, Sept. 4) suggests that President Carlos Menem "could clarify his personal commitment for a free and unintimidated press and insist that criminal attacks against journalists and other critics be fully prosecuted."


Others Call It an Abyss, but Giants Say It's Just Second Place
Peter Magowan, the grocery store magnate who bought the Giants, is back to worrying about paper versus plastic.
That's because Giants versus Braves is practically over.
Atlanta is on the up escalator, San Francisco is on the down escalator, and it seems only mechanical failure can rescue this National League West race.
It is either Barry Bonds's fault for being poisoned by Kryptonite or the Cubs' fault for not allowing the Braves to realign to the East last winter, but the Bay Area already expects the worst: second place.


Dehere Is Now Following In Secretariat's Footsteps
The road to the Breeders' Cup turned into Belmont Park yesterday when 32 of the prize horses in the country were entered in Saturday's four Grade I stakes that will give New York its busiest and best day of racing this year.
And for an encore, six of the prime fillies in the land will run the next day in the Ruffian Handicap, which could be the most glamorous race of all.
Paseana, Bertrando, Missionary Ridge and Bien Bien were flown into town from California this week.
Serrant was flying in from France, and Montbrook from Maryland.
And the superstar of the show, the undefeated 2-year-old colt Dehere, was being primed at his home base at Monmouth Park in New Jersey for the fifth race in his drive toward one and possibly two championships.


Sports of The Times; The Heart Of the Yankee Matter
WHENEVER George Steinbrenner is around the Yankees, whether at Yankee Stadium or on a road trip, his employees are on alert.
"Hitler is coming," one employee likes to say.


GENERAL DYNAMICS DECLARES ANOTHER SPECIAL DIVIDEND
The General Dynamics Corporation declared a special dividend yesterday of $12 a share, saying it was the last in a series of payouts that have put $3 billion in the hands of shareholders and lenders since 1991.
The military contractor also said it would increase its regular quarterly dividend to 60 cents a share from 40 cents.
After the announcement, shares of General Dynamics rose $2.875, closing at $99.50 on the New York Stock Exchange.


60's Radical, Linked to a Killing, Surrenders After Hiding 23 Years
Twenty-three years after going underground as an anti-war radical wanted for bank robbery and the murder of a Boston police officer, Katherine Ann Power surrendered to the police here today.
One of the last of a generation of fugitive student revolutionaries opposed to the Vietnam War, Ms.
Power, 44, pleaded guilty in Superior Court today to charges of manslaughter and armed robbery dating back to 1970, when she was a senior at Brandeis University.


Court in Cairo Condemns Two Militants to Death
A military court sentenced two of eight Muslim militants today to hang for trying to assassinate an army general.
The sentence is part of a Government campaign to cripple the Islamic fundamentalist movement, the military prosecution said.
The court sentenced four men to life in prison, and two others were acquitted, a spokesman for the military courts, Mustafa Ismail, said.
The two given the death penalty are in custody, and three of those with life terms are fugitives.


HONEYWELL SETTLES AUTOFOCUS PATENT SUIT AGAINST FUJI
Honeywell Inc. said yesterday that it had settled a patent infringement suit against Fuji Photo Film, heading off a civil trial scheduled for October.
Honeywell said it had agreed to drop the suit against the Fuji Photo Film Company of Japan and its United States subsidiary, Fuji Photo Film U.S.A.
Inc., in exchange for payment of an undisclosed amount, which would be included in Honeywell's third-quarter results.


Living the Good Life, Finally
Even on a bad day, when he comes in to relieve for the White Sox and the sky collapses, when he gives up two runs on two hits and a walk in two-thirds of an inning and then is removed from the premises, even on such days as the one that occurred recently in Boston, Jeff Schwarz, the 29-year-old rookie, can, if not actually smile, at least appreciate that heaven, too, can have its down moments.
It has taken him too long to get to the big leagues not to have perspective, even when being knocked about in the heat of a pennant race.
It took him 11 years in the minor leagues -- "11 years and two weeks," he will correct you -- before he reached the big leagues.


Review/Pop; John Zorn Makes Radical Turn Chic
In the mid-1980's, the downtown composer John Zorn embarked on a series of collages, made in the studio, that codified his quick-cut, improvisational approach.
On one, "The Big Gundown," he rewrote the music of the film composer Ennio Morricone, but on two others, "Godard," from 1985, and "Spillane," from 1986, Mr.
Zorn constructed pieces out of scraps and shards of musical styles, clearly meaning to evoke the emotional textures of Godard's films and the writing of Mickey Spillane.
Nearly 10 years later, as part of a month of Mr.
Zorn's music at the Knitting Factory, the "Godard" and "Spillane" pieces have re-emerged.
Although they seemed radical when they first appeared, they don't now: Mr.
Zorn's practice is now part of the common vocabulary.
The compositions just sound good, and it is easier with hindsight to see why the works radiate pleasure.


Bosnian Troops Advance Against Croats in Offensive Near Mostar
Bosnian Government forces advanced in heavy fighting against Croatian units along a new front about 20 miles northwest of the battered city of Mostar today, Sarajevo radio reported.
The offensive by the Muslim-dominated Bosnian Army appeared to be an attempt to take high ground from which Croatian artillery has been able to pound the main highway linking Mostar with Muslim-controlled central Bosnia.
Muslim forces control part of Mostar, but so long as the Croatian artillery commands the road to Jablanica the Mostar Muslims are virtually cut off.


ON LOCATION WITH: Brenda Laurel; Jung in Motion, Virtually
IT is not immediately easy to fathom what Brenda Laurel is trying to do on a mountain above this resort town.
Her goal is to create a "virtual environment for two." She wants to take audio and video recordings of this landscape and put them into a computer at the Banff Center for the Arts, so that two people can jointly experience the Canadian Rockies without the inconvenience of going outdoors.
All they have to do is put on some gloves, magnetic coils and helmets tethered to the computer.
It will monitor their movements as they swivel their heads and walk around the room, adjusting the sights and sounds inside the helmets to simulate a real walk in the mountains -- just the sort of experience that virtual-reality devotees have been promising for years.


Rejectionists Chart Uncertain Course
In the two weeks since the news broke that the P.L.O. and the Israelis were negotiating a peace agreement, the Palestinian refugee camps and souks of Damascus have become a caldron of intrigue and argument.
Here, among the narrow streets where the Palestinian movement's most militant opposition groups maintain their offices, the question of the moment is: what can or should be done to sabotage the deal wrought by Yasir Arafat and Israel?


2 Small Banks Cut Prime to 5 3/4%; Others Stay at 6%
The Southwest Bank of St.
Louis and the Central Fidelity Bank of Richmond cut their prime rates yesterday to 5 3/4 percent from 6 percent, but the moves were not followed by larger banks.
Executives of some big New York banks indicated that they had no immediate plans to cut their prime rates.


Naval Academy Pushing Inquiry About Cheating
In what is emerging as one of the largest cheating scandals ever at the United States Naval Academy, Navy investigators suspect that at least 125 midshipmen had advance knowledge about a final exam given last December.
Some midshipmen merely received a computer message urging them to study a particular question on a previous year's test.
But others obtained a copy of the final exam for Electrical Engineering 311, a notoriously difficult course required for all third-year students, Navy officials said.


Video Violence: It's Hot! It's Mortal! It's Kombat!; Teen-Agers Eagerly Await Electronic Carnage While Adults Debate Message Being Sent
In the history books, Monday will go down as the moment when bitter enemies allowed the yearning for peace to triumph over their enduring enmity.
But for millions of aficionados of video games, it was something more: "Mortal Monday," the breathlessly awaited moment when a bloody but wildly popular arcade game came into American homes.
"I only wish it could have been Friday so I could have played it all weekend," said Michael Morgan, 15, a 10th-grade student from Oyster Bay, L.I., who spent almost all his vacation money on the arcade version of the game.
"There's nothing close. It's the best video game I've ever played."


Reynolds Cutbacks May Signal Wide Job Loss in Tobacco
The R. J. Reynolds Tobacco Company's announcement that it would cut 1,000 workers is just the beginning of job cuts for an industry where price wars have eroded profits and new legislation threatens to narrow earnings further, analysts said yesterday.
"This was expected, and I definitely think there will be more cuts," said Howard Penney, an analyst for Morgan Stanley.
"As the price structure of domestic tobacco has changed, companies need to get their cost structure commensurate as soon as possible."


Effort Starts at U.N. to Update Mideast Resolutions
Egypt, Russia and the United States have agreed to work with Israel to eliminate, revise or defer many resolutions on Middle East affairs that the United Nations General Assembly has adopted.
The countries believe that the resolutions have been rendered irrelevant by the agreements Israel signed this week with the Palestine Liberation Organization and Jordan, diplomats said.


William H. Osborn Jr.; Investment Banker, 72
William H. Osborn Jr., a retired investment banker and consultant with Lehman Brothers, died yesterday at his home in Locust Valley, N.Y.
He was 72.
His family said the cause was pancreatic cancer.


Let's Decriminalize Big-Time College Sports; Back to Amateurism
To the Editor:
"Cleaning Up College Football" (editorial, Aug. 29) maintains that student athletes should receive not just tuition, room and board, books and $2,400 annually in spending money (about $50 a week -- more than all but the most extravagant college students spend on clothing, entertainment and other nonacademic pursuits), but also compensation to cover transportation back home and other education-related expenses.


Let's Decriminalize Big-Time College Sports; Profits for Athletics
To the Editor:
"Cleaning Up College Football" (editorial, Aug. 29) repeats a common canard when it says, "Athletes make millions for their schools." To the extent that the athletic departments in universities "make millions," the funds are retained for the benefit of the athletic departments.
This, at least, is our experience at the University of Illinois.
None of the revenue of "our" teams is made available in any way to cover the real costs or budgetary needs of the university, except for costs incurred in the operation of the athletic teams.


Correction: Iva Patcevitch
A picture yesterday with an obituary of Iva Sergei Voidato Patcevitch, a retired chairman of Conde Nast Publications, was published in error.
It showed Marcel A. Palmaro, who died in 1969.
Mr.
Patcevitch is shown above. (Jean Raeburn, 1959)


Guarded Optimism for Peace Ushers In Jewish New Year
Letty Cottin Pogrebin, a writer, came back to Manhattan from the historic handshake in Washington with a feeling of euphoria, ushering in the Jewish New Year last night with chicken soup (her mother's recipe), brisket and a palpable -- though guarded -- sense of hope.
"I who love language have been reduced to the most ordinary cliches," said Ms.
Pogrebin, chairwoman of Americans for Peace Now, a Zionist advocacy group.
"So here goes: I never thought I'd live to see the day. I couldn't believe my eyes. It's a dream come true."


Review/Dance; Decoding the Moves, but With a Comic Approach
Never mind Conan, Dave and Jay.
The Twyla Tharp show, which has the advantage of playing live at City Center for the next two weeks, is centered around a compere with built-in star power who knows how to connect immediately with her public.
Complete with stand-up comic routine that masqueraded as show-and-tell, audience participation that was highly effective in a variety of ways, and some serious dancing in tights and T-shirts by Miss Tharp and her new 16-member troupe, the choreographer's latest venture opened on Tuesday night with good-humored pizazz.


People
*
Janice Grossman, vice president and group publisher of Seventeen, Soap Opera Digest and Soap Opera Weekly at the K-III Magazine Corp., New York, was named to handle the additional new responsibilities of managing the group sales function for all seven of the company's magazines.


Iranian Leader Denounces Peace Pact
The Iranian President, Hashemi Rafsanjani, has denounced the accords between the P.L.O. and Israel as "the most degrading times for the Islamic holy war in Palestine" and predicted that they will fail to yield peace.
"The Palestinian problem cannot be solved by several people signing an agreement in the White House," Mr.
Rafsanjani said on Tuesday of the formal ceremony in Washington on Monday.


No Good Nannies? Find a Good Family
IN an epic search for the perfect nanny, one California mother hired and dismissed 19 nannies in one year.
Many other working parents obsess nearly as much over what sometimes seems an impossible task: to find a loving and responsible person to care for their children.
But it turns out that nannies, too, struggle to find the families of their dreams.


Apartheid's End Transforms Beauty Show
In mid-July two African National Congress organizers sent a secret memo to Cyril Ramaphosa, the congress's secretary general, telling him of "a major breakthrough for the oppressed masses of our people."
The subject of the document was the Miss South Africa contest.
The congress organizers reported that they had confronted sponsors of the competition with complaints that 9 of the 12 finalists were white.
After "intensive negotiations," the memo said, they had extracted promises of a "training fund" to groom future nonwhite beauty pageant contestants.


A Good Year for Canandaigua


Hailing Health Plan but Denouncing Trade Pact, Big Labor Is Heard Again
After years of falling membership and political influence, organized labor has emerged as a force behind both the drive to stop President Clinton's proposed trade agreement with Mexico and Canada and the campaign to enact his overhaul of the health care system.
One reason for the new clout of the unions, which have long been irrelevant to the debates over such national issues, is a serendipitous convergence of their agenda with the agendas of many other interest groups, in particular advocates for the poor and the environment.
Another is a friend in the White House who, despite the differences over trade, has been granting labor easier access and more of its wishes than any President since Lyndon B. Johnson.


Essay; Fuzzy, Was He?
President Clinton rises to a needling and is prepared to needle back.
In our interview on Sunday, he was asked if -- in what he had called his "terrific" phone call to King Fahd of Saudi Arabia -- he had urged an end to the anti-Israeli boycott.
"I didn't talk to him about it . . . but I favor an end to the boycott."


The Humanitarian Illusion
Gen.
Mohammed Farah Aidid again showed he would stop at nothing when he sent women and children amid his henchmen into Mogadishu streets to attack members of the United Nations force last week.
The U.N. troops, faced with a physical threat that overrode complex moral considerations, fired back, killing perhaps 100 civilians and moving the troubled U.N. intervention in Somalia to the brink of disaster.
And yesterday Somali gunmen shot and killed two Italian soldiers.


Jules Ritholz, 68, Dies; New York Tax Lawyer
Jules Ritholz, a nationally known tax lawyer, died yesterday at Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center in Manhattan.
He was 68.
The cause was lung cancer.


U.N. Votes Embargo Against Angolan Rebel
The United Nations Security Council voted unanimously today to cut off supplies of arms and fuel to Angola's Unita rebel group unless its leader, Jonas Savimbi, agrees to a new cease-fire and renewed peace talks within the next 10 days.
The Council agreed to delay the sanctions after United Nations Secretary General Boutros Boutros-Ghali reported that he might be able to persuade Unita's leader to accept another cease-fire and restart the peace negotiations after holding several telephone conversations with him.


Saberhagen Will Undergo Elbow Surgery
The announcement was not a total shock.
How major a blow it will ultimately be for the Mets won't be determined for months.
Bret Saberhagen, who has endured controversy, failure and an odd and endless assortment of physical calamity, will undergo elbow surgery later this month.
The club, not pretending that surgery on a pitcher is ever to be treated lightly, said it was virtually certain Saberhagen would be ready for the start of spring training.


U.S. AND ISRAEL ASK SYRIANS TO SILENCE ARAFAT OPPONENTS
Israel and the United States called on the President of Syria today to silence Palestinians in Damascus who are attacking the peace accord between Israel and the Palestine Liberation Organization.
President Clinton telephoned the Syrian President, Hafez al-Assad, for the second time in six days, Administration officials said, not only to assure him that Washington was committed to fostering Syrian-Israeli negotiations over the Golan Heights, but also to ask him to rein in the Palestinian hard-liners in Damascus, who are opposed to Yasir Arafat, the P.L.O. chairman.


400 SIKORSKY AIRCRAFT WORKERS CHOOSE BUYOUTS
About 400 white-collar workers at Sikorsky Aircraft have opted for cash and other incentives to quit or retire early in company programs intended to avoid layoffs.
Sikorsky, a division of the United Technologies Corporation, had presented buyout offers to about 5,200 workers, nearly half of Sikorsky's work force of 11,500.
The offer expired on Tuesday.
The workers who made the deadline will be notified within the next week if they may take the buyout, company officials said. (AP)


Abortion-Rights Measure Gives Way to Other Priorities in Congress
Legislation to prohibit most state restrictions on abortion appears to be dead for at least this year and perhaps longer.
The measure, known as the Freedom of Choice Act and once the prime legislative goal of people who support the right to an abortion, has lost momentum after a determined assault by opponents.


Georgia to Review Ice Cream Thief's Prison Term
The Georgia State Board of Pardons and Paroles said today that it would review the three-year prison sentence imposed by a rural judge on a black youth for a burglary in July which a few ice cream bars were stolen.
The case, which has attracted national attention, reached the board more quickly than it ordinarily would have after the judge, Andrew Whalen of the four-county Griffin Circuit Court, canceled his own plan to reconsider his sentence at a hearing next month and asked the state board to step in.


Wells Rich Seeks Successor to Officer
Wells Rich Greene BDDP Advertising/New York said yesterday that it would seek a successor to Mary Moore, the vice chairman and chief creative officer for the last five years.
David Sklaver, the president, said in a statement that after Ms.
Moore had recently "expressed her interest in changing her role at the agency," it was decided that she would move "into a new role in the agency working on new business." The statement, however, did not describe her new position, title or duties.


Review/Pop; Midler, Closer to the Mainstream But Still Creating Quite a Splash
Wisecracking, jiggling her flesh and whooping it up in a voice that has never sounded stronger, Bette Midler retook New York on Tuesday evening.
The entertainer made her entrance at Radio City Music Hall, where she is to perform 30 shows through Oct. 23, floating over the stage inside a cardboard cloud.
Its fleeces quickly parted to reveal a sun whose golden rays were dimmed by the glare of the star's ferociously mischievous grin.


Bartle Bogle Lands Hugo Boss Account
Hugo Boss A.G., the German men's apparel company, said yesterday that it had selected Bartle Bogle Hegarty in London to handle its worldwide account, which had been at Gurgen Sautter Consulting in Metzingen, Germany, for more than a decade.
Billings were estimated at $10 million.
Bartle Bogle was awarded the account after a three-month review in which the other participants were not disclosed.


CHRONICLE
"It's like a dream," said MICHEL KLEIN, speaking from the Guy Laroche salon in Paris yesterday.
The house of Laroche is to announce today that Mr.
Klein, who is 35 and who has run his own ready-to-wear company in Paris for 15 years, will take over the design of its couture collection.
His first collection will be shown in January 1994, for spring.
He replaces Angelo Tarlazzi, who will continue to produce his own ready-to-wear collection for Laroche.
"I just visited the workrooms and was amazed at their technique," Mr.
Klein said.
"I want to use that technique, but to make clothes that are relevant to modern life. Couture generally emphasizes clothes for huge parties, but I want to make styles for other parts of a woman's life. If a man goes to a tailor for a suit, he wears it all the time."


PARENT &amp; CHILD
FOR some children it is obvious, even by the time they're in kindergarten, that they'll never play tennis on the center court at Wimbledon or take the field at Yankee Stadium.
Child-development professionals describe these children as having difficulties with gross and fine-motor skills.
But on the playground, their classmates simply refer to them as klutzes.
"Being a klutz may not seem very important when you're in the first grade, but it has profound implications by the time a child is an adolescent," said Dr.
Jane Clark, an associate professor of kinesiology at the University of Maryland at College Park. (Kinesiology is the study of human muscle movement.)


Let's Decriminalize Big-Time College Sports
To the Editor:
Nothing could be more naive than the conclusion of your Aug. 29 editorial on college football, which declares "simple reforms could make it financially clean and academically respectable as well as entertaining." Endless reforms, simple and complicated, have been adopted by the National Collegiate Athletic Association for decades.
Nevertheless, a 1989 study of intercollegiate athletics recommends 134 more nonredundant changes -- some clearly utopian -- not to reach perfection, but merely to eliminate immorality and corruption.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.12
3.00
4.48
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
2.95
2.97
2.88
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.05
3.07
2.90
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
4.93
4.98
5.88
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
5.97
5.97
7.32
TELEPHONE BONDS
6.96
7.00
8.40
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
5.48
5.45
6.25
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Puerto Rico Sells $700 Million Issue
Puerto Rico sold $700 million of tax and revenue anticipation notes yesterday through underwriters led by Donaldson, Lufkin &amp; Jenrette.
The notes, with a maturity date of July 29, 1994, are, like other Puerto Rico issues, exempt from Federal and state taxes.
The issue was given a 3 percent coupon and priced at a premium to yield 2.70 percent.
For investors in a 31 percent tax bracket, the taxable bond equivalent yield would be about 3.91 percent.


Edwin Emery, 79, Dies; Author on Journalism
Edwin Emery, a journalism professor at the University of Minnesota and the author of books on the news media, died yesterday at Midwest Community Hospice in Minneapolis.
He was 79 and lived in Minneapolis.
The cause was leukemia, the hospice said.


AFTER THE PRIMARY: New York State; Albany Vote: Death Knell For Machine
Albany's fabled Democratic machine, which ruled New York's capital city through a combination of patronage and personality for 72 years, was declared dead today after the party's designated candidate lost Tuesday's mayoral primary.
Gerald Jennings, an insurgent Alderman, narrowly defeated Harold L. Joyce, who had resigned as the county Democratic chairman to run for mayor.
"The days of fear are over," Mr.
Jennings declared at his victory party Tuesday night.
"The sun is shining on this city and on this Democratic Party."


Rules Have Changed On Election Spending
To the Editor:
Re "August Doledrums" (editorial, Sept. 3), on the civil penalty levied against my 1988 Presidential campaign committee by the Federal Election Commission:


U.S. Will Not Retry Garcia in Extortion
Five months after a Federal appeals court dismissed extortion charges against former Congressman Robert Garcia of the Bronx, prosecutors announced yesterday that they would not retry the case.
Mary Jo White, the United States Attorney in Manhattan, said she would also abandon efforts to retry Mr.
Garcia's wife, Jane Lee Garcia, and E. Robert Wallach, the former Wedtech Corporation lawyer whose trial on charges of influence-peddling ended in a deadlocked jury.


Choreographing Times Sq. Into 21st Century
Borrowing a dab of "Guys and Dolls" and a dash of "Blade Runner," and bowing to both Florenz Ziegfeld and Jane Jacobs, state and city officials yesterday presented their vision of West 42d Street for the rest of the century: jumbled, kinetic, dazzling and loud.
This vision comes in the form of guidelines that are to shape the interim redevelopment of four sites at the crossroads of Broadway and Seventh Avenue.
Office towers were once to have been built on those parcels.
But that plan, hatched in the early 1980's, was postponed indefinitely last year when it became clear that Manhattan's battered real-estate market could not sustain such construction.


The Set Makes The Host
EACH night, when Conan O'Brien, David Letterman, Arsenio Hall, Chevy Chase and Jay Leno go on the air, they peer at their late-night audiences from sets that are evanescent homes.
Just as each man has his own personality, so, too, does each set.
"The set is a land that is nowhere, because there's no basic script to tie the show to," said Kathleen Ankers, who has been Mr.
Letterman's set designer for 11 years.


AFTER THE PRIMARY: Comptroller; Hazy and Anxious, Holtzman Stands and Pleads
"Any other questions?" Comptroller Elizabeth Holtzman asked plaintively last evening at the end of a grueling news conference devoted to defending her own integrity and resuscitating her badly wounded candidacy for re-election.
She peered about in an anxious sweep of a squad of 10 television cameras, as if desperate to keep talking before an inert jury about her record, her 20 years in office, and her hopes to not see all this end on Sept. 28, when she faces the voters once more.


Board Votes To Reopen All Schools
Deciding that a chaotic school opening was better than further delay, the Board of Education yesterday voted unanimously to open schools on Monday, embracing the recommendation of the new Chancellor and acknowledging that thousands of students would encounter closed classrooms and shortened schedules.
Officials still had not figured out how many classrooms or entire schools would be shut down.
But they estimated that at least 20 school buildings, including seven regular high schools and seven alternative schools, would remain completely closed for weeks while cleanup crews remove asbestos.
In hundreds of other buildings, classrooms containing exposed asbestos and those that are uninspected will remain closed.


Corrections
A picture yesterday with an obituary of Iva Sergei Voidato Patcevitch, a retired chairman of Conde Nast Publications, was published in error.
It showed Marcel A. Palmaro, Monaco's consul general in the United States, who died in 1969.
A picture of Mr.
Patcevitch appears today on page B10.


U.A.W and Ford Agree on New Contract
The United Automobile Workers union reached a tentative agreement late tonight with the Ford Motor Company on a new three-year labor contract, successfully fighting off the company's efforts to force workers to pay more out of their own pockets for health care.
The agreement, which came nearly 24 hours after the old contract expired, was announced after a round-the-clock negotiating session.
The union had authorized a strike but chose to continue negotiating after the contract expired.


AFTER THE PRIMARY: Nassau; Cameras, Over Here! Gulotta Forced to Share His Moment in Lights
It was 12:30 P.M., and Thomas S. Gulotta, the Republican Nassau County Executive who is running for re-election, was more than an hour late to the news conference where he would deliver his opening salvo in the campaign.
The apparent reason for the delay was pacing the press room in the County Supreme Court building, barely able to contain his delight at what appeared to be Mr.
Gulotta's discomfort.
Benjamin L. Zwirn, the Democratic nominee and a politican known for his take-no-prisoners approach to campaigning, had decided to crash Mr.
Gulotta's event in a move that may well typify the harsh confrontations expected in the six weeks before the general election.
D'Amato's Back Yard
"Tom Gulotta has never been pushed in an election since the day he was anointed, and this year is going to be different," Mr.
Zwirn said in an interview later in the day.
"We're going against the most powerful political machine known to man since the Soviet Union crumpled, and today we demonstrated that we're not afraid."


FRENCH FARMERS STAGE A PROTEST
French farmers disrupted traffic in and around Paris today as a warning of the trouble that may lie ahead if the French Government does not stand firm in its opposition to a United States-European Community agreement to reduce subsidies for European agriculture.
Just five days before a crucial meeting of European foreign and agriculture ministers in Brussels, France warned again today that it was ready to veto the accord if its European Community partners did not agree to a "clear, clean decision to reopen negotiations with the Americans."


VOLKSWAGEN BUYS PLANT FROM SPANISH SUBSIDIARY
Volkswagen A.G. said it had acquired a factory and the finance unit of its Spanish subsidiary, SEAT, for 120 billion pesetas, or $931 million.
The sale of the plant in Pamplona, Spain, and the Fiseat finance unit to the German parent is "the first step toward the successful rationalization of SEAT," Volkswagen said in a statement.
SEAT's losses are expected to reach 100 billion pesetas this year, Volkswagen said.
SEAT's difficulties have been attributed to high investment costs, the 30 percent devaluation of the peseta against the mark, high start-up costs for new models and declining sales in Europe.(Bloomberg Business News)


Yankees Heading Homeward, Their Heads Bowed
Jim Abbott stared down at the mound for what seemed like forever, shocked and stunned by what had happened.
Buck Showalter was approaching from the left, but Abbott peered at the dirt and never looked at his manager.
Abbott handed him the ball, walked toward the dugout and gazed at the gray sky.
He closed his eyes.
He cringed.
He was not alone in his frustration.
The Yankees' important nine-game road trip screeched to a painful conclusion for them today after Abbott was bounced before the second inning even ended.
He did not throw strikes.
He did not obtain elusive third outs.
He did not give the Yankees a chance to win when they desperately needed it and the last-place Brewers exploited Abbott and every other pitcher in a gray uniform in a 15-5 victory at County Stadium.


DISNEY'S STOCK FALLS ON THEME PARK ATTENDANCE FEARS
Shares of the Walt Disney Company fell yesterday on fears that its theme park attendance in the fourth quarter would fall far short of prior-year figures, analysts said.
Disney stock fell $1.50, to $39.125, on the New York Stock Exchange.
Some analysts said the recent violent deaths of several tourists in Florida might be making some investors edgy about the stock.
Disney said security was a top priority at its theme parks.
Analysts also said that last year's park attendance figures were extremely strong, largely because of heavily discounted air fares that are not available this year.(Reuters)


Inquiry Finds 'Gross Negligence' By Holtzman in Bank Loan Deal
A city investigation has found that Comptroller Elizabeth Holtzman showed "gross negligence" in taking a $450,000 campaign loan from a bank and then approving the bank's selection as an underwriter of New York City bonds.
The report by the Department of Investigation also questioned Ms.
Holtzman's honesty, saying the evidence strongly suggests that she knew the bank was seeking city business despite her repeated claims that she was not aware of its desire to attain a higher status in the group of underwriters for city bonds.


Faced by Big Ghost, Fregosi Holds Ground
There they go again, with all those negative vibes.
And who should be surprised.
After all, it's Philadelphia, the City of Brotherly Cynicism; it's a pennant race and it's the Phillies -- an incredibly incendiary combination.


Talent Flows From Every Fingertip
If the first two games are any indication, it looks as if the Jets' offense will be predicated on spreading the work and glory around.
All four of quarterback Boomer Esiason's touchdown passes have been to different receivers and the two in the Jets' victory against Miami went to players who aren't even starters.


CHRONICLE
For the baseball fan who has everything: WHITEY FORD, the Hall of Fame New York Yankees pitcher is to go on the Home Shopping Network tonight from 10 to 11 to sell -- or try to sell -- 1,941 bats signed by his 1950 teammate JOE DIMAGGIO.
The price? $4,000 a bat.
The significance of the the number "1941"?
That was the year of Mr.
DiMaggio's 56-game hitting streak.
Asked why he had agreed to do the stint, which will be broadcast from Mickey Mantle's restaurant on Central Park South, Mr.
Ford said yesterday: "They were looking for a fellow who played with Joe, and there are not many of us left around. So I said, 'Fine.' I've done other things for the Home Shopping Network."


Garden Q.&amp; A.
Faltering Montauk Daisies
Q.
When the Montauk daisies I love so much tripled in size, I was advised to cut them in half.
Why are they now yellowing even with good sun and regular watering? -- Linda A. Silverstein, Great Neck, L.I.


Challenge to Will Delays Nureyev Estate Sale
The two-part sale at Christie's of Rudolf Nureyev's paintings, sculpture, furniture, textiles and costumes, which the auction house estimated would bring $5 million to $7 million, has been postponed a year, Christie's announced yesterday.
The delay results from a challenge to the dancer's will that has been filed by Nureyev's sister and niece, who live in Paris.
The auctions had been scheduled to take place at Christie's in London on Dec. 17 and 18 and in Manhattan on Jan. 19 and 20.
Christie's said Nureyev family members have been questioning what will be sold and what will be included in an exhibition that is to open in Paris in the next year.
In addition to the foundations Nureyev started, he wanted a museum in his memory.
What should go into such a museum is apparently also a matter of contention.


Accounts
*
Pfizer Animal Health,New York, to Earle Palmer Brown, New York, as the first agency to handle integrated marketing for the Poultry Teams, a new group of marketing and technical service employees who sell poultry drugs.
Billings were not disclosed.


METRO DIGEST
A NEW YEAR LIKE FEW OTHERS
Across New York and the country, American Jews began their 10-day observance of the High Holy Days charged with mixed emotions after a historic week in which Israel and the Palestine Liberation Organization signed an agreement that raised the possibility of peace in the Middle East.
A1.
NEW YORK CITY  AFTER THE PRIMARY: RALLYING ROUND THE MAYOR
Bracing for the political fight of his career, Mayor David N. Dinkins used the noontide after his easy renomination to wrap himself in the support of top Democratic politicians at a pep rally, even as his Republican-Liberal rival, Rudolph W. Giuliani, pulled hard for the cover of crossover Democratic voters he will need to win.
A1.


Executive Moving To BBDO in West
David Lubars, a partner, executive vice president and executive creative director at Leonard Monahan Lubars &amp; Kelly in Providence, R.I., said yesterday that he would leave to join BBDO Los Angeles in the new position of executive vice president and executive creative director, effective in early November.
Mr.
Lubars, 34, joined Leonard Monahan in 1982 when it was known as Leonard Monahan Saabye.
He left in 1985 to join Chiat/Day in Venice, Calif., then rejoined Leonard Monahan in 1988.


STUDY FINDS WASTE IN ULTRASOUND USE
The routine use of prenatal ultrasound screening does not improve the outcome of pregnancies for low-risk women, according to the results of a study of 15,530 low-risk pregnancies, the largest ever conducted on prenatal ultrasound screening.
The authors of the study said the results indicated that ultrasound should be used more selectively.
The six-year, $7 million study found the same rate of early deliveries and low-weight babies among women who received routine ultrasound at 15 to 22 weeks gestation and again at 31 to 35 weeks and women who received no ultrasound screening.
The study also showed the same rate of fetal defects at birth, totaling 5 percent for both groups.
All the women in the study had no indications of complications at the beginning of their pregnancies.


JUDGE CLEARS FEES OF $4.8 MILLION IN MACY CASE
The lawyers, accountants and financial advisers who are steering R. H. Macy &amp; Company through bankruptcy court won approval yesterday to be paid $4.8 million in fees for the three months ended July.
"For this period, I will not rock the boat, and I will approve the application with a 5 precent holdback," United States Bankruptcy Judge Burton R. Lifland said.


Canandaigua to Acquire Vintners
The Canandaigua Wine Company said today that it had agreed to buy the Vintners International Company, the fifth-largest wine producer in the United States.
The acquisition of Vintners, based in Gonzales, Calif., will make the New York-based Canandaigua the nation's second-largest winery, after the giant E. &amp; J. Gallo Winery of Modesto, Calif.
Vintners' brands include Taylor and Paul Masson.


In Rabies Spread, Veterinarians Put Profits Before Public Safety
To the Editor:
"Rabies Shots Become a Public Health Issue," a letter from me you published May 14, 1991, warned that rabies was making a serious move north and would be threatening those of us in the New York City area for the first time in many years.
I proposed that the first thing we could do to prevent this horrible disease from sending New Yorkers to a slow, painful and certain death was to stop veterinarians from charging roughly 75 times as much for administering a rabies shot to a pet dog or cat as the shot costs them.


Concert Hall Aims for Hartford's Revival
In yet another effort to make over Hartford into a regional center for night life and entertainment, Gov.
Lowell P. Weicker Jr. unveiled plans today for a 30,000-seat indoor-outdoor concert amphitheater to be built on the edge of the city's impoverished North End.
Mr.
Weicker said that, barring snags, ground would be broken this fall for the $20 million project, a joint venture between the state and two private developers.
It is to be finished, he said, in time for next summer's pop and rock concert tours, many of which have skipped Connecticut for lack of a place to perform.


Parking Rules
Because of Rosh ha-Shanah, alternate-side parking rules are suspended in New York City today and tomorrow.
Next week, alternate-side parking rules will be suspended on Sept. 25 for Yom Kippur.
Other regulations remain in effect.


Paintings by Vermeer and Goya Are Recovered 7 Years After Theft
Two extraordinary paintings, a Vermeer and a Goya, have been recovered by the police in Belgium seven years after they were stolen from a private collection in Ireland.
The paintings, Vermeer's "Lady Writing a Letter With Her Maid" and Goya's "Portrait of Dona Antonia Zarate," were among the most valuable works of art to have disappeared into the hands of thieves in recent years.


Stocks Advance on Triple-Witching's Spell
The stock market sank under steep losses early in the session yesterday and then recovered on program buying associated with tomorrow's "triple witching" expiration of options and futures contracts.
Triple-witching days -- the simultaneous expiration of stock options, stock index futures and stock index options -- normally occur on the third Friday of each month.
Yesterday, however, traders planning to be absent for the Jewish Rosh ha-Shanah holiday today apparently began limiting their exposure in advance, bringing volatility to the day's trading.


Arguments Start in Case of Garroted Youth
The death of Robert A. Solimine Jr. seems unbelievably bizarre.
On Feb. 16, 1992, the 17-year-old was sitting in his car in a parking lot at a school in Clifton when he was garroted with shoelaces tied to an extension cord.
Five friends have been charged with plotting his death over ritualistic meetings that mixed Mafia lore with Catholic prayer rituals.
Three youths have pleaded guilty, and their testimony is central to the case against a 19-year-old, James Wanger, charged with the strangling.
Mr.
Wanger acted, prosecutors say, after he, the victim and another youth recited the "Hail Mary."


Ms. Holtzman's Unlikely Story
No wonder New York City's Comptroller, Elizabeth Holtzman, sought to suppress the investigation into her campaign finances.
Ms.
Holtzman has asserted for months that she did not know that the same banking company that granted her a generous campaign loan was later selected as an underwriter of city bonds on her office's recommendation.
The loan came at a crucial time during her unsuccessful Senate campaign last year, and helped finance the advertisements that attacked her rival Geraldine Ferraro's integrity.
Now the Department of Investigation has weighed in, and its judgment of Ms.
Holtzman's own integrity is harsh.
In a report released yesterday after a reluctant Ms.
Holtzman gave her assent, the department paints a troubling portrait of a public official so driven and distracted by ambition that, at best, she put politics ahead of her office's responsibilities.


The Edsel is back, though on a smaller scale, and so is the over-hype that preceded the car in 1957.
"DESTINED for automotive history."
"A breed apart."


Perot Leads Attack on Trade Agreement
A day after President Clinton mobilized three former Presidents to answer criticisms of the North American Free Trade Agreement, the pact's opponents resumed their attacks, with Ross Perot leading the charge.
On two television talk shows, Mr.
Perot warned that the agreement would throw up to five million Americans out of work, destroy the American middle class and wreck the Federal Government's tax base.


A Brimfield diary by Suzanne Slesin


Environment Groups Are Split on Support For Free-Trade Pact
A dispute over the trade pact with Mexico and Canada has split the American environmental movement, exposing a profound ideological rift over whether some large national environmental organizations have become too friendly with the Clinton White House.
The rift, which has been simmering since early this year, boiled over into a public feud today after a group of environmental leaders appeared with Vice President Al Gore to voice their support for the North American Free Trade Agreement now being considered by Congress.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-13  ISRAEL AND U.S.
SEEK SYRIA'S HELP  Israel and the U.S. called on President Hafez el-Assad to silence Palestinian radicals in Damascus whom the Syrian Government is allowing to attack the peace accord between Israel and the P.L.O.
A1  RISING INTRIGUE IN DAMASCUS  Damascus has become a cauldron of intrigue where the question of the moment is: what can or should be done to sabotage the accord?
A10


Review/Television; Measuring the Lines Between Religion and Politics
The give-and-get format brings out high spirits and low blows in tomorrow night's "Firing Line" debate about the religious right.


Corrections
Because of a mechanical error, excerpts published yesterday from the New York City Investigation Department report about a campaign loan to Elizabeth Holtzman included an incomplete sentence.
It should have read, "In guaranteeing the $450,000 loan from Fleet Bank to her Senate campaign committee, Holtzman entered into a financial relationship with a subsidiary of FFG, which was doing and actively seeking business with the Comptroller's Office."


Virtuoso Play by Short Ends in Complex Draw
Aggressive gambit play by Nigel Short intimidated Gary Kasparov, and brought about a quick but intense draw yesterday in Game 5 of their world championship match in London.
Despite this virtuoso performance, the Englishman still trails the Russian 4 to 1 in the 24-game series.
The winner will get approximately $1.43 million, the loser $861,000.


An Idea Whose Time May Have Passed
In reaching a tentative agreement on Wednesday night that calls for lower wages for new workers, the Ford Motor Company and the United Automobile Workers are turning to a cost-saving measure that seems to have fallen out of favor recently among management and labor negotiators in other industries.
When it came to prominence in the airline and supermarket businesses a decade ago, the two-tier wage system was hailed by some companies as an innovation that would allow them to maintain or expand work forces more cheaply.
It allowed unions to make concessions without hurting current members.


Detroit Seeks to Monitor Japan's U.S. Auto Sales
Detroit's Big Three auto makers have quietly asked the Clinton Administration to set up an elaborate system for monitoring the prices and sales of cars and trucks imported from Japan and are threatening to seek steep tariffs on the imports if the Administration turns them down, three people involved in the issue said today.
The auto industry's request is the latest step in Detroit's yearlong effort to win Government help against Japanese competition.
The latest request is based on the rapid appreciation this year of the yen, which gives the industry a fresh argument to try to win tariffs on imports by filing complaints with the Commerce Department.


United Water to Acquire GWC for $200 Million
United Water Resources Inc. said yesterday that it would buy the GWC Corporation for $200 million in stock and cash, creating the nation's second-largest investor-owned water utility.
United Water, based in Harrington Park, N.J., is the parent of the Hackensack, N.J., and Spring Valley, N.Y., water companies, which serve about one million people.
United also owns subsidiaries in real estate development and environmental testing.
The company reported net income of $15.8 million last year on revenues of $164.9 million.


Corrections
A picture caption yesterday about a gathering of participants in a Congressional hearing on the North American Free Trade Agreement misidentified Senator Bob Packwood's home state.
It is Oregon, not Utah.


Review/Film; Some Folks Just Can't Look Bad
No audience in the world will believe that Will Parker, the starving, desperate ex-con who is at the center of "Morning Glory," could have the robust physical well-being of Christopher Reeve.
Nor could any audience seriously believe Deborah Raffin (who wrote the film with Charles Jarrott) as Elly Dinsmore, a pregnant widow leading a threadbare existence on a dusty, neglected farm.
Ms.
Raffin, her cheeks rosy and her blond hair gleaming, is meant to be suffering such dire adversity that she has placed a "husband wanted" ad in the local newspaper, an ad that Mr.
Reeve's Will duly answers.
Nowhere this side of Madison County could a lonely woman in a farmhouse (albeit one wearing fashionably waiflike frocks and ankle-high work boots) expect to find so eligible a stranger.
"All I'm lookin' for is a dry bed and a full plate," Will says.


Runoff Votes That Settled Other Contests
Democrats have resorted to runoff elections to choose a nominee three times in modern New York City politics -- for mayor in 1973 and 1977 and for City Council president in 1977.
But the Sept. 28 runoff for comptroller marks the first time that candidates for secondary office will meet in such a contest without a fight at the top of the ticket to fuel turnout.
"It's completely uncharted water," said Maureen Connelly, a political consultant and a veteran of Edward I. Koch's successful runoff against Mario M. Cuomo in 1977.
"If it's a rainy day, people may just stay home, and having worked on a lot of comptrollers' races, I can tell you people can get an attack of 'my eyes glaze over.' It's tough to make them focus."


Syria Criticizes Israelis, Breaking Silence on Pact
Syria sharply criticized Israel today in its first official reaction to the accord between Israel and the Palestinians, asserting that Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin's Government intended the agreement to divide Arab ranks and maintain its hold on Arab land, including the Golan Heights.
Three days after the agreement was signed in Washington, Mohammed Salman, the Syrian Information Minister, said Israel had turned to secret negotiations in Norway with the Palestine Liberation Organization specifically because it wanted to circumvent the American-sponsored peace process begun in Madrid, in which Israel has been engaged in talks with Syria, Jordan and Lebanon -- as well as the Palestinians -- over exchanging land for peace.


Review/Film; Painting a Philosopher in His Own Colors
"Wittgenstein" is Derek Jarman's terribly arch, occasionally clever portrait of the Viennese-born philosopher Ludwig Wittgenstein, whose analyses of language and its meaning help to define the audience that will find this film of interest.
Mr.
Jarman's outlook should appeal chiefly to those who share a playful, contextual approach to the meaning of language, and to those who once watched Ken Russell's biographical films wishing that Mr.
Russell would calm down.
Mr.
Jarman's approach to serious biography is no less overheated than Mr.
Russell's ever was.
But it is more stridently experimental, and it does look more spare.
Set against black backgrounds, using brightly colored costumes and props, and constructed as a string of puckish blackout sketches, "Wittgenstein" abounds with giddy theatrical tricks meant to illustrate biographical details and ideas of real substance.


Hispanic Officials Back Hevesi for Comptroller
In a sign of the shifting fortunes in the Democratic race for comptroller, Alan G. Hevesi received endorsements from several Hispanic officials yesterday, campaign officials said, while aides to the embattled incumbent, Elizabeth Holtzman, assured her supporters that she would stay in the race to the end.
The day marked the beginning of what is likely to be a furious backstage battle for endorsements from prominent black, Hispanic and female officials whose support could prove pivotal in the Sept. 28 runoff, where the turnout is expected to be extremely low.


METRO DIGEST
GIULIANI OFFERS HOMELESS PLAN Rudolph W. Giuliani, the Republican-Liberal candidate for mayor, said that if he is elected, his administration would drastically curtail New York City's sprawling $500 million-a-year shelter system for the homeless, setting a stringent 90-day limit on many shelter stays.
His proposals would cut the number of people in city shelters each night -- typically 24,000 -- by almost half, his advisers said.
A1.
NEW YORK CITY  PEACE'S LURE DRAWS CROWDS At Rosh ha-Shanah celebrations throughout the metropolitan region, in the aftermath of a Middle East accord that has loosed soaring hopes for peace and made the impossible suddenly seem probable, unusually large crowds attended services, and services were rewritten.
B3.


At 30, Latest Stop for Carpenter Is the Audition Line for Devils
Twelve years and five teams after he was the National Hockey League's newest star-in-waiting, Bobby Carpenter is on a tryout with the Devils and has a chance to make the team.
Carpenter, who is trying out as a free agent without compensation, was given his first big test with the Devils in tonight's 5-3 loss to the Flyers at the Spectrum, which was the pre-season opener for both teams.


It's the Same Old Cry About Black Music
To the Editor:
After a career as a white man at radio stations programmed toward black audiences, I see how little things have changed.
Popular culture, especially music, has always reflected its audience, not the reverse.
The truly dangerous myth repeated in "The Politics of Gangster Rap" by Brent Staples (Editorial Notebook, Aug. 27) is the danger that black music presents.


Art in Review
Squeak Carnwath  Ledisflam Gallery 130 Prince Street SoHo Through Oct. 2
Art that looks as if it was produced by an angry, precocious child is one of the hallmarks of the last few years, although the work of the California painter Squeak Carnwath has been assuming this posture since the 1970's.


U.S. Weighs a Donors Conference To Seek Pledges for Mideast Plan
As part of the Administration's commitment to help carry out the Israeli-P.L.O. agreement, President Clinton will propose to America's allies that the United States hold a special conference for donor countries to pledge money for Middle East peace, senior Administration officials said today.
The officials said that Mr.
Clinton wants to organize such a conference as a sort of economic summit meeting that would build on the momentum of Monday's signing of the agreement in Washington to insure the maximum contributions from donors and keep the world's attention focused on the importance of carrying out the accord.
Part of U.S.
Strategy&gt;
The conference would be part of a three-pronged American strategy for the Middle East Administration that officials said had been developed in recent days.


Washington Memo; First Lady With a Health Plan to Sell
After seven months of leading the Administration's internal effort to develop a national health plan, Hillary Rodham Clinton late this month will take on the most substantive public role ever played by a First Lady when she appears as the lead-off witness in Congressional hearings on the plan.
With the Administration's hopes for shaping history on the line, Mrs.
Clinton will testify on Sept. 28 before a rare joint hearing by the Senate's Finance Committee and Labor and Human Resources Committee.


New Palestinian Police Force Readied


Warnings From New York
Responding to attacks on foreign visitors in Florida, the New York City Police Department is preparing to update pamphlets advising tourists how to avoid becoming crime victims in New York, a top police official said yesterday.
Police Commissioner Raymond W. Kelly said the department's Crime Prevention Unit was printing an initial 10,000 pamphlets for distribution, primarily at La Guardia and Kennedy Airports.
The pamphlets will at first be in French, German, Japanese and Spanish and might be available in a month.


Art in Review
Gerhard Richter  Marian Goodman Gallery 24 West 57th Street Manhattan Through Oct. 23
Gerhard Richter's latest works, mostly big abstractions (nearly eight feet square) and a small hyper-realist still life based on a photograph of flowers, are variations on familiar themes.
But even if they do not break new ground -- and to an extent Mr.
Richter's highly cerebral art has long been based on a critique of originality and stylistic invention -- they confirm his stature as one of the most compelling and difficult painters around.


On My Mind; 'Holocaust Syndrome'
At this moment of first fragile hope, the theory that more than almost any other wounds Israel and trivializes history is still heard -- now from Jews, Israeli and American.
The theory was reported again during the celebration in Washington.
For decades, it goes, the survival policy of Israeli leaders rested on deep pessimism, fear and defensiveness arising out of the Holocaust.
No matter how strong the country became, they trusted no one, relied only on arms, saw themselves perpetually as victims who had to act defensively instead of free people determining their own destiny.


Mexico Takes Giant Steps Toward a New Era
To the Editor:
Whatever one's view of the North American Free Trade Agreement, your pages have largely overlooked Mexico's moves toward fundamental political change since the country's 1988 electoral trauma.
Last July, Mexico's governing Institutional Revolutionary Party proposed a special session of Congress to consider political reforms, which have now been passed (news article, Sept. 4).


On Tuesday Night, Read Gifford's Book
Frank Gifford never had the itch to write an autobiography, although the adult life of this son of an oil-field worker has been a 40-year string of celebrity: a dozen years with the New York Giants and a seamless move into television capped by 23 years on ABC's "Monday Night Football." He has never been controversial, but he has been famous in New York for an epoch.
Some publishers wanted a tell-all tome that bashed Howard Cosell, who laid waste to Gifford in his memoirs.
No, Gifford said.
More important was a need to explain his Depression rearing, in which he moved 48 times, and how football vaulted him from Bakersfield, Calif., to stardom.


A Confession to Murder To Get Back in Prison
The killing on Oct. 9, 1977, was unremarkable, as homicides go.
The victim, Alfredo Garza, was shot to death in a public housing project in San Antonio in what the police surmised was a drug deal gone bad.
With few leads and no hard suspects, the case remained open and appeared very likely to stay that way.


On the Emmitt Watch: The Long Ordeal is Over
The only people who have been quizzed on TV more than Emmitt Smith in recent days were Yitzhak Rabin, the Israeli Prime Minister, and Yasir Arafat, chairman of the Palestine Liberation Organization.
In some pigskin minds, Smith's just-concluded contract dispute with the Dallas Cowboys owner Jerry Jones -- and the Cowboys' 0-2 record -- was as crucial as the detente between Israel and the P.L.O.
If the Smith-Jones dispute had continued, the two men might have ended up on Larry King and "Meet the Press." If their impasse hadn't yet become grist for John McLaughlin -- "Issue one: Emmitt Smith deserves $13 million for four years? Wronnnggggg!" -- it might soon have.


Review/Film; Artist's Woes From a New Perspecitve
"Divertimento," opening today at Lincoln Plaza Cinemas, is a straight-faced bit of tomfoolery sent out under the name of Jacques Rivette.
He is the French director of "La Belle Noiseuse," the hypnotically beautiful, numbing four-hour film, released here in 1991, about the angst of a great, if severely blocked, painter.
In fact, "Divertimento" is "La Belle Noiseuse," but with its running time cut in half.
According to press material handed to critics at the "Divertimento" screening, Mr.
Rivette, obligated to deliver a two-hour television version of the film, "turned this chore into a challenge." That is, he recut the film, eliminating much of the original material and putting in other material not used in the first version.
The idea was to see the original story from an entirely new perspective.


Art in Review
Kathy Muehlemann  Pamela Auchincloss Gallery 558 Broadway (near Prince Street) SoHo Through Oct. 13
Viewed from the center of the gallery, Kathy Muehlemann's small, abstract grisaille paintings look like dark fields radiating a low-wattage gray light.
Up close, one sees that they are composed of an edge-to-edge fabric of springy, curling white lines, rendered as precisely as if with an engraver's tool.


2 Senate Moderates, DeConcini And Durenberger, Are Retiring
Senators Dennis DeConcini of Arizona and Dave Durenberger of Minnesota, two moderate lawmakers who have been dogged by charges about their ethics, announced today that they would not run for re-election next year.
Both Senators faced uphill races, and their decisions to step down reflected the growing public anger at a Congress whose image has been sullied in recent years.
Mr.
DeConcini, a Democrat, was a central figure in the ethical questions surrounding a savings and loan executive two years ago.


Art in Review
'John Baldessari' 'Working Materials'  Brooke Alexander Editions 476 Broome Street SoHo Through Oct. 16
Given that appropriation is one of the staples of contemporary art, it's interesting to see how it's done, in this case by the influential Californian and image-recycler John Baldessari.
This show-and-tell exhibition of previously unseen materials reveals the artist's technique of isolating different parts of magazine photographs, movie stills, posters and other found imagery, or obscuring parts of them with paint, in preparation for having them cropped, blown up and montaged.
Anyone familiar with Mr.
Baldessari's often monumental finished works, with their enigmatic yet charged juxtapositions and deletions, their fractured narratives and often sinister evocations of power and glamour, should be intrigued by this glimpse of their modest beginnings.
They underscore both the brilliance and the utter simplicity of his achievement.


Prayer and Curses Mark a New Year
On Israel's most promising and worrisome New Year's Day in decades, Moshe Ziegel went to the water's edge today to cast his sins symbolically into the Mediterranean, wondering whether the Government should do the same.
"We pray this will make things better, but we don't know, do we?" Mr.
Ziegel, yarmulke on his head and prayer book in his hand, said of the sweeping changes that ushered in the New Year's holiday, Rosh ha-Shanah.


A.T.&amp; T. REDUCES PRICE OF NOTEBOOK COMPUTERS
A.T.&amp; T. said yesterday that it would reduce by $300 up to $1,300 the retail price of its EO Personal Communicator line of advanced notebook computers.
The units incorporate advanced microprocessors, handwriting-recognition programs and an optional modem and cellular telephone.
But at $2,000 for a basic unit to $4,800 for a unit with a cellular phone, they were far more expensive than other notebook computers with similar performance.
With the reductions, the prices for the line will vary from $1,600 to $3,500.


For Children
'The Cat in the Castle'  Wings Theater 154 Christopher Street (near Greenwich Street) Greenwich Village (212) 627-2961 Recommended ages: 3 to 8 Through Nov. 21
This story is about two intrepid New York City cats, Hugo and Mimi.
Mimi, for example, explores a queen's castle knowing that Her Highness is allergic to cats and has all felines exterminated; Hugo goes along because he's Mimi's friend.


ANTI-MAFIA PRIEST SLAIN IN PALERMO
Only four months after Pope John Paul II urged Sicilians to rise up against the Mafia, a Roman Catholic priest who was an outspoken opponent of organized crime was shot and killed in Palermo on Wednesday night in what investigators say appears to have been a Mafia execution.
The Rev.
Giuseppe Puglisi, a 56-year-old priest who has made a life of challenging the Mafia on its own turf, was shot in the neck in front of his rectory in the depressed industrial Brancaccio neighborhood of Palermo.
He was taken unconscious to a local hospital, where surgeons could not revive him, officials said.


Review/Film: The Age of Innocence; Grand Passions and Good Manners
TAKING "The Age of Innocence," Edith Wharton's sad and elegantly funny novel about New York's highest society in the 1870's, Martin Scorsese has made a gorgeously uncharacteristic Scorsese film.
It would be difficult to imagine anything further removed from the director's canon than Wharton's Pulitzer Prize-winning page-turner, not even "The Last Temptation of Christ."
Yet with a fine cast headed by Daniel Day-Lewis, Michelle Pfeiffer and Winona Ryder, Mr.
Scorsese has made a big, intelligent movie that functions as if it were a window on a world he had just discovered, and about which he can't wait to spread the news.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-11  MUSLIMS AND SERBS ALTER PLAN  The Muslim-led Government of Bosnia and Bosnian Serbs agreed to adjust a peace plan that would partition the country, allowing referendums on whether the republics will remain in the new union.
A1  It's unclear if the accord meets U.S. conditions for sending troops.
A8


Recount Scheduled in White Plains Mayoral Primary
Mayor Alfred Del Vecchio got the surprise of his political life this week when unofficial results of a primary race too close to call showed his challenger for the Republican nomination, Michael A. Coffey, leading by 13 votes.
The longtime Mayor's lawyer, John DeMarco, has charged that the fight for the nomination turned physical on Election Night.
He says he was assaulted by Mr.
Coffey as he tried to serve him with court papers notifying him that the voting machines were being impounded for a recount on Tuesday.


No Headline
"The implication is that this is the biggest thing that happened anywhere in the inner solar system since life began." -- DR.
CLARK R. CHAPMAN on the object that hit Yucatan 65 million years ago, leaving a 185-mile-wide crater.  [ A14:4. ]


Shuffle Master
The stock of Shuffle Master Inc., a maker of automatic card shuffling systems, surged yesterday, closing near its 52-week high after the the Nevada Gaming Board approved the company's Double Deck shuffling system for use in casinos in the state.


James Tyeska Is Dead; Bass-Baritone Was 43
James Tyeska, a bass-baritone who was also a voice teacher at Sarah Lawrence College, died on Sept. 5 at his home in New York City.
He was 43.
The cause was AIDS, his family said.


4 on Metro-North Train Robbed by Armed Gang
Five masked men staged an armed robbery on a Metro-North commuter train last night, robbing four passengers and escaping, a Metro-North spokesman said early this morning.
Brandishing handguns and firing a shot into the floor, the thieves got in, grabbed the passengers' belongings and got out of the northbound train in less than the approximately two minutes it would normally spend in the station, Glenwood Station in Yonkers, said the spokesman, Dan Brucker.


Irving Allen Dodes, 78, Mathematics Educator
Irving Allen Dodes, an innovator in mathematics education in New York City's public schools and colleges, died, apparently of a heart attack, on Sept. 10 near his home in Quincy, Mass.
He was 78.
He had been missing for 13 days and was believed to have been stricken while taking a walk.


Goalie Potvin Signs Three-Year Contract
Goalie FELIX POTVIN has signed a three-year, multimillion-dollar contract with the Toronto Maple Leafs.
The 22-year-old Potvin, who earned $145,000 last season, will get $1.2 million this season and $1.4 million in each of the next two seasons.
The deal also includes several bonus clauses.
He was selected to the all-rookie team last season after going 25-15-7 with a league-best 2.50 goals-against average in the regular season and 11-10 with a 2.84 goals-against average in the playoffs. (AP)


Andretti to Return to Indy-Car Circuit
MICHAEL ANDRETTI confirmed yesterday that his Formula One season was over and that he planned to return to the Indy-car circuit in 1994.
Andretti, the 1991 Indy-car points champion who has had a disappointing rookie year on the international circuit, will leave Team McLaren without competing in the season's final three races.
In London, the McLaren team confirmed the report made Wednesday by The Associated Press.
The American driver said he made his decision when the team refused to commit itself to whether he would be offered a ride for the final two years of his three-year contract.


On Stage, and Off
Will It Be Shepard? Rabe? (Neither?)
Two big galoots are duking it out over a girl, but the girl has them both wrapped around her little finger.
It's a hackneyed story -- you wouldn't put it on stage -- but delicious anyway, particularly since the bruisers are Sam Shepard and David Rabe, and the coquette is Jennifer Jason Leigh.
Each man has a play aiming to open in New York in the next few months, each will direct his own work and each wants Ms.
Leigh for the leading female role.


The Bishops Spoke Up
To the Editor:
"The War on Abortion Clinics" by Tanya Melich (Op-Ed, Sept. 9) irresponsibly claims that, in response to abortion clinic violence, "There was no loud outcry of condemnation from responsible anti-choice organizations like the U.S. Catholic Conference."


Inside Art
A Vandalized Lichtenstein
It may be curtains for "Curtains," the 1962 Roy Lichtenstein painting that was vandalized last month, apparently beyond repair, while on loan to the Whitney Museum of American Art.
The painting was lent by the St.
Louis Art Museum as part of its show "Hand-Painted Pop: American Art in Transition, 1955-1962," which opened at the Whitney in July, having been at the Museum of Contemporary Art in Los Angeles.


Jackson and Farrakhan Vow Effort for Blacks' Well-Being
Jesse Jackson and Louis Farrakhan, who drifted apart during Mr.
Jackson's Presidential campaign in 1984, joined with others today to call for a united effort to improve the economic well-being of blacks.
Mr.
Jackson and Mr.
Farrakhan appeared at the annual legislative meeting of the Congressional Black Caucus, which held a panel discussion on race and politics that drew an audience of 2,000 people at the Washington Convention Center.


TV Weekend; Tempting a Captor With Wine, Women and Chess
While the networks huff and puff about another new season, generally running true to ho-hum form, television's more inventive and ambitious work is popping up elsewhere.
"And the Band Played On," on HBO, is one example.
Another, coming up on Sunday and Monday at 8 P.M., with repeats at midnight, is A&amp;E's four-hour "Framed," written by Lynda La Plante, whose "Prime Suspect" held a memorable grip on international audiences.
Like "Prime Suspect," "Framed" goes into the inner precincts and lives of London police detectives.
This time, the officer of choice is Detective Sgt.
Lawrence Jackson (David Morrissey).
On vacation in Spain with his wife and two young sons, Larry happens to spot Eddie Myers (Timothy Dalton), a supergrass, or informer, thought to have drowned after escaping police custody four years earlier.
Eddie is extradited back to London, where Inspector Jimmy McInnes (Timothy West), humiliated by the escape, is eager to restore his own reputation with a tough new conviction.


Finally, Back to School
New York City's Schools Chancellor, Ramon Cortines, says schools will open on Monday.
Thousands of students will have to take classes in other buildings, and some classes will be shortened to accommodate double sessions.
But Mr.
Cortines has at least moved quickly to tackle the asbestos crisis and to counter the tremendous erosion of confidence it has produced.
There are many points of blame for this fiasco.
To comply with a 1986 Federal law, the Board of Education had to prepare asbestos management plans for each of the city's more than 1,000 school buildings.
While the Federal regulations were confusing, the board compounded the problem by hiring poorly trained inspectors and failing to supervise them.
The reports were so unreliable that Mayor David Dinkins ordered reinspection of the entire system last month.


U.S. Altering Tactics in Drug War
Nine months into the Clinton Administration, fundamental changes in the way the United States fights the drug war are under way.
Though Mr.
Clinton has personally addressed the issue of drugs infrequently, his National Security Council has been arguing that the huge effort to catch smugglers from Latin America should be scaled down.
At the same time, the Drug Enforcement Administration is taking the final steps to put into effect a new strategy that concentrates on a handful of traffickers responsible for most of the world's cocaine and heroin.


RESULTS PLUS
TENNIS


Shakespeare Will Survive Despite Editorials to the Contrary; Double Standard
To the Editor:
Re "Shakespeare for Mere Mortals" (editorial, Sept. 3): Why is it that the editors of a major newspaper feel it newsworthy to insist on the "newsworthlessness" of modern literary scholarship?


Art in Review
Alfred Stieglitz  Pace-MacGill Gallery 32 East 57th Street Manhattan Through Oct. 23
The tangled emotional and artistic relationship between Alfred Stieglitz and Georgia O'Keeffe has become the stuff of legend, not to mention recent exhibitions on both the West and the East Coasts.
This glittering show features 18 pictures by Stieglitz, all but two of them from O'Keeffe's own collection; 10 of the pictures are of O'Keeffe herself, part of the extended portrait Stieglitz made of her from the time of their meeting in 1918.


Market Place; O'Brien Environmental: a big block sold, a loss reported.
O'BRIEN Environmental Energy fell 93.75 cents, to $2.8125, on Wednesday, but that wasn't terrible news to some prescient shareholders.
A block of 1.08 million shares moved on the American Stock Exchange about 1 P.M. on Wednesday, taking the stock down a full point in a single trade.
The stock did not trade at all yesterday, pending news that was slow in coming from the company.
By 5:10 yesterday afternoon, anyone who was perplexed as to why that savvy -- but undisclosed -- trader dumped more than a million shares the day before had no further doubts.


Forecast Calls for A Deluge Of Races
Champions and contenders from every division of racing worked out at Belmont Park yesterday, but they did it in the mud under heavy skies that cast a shadow over the six major stakes this weekend that will launch New York's countdown to the Breeders' Cup.
The forecast called for more rain today and possibly tomorrow, when 42 horses of distinction will race in the five stakes that Belmont trumpets as the first of its two Super Saturdays.
And on Sunday, the weekend will close with fanfare when some of the ranking fillies and mares in the country compete in the Ruffian Handicap, which could become the most dramatic race of all.


Cable Television Industry Is Handed a Legal Setback
In a defeat for the cable television industry, a Federal judge upheld a provision of the new cable television law today that requires cable operators to negotiate programming prices with local affiliates of ABC, CBS, NBC and other broadcast networks.
Federal District Judge Thomas Penfield Jackson rejected cable industry arguments that the so-called retransmission consent clause of the 1992 cable act violates the industry's First Amendment rights to free speech.


4 Are Found Shot to Death In the Bronx
Four people were shot to death and three others critically wounded yesterday in a Bronx apartment where the police also discovered drugs and large amounts of cash.
The multiple shooting stunned residents in the Castle Hill section of the Bronx, a racially mixed, working-class neighborhood that has escaped the worst ravages of drugs and crime that have afflicted other areas of the city. 'You Know You're Not Safe'
"When you see this happening in an area like this, you know you're not safe anymore," said Gloria Gonzales, 57, who has lived for seven years at 2070 Powell Avenue, where the shootings took place.


Peter Mark Schifter, Director, 44, in TV, Theater and Opera
Peter Mark Schifter, a theater, opera and television director who was nominated for a Tony Award for his work on the 1989 musical "Welcome to the Club," died last Friday at Lenox Hill Hospital in Manhattan.
He was 44.
The cause was AIDS, said Doug Jones, a friend.


Reviews/Film; Three Rivers, Two Officers, One Killer
"Striking Distance," the new Bruce Willis action-melodrama, isn't long on coherence, which makes very little difference.
It's an enjoyably brisk movie spectacle, much of which takes place in and around Pittsburgh, on the Allegheny, Ohio and Monongahela Rivers.
Pittsburgh is not a special effect.
As used by Rowdy Herrington, the director, and as photographed by Mac Ahlberg, Pittsburgh looks so beautiful and clean that it seems slightly unreal, the perfect setting for this kind of make-believe.
The story (quite tall and not exceptionally original) is about Tom Hardy (Mr. Willis), a homicide detective who's hated by his colleagues for testifying against his partner (also his first cousin) in a police brutality case.
Later, Hardy is demoted to the river rescue squad.
His crime: He publicly challenges the department's prosecution of a man he thinks innocent of some highly publicized serial killings.
Hardy could well know the truth, but he doesn't know at the time he objects.
The serial killings, to no one's surprise, involve Hardy much more intimately than he originally guesses.
Though the film's initial chase is dimly motivated, most of the action sequences are very well staged, particularly those on Pittsburgh's rivers.
They are the film's true subject.


Stocks Are Mostly Flat as Dow Slips 2.80
A listlessness descended on the stock market yesterday, with mostly flat trading and light volume on the first full day of the Jewish holiday of Rosh ha-Shanah and a day ahead of "triple witching" day.
The Dow Jones industrial average slipped 2.80 points to close at 3,630.85.
Volume was a modest 229.7 million shares, down from 298.3 million on Wednesday.


U.S. IS EXAMINING NEW BOSNIA PACT
Administration officials said today that they did not have enough information to determine whether an accord based on the agreement signed today by the Bosnian Government and Serbian nationalists would meet President Clinton's conditions for contributing American peacekeeping troops to Bosnia.
"We hope that this will reignite the negotiating process and that it will result in a viable and equitable agreement between the parties," said David T. Johnson, a State Department spokesman.
"But without any more details it's hard to make any more comment than that."


Joseph G. Smith, 66; Helped NBC Choose Peacock as Symbol
Joseph G. Smith, a psychologist, a leading expert in consumer research and chairman of a New York market research company, Oxtoby-Smith Inc., died yesterday at Mount Sinai Medical Center in Manhattan.
He was 66 and lived in Lido Beach, L.I.
The cause was cancer, the hospital said.


Tensions Amid Recognition


Barneys touts its new store on Madison Avenue with an eye-catching, artistic campaign.
AS if the pools of ink the press devoted to the opening of the new 230,000-square-foot Barneys New York store on Madison Avenue wasn't enough, the company has also begun a series of eye-catching advertisements.
The ads sustain the elements of fun, whimsy and spontaneity that have typified the retailer's advertising campaigns.
But they are also an arresting departure from the often-imitated Barneys advertising of the past.


Corrections
An article and a chart yesterday about the surrender of Katherine Ann Power, a fugitive antiwar radical, misstated the prison time served by Susan Saxe, an associate of Ms.
Power, after her arrest in 1975.
It was about seven years.
The article also referred incorrectly to the events that ignited student protests in the spring of 1970.
Invasions of Cambodia by United States and South Vietnamese troops, not the bombing of Cambodia by United States warplanes, set off those protests.


Corrections
A report in the Company News column of Business Day on Wednesday, about a contract being negotiated by the Nynex Corporation with Northern Telecom's United States subsidiary to supply digital switching systems over five years, misstated the value of the contract.
In a clarification of its original announcement, Northern Telecom said the initial contract was worth substantially less than $1 billion.


The Notre Dame 'Mutiny' That Wasn't
In a scene from the upcoming film "Rudy" the seniors of the 1975 Notre Dame football team march into Coach Dan Devine's office and, one after another, lay their jerseys on his desk.
The gesture is supposed to force the coach to put a hard-nosed walk-on named Rudy Ruettiger on the dress list in his last game of eligibility after being a member of the scout squad for two years.
"Completely false," Devine said Wednesday.


Dickerson Doubtful for Sunday
Atlanta Falcons Coach JERRY GLANVILLE and ERIC DICKERSON differ over the severity of the running back's disk problem.
Glanville, who once had a disk injury, said Wednesday that Dickerson was listed as doubtful for Sunday's game with San Francisco.
"I'd have to rate it as severe," Glanville said.
"It's an injury that's dangerous. The disk in the sixth vertebra, with numbness in the fingers."


Lauren Moves Polo Into Its Own Quarters
The Ralph Lauren mansion boutique on Madison Avenue evokes luxury with its turn-of-the-century trappings: leather club chairs, polished mahagony and oil paintings.
But when Mr.
Lauren's Polo Sport store opens across the street tomorrow, it will be a tribute to the most elusive luxury of the 90's: leisure time.


New-and-Improved Kovalev Will Even Throw a Check
A man of very little patience, Mike Keenan has absolutely none when it comes to underachievers.
Coming into his first camp as head coach of the Rangers, Keenan, who has built his reputation on getting the most he can out of what he has, was generally vague as to what he expected from a team that played to the least of its expectations last season.


Corrections
A Reporter's Notebook article yesterday about the signing of the Israeli-Palestinian agreement in Washington misspelled the first and last names of the Israeli Cabinet Secretary, who led the Israeli delegation to the Arab-Israeli peace talks.
He is Elyakim Rubinstein.


Small-Cap Nasdaq Stocks
A complete listing of Nasdaq small-capitalization stocks now appears in The New York Times on Sundays.
The partial listing of those stocks, formerly published daily, has been discontinued to provide space for expanded mutual fund tables.


Vikings Fire Offensive Coordinator
The Minnesota Vikings fired offensive coordinator JACK BURNS yesterday in reaction to the offense scoring only 17 points in the team's first two games.
BRIAN BILLICK, an assistant under Vikings Coach DENNIS GREEN when both were at Stanford, has been promoted from tight-ends coach to coordinator.
Billick, 39 years old , also will be quarterbacks coach.


Hillary Clinton to Testify
Hillary Rodham Clinton will be the lead-off witness for the Administration's health care plan before Congress later this month.
Page A20.


Terry Morris; Writer, 79
Terry Morris, a magazine and short-story writer and past president of the American Society of Journalists and Authors, died yesterday at her home on Central Park South in Manhattan.
She was 79.
Mrs.
Morris's career spanned three decades -- from 1945 to 1975 -- when she wrote dozens of articles for many of the country's leading magazines.
In 1967 McCall's published an exclusive interview that she had with Stalin's daughter, Svetlana Alliluyeva, who had immigrated to the United States after burying her fiance's ashes in India.


Sports of The Times; Baseball Should Open Trap Door
THE most entertaining game in town in recent days has been speculating how baseball would look if this were 1994 and the new realignment had already taken place.
This has been considerably more fun than morbidly dwelling on this decent, hard-working, overachieving Yankees team reaching its level.
This trend continued last night in a gloomy defeat to the Red Sox that dropped the Yankees three games behind Toronto.


For Ford, a New Contract but Little New Ground
Abandoning efforts to frame a fundamentally different agreement with the United Automobile Workers, the Ford Motor Company reached a tentative three-year contract with the union late on Wednesday that increases wages and preserves benefits, including health care fully paid by the auto maker.
The few changes appeared more likely to benefit Ford than the industry's ailing giant, the General Motors Corporation, with which the U.A.W. will seek a similar agreement in coming weeks.


Detectives Testify in Case of Youth Garroted in Ritual Slaying
Friends of 17-year-old Robert Solimine Jr. who admitted their part in his slaying named James P. Wanger as the person who actually garroted the victim, police officers testified today.
In the first full day of testimony in Mr.
Wanger's murder trial in State Superior Court, three police officers described their investigation after finding the still-warm body of Mr.
Solimine shortly after midnight on Feb. 17, 1992, led to the arrest of Mr.
Wanger the next day.


Mr. Rohatyn and a City's Debt
The chairman of New York City's Municipal Assistance Corporation, Felix Rohatyn, has held that unsalaried post for nearly two decades, but his real influence goes well beyond the formal title.
Using his position as a platform, the outspoken investment banker created a broad and unusual role for himself as the city's fiscal conscience.
Now that Mr.
Rohatyn has resigned, New Yorkers can only hope that circumstances and luck will conspire to bring them another Rohatyn, a shrewd private citizen with enough patience and guile to prod and guide political insiders.
Mr.
Rohatyn came on the scene with the fiscal crisis of the mid-1970's, when Gov.
Hugh Carey enlisted him to help save New York City from bankruptcy.
That accomplished, Mr.
Rohatyn turned himself into New York's pessimistic truth-teller.
He could overdo it -- hence his familiar "Cassandra" label.
He could anger other players in the city's fiscal drama -- especially labor leaders who resented his hard-edged advice.
He could act like a rival to the mayor, bent on making policy for the city.
He could fuss over his press coverage.


Books of The Times; A Movie Code of Feminine Conduct
A Woman's View  How Hollywood Spoke to Women, 1930-1960  By Jeanine Basinger  Illustrated. 528 pages.
Alfred A. Knopf. $30.
In "Woman of the Year," Katharine Hepburn plays a famous political columnist whose devotion to her high-powered career infuriates her sportswriter husband, played by Spencer Tracy; at the end of the movie, she tries to placate him by trying to cook breakfast.


Bergen County Fights Nonregulation Shoeshines; Courthouse Fixture Is Told to Get $1 Million Liability Policy and Keep an 'Audit Trail'
For 27 years, Bobby Taylor has run a shoeshine stand in the lobby of the Bergen County Courthouse, a little business where he offered a nice shine, ($1 for judges, $2 for everyone else), a ready smile and plenty of quips and banter each morning.
For 27 years, he occupied his space in the courthouse based on a handshake and gentleman's agreement.


Art in Review
Andy Goldsworthy  Galerie Lelong 20 West 57th Street Manhattan Through Oct. 16
The Scottish artist Andy Goldsworthy achieves powerful effects from modest means in works made of natural objects like leaves, twigs and ferns.
A scrim made of horse-chestnut stems tacked together with thorns divides one gallery, while a sinuous pattern of dried ferns covers a wall in another, suggesting a giant snakeskin or the path of a particularly convoluted river.


Inspections Mishandled, Cortines Says
The Schools Chancellor strongly criticized the crash inspection of New York City's school system for asbestos yesterday, saying that a lack of communication and cooperation had marred the effort and suggesting that the 11-day postponement of the first day of school could have been avoided.
A day after the Board of Education voted to open schools on Monday, whatever the chaos caused by the closing of scores of classrooms and some schools, the Chancellor, Ramon C. Cortines, said "a vacuum" between school and city officials had created avoidable disarray as the emergency inspection effort bogged down last month.


RESULTS PLUS
TENNIS  Pioline Is Defeated in Romania  Cedric Pioline, the United States Open runner-up, was upset by Andrea Gaudenzi, 6-3, 3-6, 6-2, yesterday in the second round of the Romanian Open in Bucharest.
Pioline, seeded third, was playing his second match since losing to Pete Sampras four days ago in the final at Flushing Meadows.
"I still am living in another time zone; for me, it's morning now," Pioline said after losing to the 20-year-old Italian.
"Besides, Gaudenzi is a very good clay player, and I last played on clay three months ago." Top-seeded Goran Ivanisevic defeated Marcelo Filippini, 7-6 (7-3), 6-2, in another second-round match in the country's first open tennis tournament. (AP) Patrick McEnroe Loses to No. 2-Seeded Rosset: Marc Rosset, the No. 2-seeded player from Switzerland, beat Patrick McEnroe, 6-4, 6-3, yesterday to gain the quarterfinals of the Bordeaux Passing Shot Tournament.
All the matches were in the second round after rain disrupted play the first three days.
No. 5 Fabrice Santoro of France, bothered by a sore shoulder, lost to Diego Nargiso of Italy, 6-1, 6-2.
No. 3 Arnaud Boetsch of France downed Nicolas Pereira of Venezuela, 7-5, 7-5, and No. 4 Javier Sanchez of Spain defeated Olivier Delaitre of France, 6-2, 2-6, 6-0.
In other matches, Javier Frana of Argentina eliminated Rodolphe Gilbert of France, 6-1, 7-6 (7-4), and Libor Nemecek of the Czech Republic ousted Chris Wilkinson of Britain, 6-4, 6-4.
In a match that ended late Wednesday, No. 1 Sergi Bruguera beat Henri Leconte, 6-4, 6-0.
The match was interrupted once by rain and twice by power outages.
Bruguera beat Leconte in the first round of the French Open and went on to win the title. (AP)


Art in Review
Raymond Pettibon  Feature 76 Greene Street SoHo Through Oct. 9
Although the cult of Raymond Pettibon remains a little hard to fathom, this Los Angeles artist could be David Salle's librettist.
His film noir-pulp novel appropriations of text, collaged with intermittent hand-drawn images, put into language the shifting malaise that Mr.
Salle has already put into pictures.
Sex, violence, amusing non sequiturs and a deeply felt skepticism drift through these unframed, rough-hewn pieces, the best of which takes a jaundiced look at Edward M. Kennedy's Waterloo, Chappaquiddick.
The results may ultimately be more interesting to read than to look at, but they have a dank, unsavory presence that seems very much their own.


F.B.I. Wants to Know if It Helped Klansman Dodge Murder Charge
The Federal Bureau of Investigation is conducting an internal investigation into whether any of its agents helped an Alabama Ku Klux Klansman escape murder charges in a 36-year-old racial killing, officials say.
The inquiry resulted from a Klansman's confession to his wife shortly before he died in December.
The new bureau Director, Louis J. Freeh, announced the investigation last week, and a bureau spokesman said Wednesday that it was under way.
He gave no indication of when it might be completed.


Now Shake Hands With Vietnam
Sooner or later some American President will find the courage to end Washington's now-pointless vendetta against Communist Vietnam.
That President might as well be Bill Clinton and the time might as well be now.
The public debate on U.S.
Vietnam policy focuses on Hanoi's cooperation in locating the remains of servicemen listed as missing in action since the Vietnam War.
But the biggest obstacle to normal diplomatic and economic relations is America's wounded national pride and White House fears of a ferocious backlash.


Smith (1-0), Cowboys (0-2) Come to Terms
It took a while for Jerry Jones to see the handwriting on the scoreboard, and even then he had to swallow twice.
But with his defending Super Bowl champions at 0-2 in the National Football League, it finally dawned on the owner of the Dallas Cowboys that the league's leading rusher for two consecutive seasons just might be worth every million of the league's most lucrative contract for a running back.
Accordingly, Jones and his vacationing running back, Emmitt Smith, came to terms yesterday on a contract that makes Smith the highest-paid running back in the league and puts the Cowboys in the running to win an N.F.L. game, perhaps as early as Sunday night, when they play the Cardinals in Phoenix.


Review/Dance; Tharp Contemplates The Ballroom Influence
The second program of "Twyla Tharp and Dancers: Informal Talk and Performance" at City Center, on Wednesday night, had more meat on the dance plate than the opening did.
Within the lecture format that Miss Tharp has devised for her new season, there was even a subliminal theme: social dancing according to Tharp.
Intentionally or not, the focus was on the ballroom styles that have inspired some of the choreographer's most sparkling pieces.
For those who wish to see this part of the Tharp repertory up close, the current practice-clothes presentation at City Center (131 55th Street, Manhattan) will be an eye-opener.
Beneath the sugarcoated surface of their jazz and pop rhythms, these works suddenly reveal their complexity of technique and structures.


Clinton Asserts He Might Bend On Health Plan
President Clinton formally opened his campaign to revise the nation's health care system today by inviting ordinary Americans to the Rose Garden to voice their complaints and by asserting his willingness to compromise on key elements of his plan.
Mr.
Clinton told a group of small-business owners who met him later at a hardware store in an industrial area of northeast Washington that he was willing to reconsider elements of his proposal that they say would hurt business owners with 50 to 100 employees.
Clinton Considers Plea
Owners of businesses of this size have been among the most vocally opposed to the President's plan because larger employers are better able to afford insurance for employees, and employers with fewer than 50 workers would be given Government assistance to ease the hardship.


Service for G. M. Brooker
A memorial service for George M. Brooker will he held at 6 P.M.
Tuesday at the Cathedral of St.
John the Divine, 1047 Amsterdam Avenue at Cathedral Parkway in Manhattan.
Mr.
Brooker, a real-estate executive who served on New York City and state boards and led civic causes, died on Aug. 18.


Rookie Who Can Grind Gets a Shot With Isles
It's not as if Dan Plante hasn't been in big-time contests or new situations before.
As a teen-age lumberjack, he excelled at log-rolling, ax-throwing and tree-climbing, earning money on the job during summer vacation and occasionally winning prizes in competition.
When he was a high school junior, his parents quit their jobs and moved from northern Wisconsin to suburban Minneapolis so Plante could get exposure and experience in a major hockey center.
Plante became a key member of the Wisconsin Badgers, helping his team to a collegiate championship game.


Giuliani to Call for Curtailing Services for Some Homeless
Rudolph W. Giuliani, the Republican-Liberal candidate for mayor, said yesterday that if he was elected, his administration would drastically curtail services for some of New York City's homeless, setting a stringent 90-day limit on many shelter stays.
His proposals would cut the number of people in city shelters each night -- typically 24,000 -- by almost half, his advisers said.


Survivors of the Streets Put Their Lives in Print
THERE are still times when this city can look beautiful, and a recent bright Sunday afternoon, from the fifth-floor terrace of the New Haven Foundation, was one of them.
It helps to look upon New Haven from a height, because then the trees blot out the streets, leaving an impression of leafy, peaceful neighborhoods spreading outward from the spires of Yale toward the cliffs of East Rock and West Rock.
Height also softens the sound of gunfire.
On the terrace, nine young men who know all about the streets of New Haven and the gunfire and the drug dealing and the unraveling of the city's life were posing for photographs and signing books.
Eight others were absent.
Brian, William and Mike were away at college.
Ray was dancing in Argentina.
Albert was dead.


New Clue to Cosmic Collision And Demise of the Dinosaurs
A speeding object from outer space that struck the Earth 65 million years ago in a cataclysm that may have wiped out the dinosaurs was far larger than previously thought and produced what was perhaps the largest explosion to rock the planet since life began, a new study says.
The crater left by the object's impact lies beneath the Gulf of Mexico and the northern tip of the Yucatan Peninsula.
Geological processes like erosion and sedimentation have long since buried all visible signs of the vast scar, which lies a mile or so beneath the Earth's surface.
That makes it hard to pin down its dimensions and cause, whether an asteroid or comet.


Francis Lawrence, 80, Athlete and Executive
Francis Warren Lawrence, a ranking tennis doubles player in the 1930's, a leading amateur golfer and an insurance executive, died yesterday at Mount Sinai Medical Center.
He was 80 and lived in Manhattan.
The cause was heart failure, his family said.


A Primer: Why Economists Favor Free-Trade Agreement
When economists of every stripe agree on anything, it is noteworthy.
So it is a sign of unusual accord that 300 economists, ranging from conservatives like James M. Buchanan and Milton Friedman to liberals including Paul A. Samuelson and James Tobin, recently signed a letter to President Clinton supporting the North American Free Trade Agreement.
Politicians have spoken so loudly and so often on the free-trade agreement that the economists seem to have been pushed into the background.
Depending on who is talking, political leaders have argued that the pact would either send millions of jobs swooshing south to Mexico (Ross Perot) or add hundreds of thousands of high-paying jobs to the American economy (Mickey Kantor). 'Economically Trivial'
Most economists say that neither is the case.
The letter to President Clinton cited a review of dozens of studies of the trade agreement's impact on American jobs and pay.
It concluded that while the signers had minor differences, they concurred that "the effects on the U.S. economy -- both good and bad -- would be small for many years."


Transactions
Baseball  American League
AL -- Reduced the suspensions of Phil Garner, Milwaukee manager; Tony LaRussa, Oakland manager; and Tommie Reynolds, Oakland coach, from five games to three after reviewing their involvement in a brawl during a game played Aug. 24.
CALIFORNIA ANGELS -- Named Richard McClemmy assistant director of marketing; Jann Mueller assistant director of promotions; and Toni Reagins assistant for creative services.
Basketball  National Basketball Association
NBA -- Suspended Richard Dumas, Phoenix Suns forward, indefinitely after he tested positive for a banned substance and refused to comply with the league's substance-abuse treatment program.
HOUSTON ROCKETS -- Named Larry Smith assistant coach.
ORLANDO MAGIC -- Signed Donald Royal, forward.
WASHINGTON BULLETS -- Agreed to terms with Georghe Muresan, center.
Football  National Football League  DALLAS COWBOYS -- Agreed to contract terms with Emmitt Smith, running back.
MINNESOTA VIKINGS -- Fired Jack Burns, offensive coordinator.
Named Brian Billick offensive coordinator.
PHILADELPHIA EAGLES -- Signed Matt Bahr, placekicker, to a one-year contract.
Released Louis Cooper, linebacker.


Hindu Rage Against Muslims Transforming Indian Politics
Slowly, gradually, but with the relentlessness of floodwaters, a growing Hindu rage toward India's Muslim minority has been spreading among India's solid middle class Hindus -- its merchants and accountants, its lawyers and engineers -- creating uncertainty about the future ability of adherents of the two religions to get along.
Along with their hostility toward Muslims, Hindus are gripped by more and more anxiety about who they are, where they are going and what is going to be there in the end.


The Spoken Word
GOV.
MARIO M. CUOMO, 92d Street Y, 1395 Lexington Avenue.
The Governor discusses the meaning of leadership.
Sponsored by Barnes &amp; Noble.
Sunday at 8:15 P.M. $15.
Information: (212) 996-1100.
POEMS OF EMILY DICKINSON, Fifth Avenue Presbyterian Church, at 55th Street.
Frances Sternhagen reads the poetry and letters of the poet.
Sponsored by the Free Theater Project.
Today at 1 P.M.
Free.
Information: (212) 247-0490.


Asbestos Problems Move Ancient Studies to a Modern Room


Last Chance
Here is a sampling of shows in New York City that are to close soon: Closing This Weekend
"A PERFECT GANESH," Manhattan Theater Club, City Center Stage 1, 131 West 55th Street.
A drama by Terrence McNally about two American women on a trip to India.
Through Sunday.
Performances: Tonight at 8; tomorrow at 2 and 8 P.M.; Sunday at 2 and 7 P.M.
Tickets: $40.
Information: (212) 581-1212.


The Sound of Nine Justices Flapping
The Supreme Court is upset because a political scientist is making a commercial killing with recordings of the Court's oral arguments.
The Court says it is "considering what legal remedies may be appropriate" against Peter Irons, who teaches at the University of California at San Diego, for selling recorded snippets from historic arguments.
Such preoccupations are unworthy of the justices' time, and imply that the high court's members own the sound of their own voices when they speak from the bench.
Mr.
Irons's recordings are flawed and amateurish; but if their honors must spend their energies on this subject, the right direction is toward wider circulation of a more polished version of their public deliberations.


Review/Art; The Act of Seeing the Act of Creation
Vija Celmins has never been one of the guys.
Her emphasis on painting process might link her to Chuck Close, her meticulous re-creations of photographs in paint and graphite to Gerhard Richter, and the soft, gray backgrounds of her works from the 1960's to Brice Marden.
Looking at the images she has made over the last 28 years, 66 of which form a spare and illuminating exhibition at the Whitney Museum of American Art, it also seems likely that Ms.
Celmins helped set the stage for the highly artificialized realism that permeated the art of the 1980's.
Signs of her influence can be seen on artists as diverse as Jack Goldstein, Troy Brauntuch, David Deutsch and Ross Bleckner.
Despite such possible connections and credits, Ms.
Celmins has always been oddly on her own, an artist's artist who has quietly pursued her almost obsessive vision without benefit of stardom.
In career and sensibility she seems closest to a late-blooming abstract painter like Agnes Martin or, even more, the reclusive 50's artist Myron Stout, with whom she shares a penchant for technical perfection, graphite and small images, as well as a low, sporadic output.


When Comptroller Is Also Campaigner: Fleet's '92 Loan to Holtzman
In early August 1992, Elizbeth Holtzman's lifetime crusade to become a United States Senator was in deep trouble.
She was mired far behind Geraldine A. Ferraro in polls and her campaign was running on fumes, with only $85,000 in the bank.
She needed money, lots of money.
On Aug. 11, her media consultants gave her a plan for a series of negative ads to be broadcast in late August that would try to tie Ms.
Ferraro's family to mobsters.
The price tag was $450,000, and she had no fund-raising event planned until Sept. 12.


COLLEGE FOOTBALL REPORT
Wagner
Ryan Tobin, meet Tony Russo.
They could meet on the first play from scrimmage tomorrow in the clash between St.
John's and Wagner at the Seahawks' Fischer Field on Staten Island.
Tobin is the 6-foot-2-inch, 220-pound outside linebacker for Wagner whom Walt Hameline calls the best he has had at the position in his 13 years as coach.
Tobin left a significant mark on C. W. Post last Saturday with 27 tackles (16 of them solo and 12 for losses), two pass breakups and one sack in a 27-21 victory.
Bob Ricca, the St.
John's coach, similarly extolls Russo, whose satistics speak for themselves.
A 5-foot-7-inch, 195-pound tailback from North Massapequa, L.I., Russo began his senior season by rushing for 149 yards on 34 carries and scoring three touchdowns.
The last one, with 2 minutes 3 seconds left, was the winning score in a 29-28 victory over St.
Peter's.
Russo, who has 44 career touchdowns, averages 5 yards a rush.
"Anthony enjoys having the offensive burden placed on his shoulders," Ricca said.
"He would not mind carrying the ball every play."


Small-Business Group in No Mood to Relent on Opposition to Health Plan
More than any other lobbying group, the National Federation of Independent Business, the nation's largest organization of small businesses, has been a thorn in the President's side.
Every step of the way, it has battled his legislative agenda and bedeviled his efforts to sell himself as the best friend small business ever had, as someone who champions the millions of mom-and-pop companies at the heart of the American dream.


COMPANY BRIEFS
CROP GENETICS INTERNATIONAL CORP., Hanover, Md., said it would cut 20 jobs as it increased manufacturing and cut back on research and development.
ENRON CORP., Houston, and Sonat Inc. said Citrus Corp., a joint venture, had received Federal regulatory approval for a $900 million expansion of its Florida natural gas pipeline system.


Don't Rule Out Greens As Source for Calcium
To the Editor:
In "What Is Your Body's Best Source of Calcium?" (letter, Sept. 11), a representative of the Council for Responsible Nutrition incorrectly states that because calcium absorption from spinach is low, the same is true "presumably in other leafy green vegetables."


Parking Rules
Because of Rosh ha-Shanah, alternate-side parking rules are suspended in New York City today.
Next week, alternate-side rules will be suspended on Sept. 25 for Yom Kippur.
Other rules remain in effect.
Traffic Alert  TOMORROW The Riverside Drive northbound approach to the George Washington Bridge will be closed from 6 A.M. to 4 P.M. tomorrow and 6 A.M. to 3 P.M. on Sunday for construction.





3-WAY MEETING SET
Bosnia's Muslim-led Government and its Serbian nationalist foes reached agreement early today on adjustments to a peace plan that would partition the country.
Hours later, international mediators called leaders of the three parties to the Bosnian war to a meeting in Sarajevo next Tuesday, apparently in the hope that they will be prepared to sign a long-awaited peace accord.


Sounds Around Town
Donaldson at the Vanguard
Lou Donaldson, Village Vanguard, 178 Seventh Avenue South, at 11th Street, Greenwich Village, (212) 255-4037.
Lou Donaldson is one of the great post-Charlie Parker alto saxophonists, somebody who saves his best improvisations for live performances; he's an amazingly funny singer, as well.
He will be joined by Lonnie Smith on organ, and it will be a meeting of 60's soul jazz and adventurous harmonies.
Shows tonight and tomorrow night are at 9:30 and 11:30 and 1 A.M.; 9:30 and 11:30 P.M. on Sunday.
Admission is $15, with a $8 cover.
The Keezer Experiment
Geoff Keezer, Yardbird Suite, 35 Cooper Square, East Village, (212) 228-5800.
Geoff Keezer is an experimentalist at heart, and when the young pianist takes on a standard, it's often to take it apart.
Mr.
Keezer was an up-and-coming pianist but his performances recently have been few and far between.
He'll be joined by the alto saxophonist Steve Wilson.
Shows tonight and tomorrow are at 9 and 10:30 P.M. and midnight.
Admission is $10, and there is a $10 minimum.
Willis and Wilson
Larry Willis, Bradley's, 70 University Place, Greenwich Village, (212) 228-6440.
One of the finest mainstream pianists around, Larry Willis can flaunt a gorgeous, effortless sense of swing.
The alto saxophonist Steve Wilson will join Mr.
Willis's trio.
The shows on Sunday night are at 10, midnight and 2 A.M.; there is a $12 cover and an $8 minimum.


RESULTS PLUS
TENNIS


In Slain Officer's Family, Anger, and Forgiveness
For a Boston police family, with three brothers and two generations on the force, time has healed some, but certainly not all, of the bitterness over the murder of Officer Walter Schroeder Sr.
"She's part of the cause of why my husband's not here and that's all there is to it," the widow, Marie Schroeder, said, referring to Katherine Ann Power, who surrendered this week acknowledging her role in the 1970 bank robbery in which Walter Schroeder was fatally shot in the back.


Trade Gap Narrowed 14% in July
The nation's trade deficit shrank 14 percent in July, the Commerce Department said today.
But while sluggish growth in the domestic economy curbed the appetite for imports, plunging deliveries of aircraft to foreign customers produced a decline in exports.
The overall narrowing of the deficit, to $10.34 billion, was less than half as large as the June surge, which pushed the deficit in merchandise to the highest level in more than five years and roiled world currency markets.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: ADVERTISING -- ADDENDA People
*
Brad Londy was named to the new position of senior vice president and co-creative director at Schell/Mullaney, New York.
He was previously vice president and creative director at Apple Computer Inc., Cupertino, Calif.


3 Ex-East German Leaders Convicted
Three former East German leaders were found guilty today of inciting border guards to kill citizens who sought to flee westward.
In the first and perhaps last trial of its kind in the reunified Germany, former Defense Minister Heinz Kessler, 73, was sentenced to seven and a half years in prison.
His former deputy, Fritz Streletz, 66, was given a five-and-a-half-year sentence.


CHRONICLE
When MEL TORME, the jazz and pop singer, arrived for his annual stint at Michael's Pub in Manhattan, he was stunned to discover that his bass ukelele had been damaged in transit, its headstock smashed.
"My heart was broken," he said.
"There are only two instruments of this quality -- this one and a twin owned by the late Arthur Godfrey."


At the Airport, Immigration Wants to See Your Palm
In an experiment under way at Kennedy and Newark International Airports, Immigration and Naturalization Service inspectors are asking a growing number of travelers to, one might say, lend them a hand.
The experimental program, called Inspass, is meant eventually to automate the immigration inspections that every traveler from abroad, United States citizen or not, undergoes.


Review/Film; Medical Hero With Warts To Match
If modern medicine had a figure comparable to Ernest Hemingway, it may have been the swashbuckling Canadian surgeon Dr.
Norman Bethune, who died in 1939.
One of the fathers of socialized medicine and an instrumental figure in the development of mobile medical units for treating soldiers wounded on the front lines of battle, he was a larger-than-life hero with many glaring warts.
Imperious, hot-tempered, a womanizer and a drunk, he carried a portable gramophone with him to the farthest reaches of China to stoke himself with Beethoven while working with Mao Zedong's revolutionary army.
Before that he worked for the Loyalist forces in the Spanish Civil War, until asked to leave because of his personal improprieties.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
The trade deficit shrank 14 percent in July, with sluggish growth in the domestic economy curbing imports.
But plunging deliveries of aircraft to foreign customers produced a decline in exports.  [ Page D1. ]  Industrial production rose two-tenths of 1 percent in August, the third straight advance.  [ D2. ]
An all-out assault to kill the Clinton health care plan is being plotted by the National Federation of Independent Business, the nation's largest organization of small businesses.  [ A20. ] Companies
The U.A.W.'s new contract with Ford breaks little ground, increasing wages and preserving benefits, including full health care.  [ D1. ]  The pact's two-tier wage system is a cost-saving measure that has fallen out of favor in other industries.  [ D1. ]


Corrections
An article on Tuesday about Philip Glass's new recording contract identified his record label incompletely.
It is Elektra Nonesuch.


Reviews/Film; Traveler Boys and Their Magical Horse
The combination of Jim Sheridan, the writer and director of "My Left Foot," and Mike Newell, the director of "Enchanted April," looks good on paper.
It looks even better on screen.
These two film makers, each of whom has demonstrated his ability to charm viewers in unexpected ways, have joined forces to tell the tale of two motherless boys, their grieving father and a magical white horse, with much of the tale set against the rugged terrain of western Ireland.
"Into the West," which Mr.
Sheridan wrote and Mr.
Newell directed, has both storytelling and scenery to recommend it.
"Into the West" also has an element of built-in exotica, some stemming from the travelers, Irish gypsies who are the film's principal characters and some arising from the underlying mysticism of the plot.
This film, which has a distinctly family-minded spirit, shows how the boys escape their own sad memories and the oppressiveness of life among those city-dwellers they refer to, quite contemptuously, as "settled people." The boys themselves, are part of a different, more adventurous tradition.


From Bad to Worse: Kamieniecki Loses at Home
The 161st Street playhouse presentation of "The Nutcracker," as choreographed by you know who, appears headed for its final performances.
As if the Yankees were in need of George Steinbrenner's recent pronouncement that it's "nut-crackin' time," their situation advanced one more step toward desperate last night.
Their 6-4 loss to the Red Sox dropped the Yankees three games behind idle Toronto in the American League East race -- the farthest they have been from first since Aug. 3 -- and four games back in the loss column.


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt  *
James River Corp., Richmond, filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission for a shelf offering of up to $400 million of debt securities to be issued from time to time.
*
Florida Power and Light Co., West Palm Beach, Fla., a subsidiary of FPL Group Inc., is offering $250 million of first mortgage bonds in two parts.
The first part, $125 million of 7 percent bonds with a 10-year call provision and due in 2025, was priced at 100 through Goldman, Sachs &amp; Co.
The second part, $125 million of 5 3/8 percent bonds due in 2000, was priced at 100 through Merrill Lynch &amp; Co.
All the bonds are rated A2 by Moody's Investors Service and A by Standard &amp; Poor's and Duff &amp; Phelps.


CHRONICLE
For Rabbi DAVID A. TEUTSCH, Rosh ha-Shanah, the Jewish New Year, is off to a joyous beginning: he is to be inaugurated next month as the fourth president of the Reconstructionist Rabbinical College in Wyncote, Pa.
As executive vice president of the school since 1990, and one of its major fund-raisers, he has already had a significant impact.
The school has received major gifts during its 25th anniversary campaign.
It has also become increasingly popular with students, and qualified applicants have been turned away for the first time.


Giants' Sign Goes Up: 'Beware the Cowboys!'
As far as Rodney Hampton is concerned, the Dallas Cowboys running back Emmitt Smith deserves the money he will now get from the Cowboys, and he can't figure out why it took so long.
Of course, Hampton is happy for his friend and fellow running back, but knows it's a whole different division race now.
"He deserves it," said Hampton, who recently signed his own new deal with the Giants.
"I knew he'd get what he wanted. I wish him the best of luck. I remember we talked at the Pro Bowl this year and he said: 'You've got to wish me luck. It's going to be contract time soon.' He knew it was going to be a tough fight even then. I guess he won his fight.


At Center of Trade-Accord Storm, Judge Bristles but Watches Image
Federal Judge Charles R. Richey is sensitive about his image.
He is pained by the attacks, from both the right and the left, over his ruling that the Clinton Administration must prepare an environmental-impact statement in connection with the North American Free Trade Agreement.


At the Bar; A Maine lobsterman's justice (or, evoking Stephen King to trap a debtor).
This is a lobster tale, a parable on the perils of taking the law into your own claws.
It is also a story of how Stephen King, whose gross annual revenue rivals those of L. L. Bean and Maine's other major industries, has been dragged quite unwittingly into the state's courts.
Earlier this summer Bert S. Look, whose family has been catching crustaceans out of this sleepy fishing village on the eastern end of the Maine coast since 1910, was the picture of frustration.
For months, he has since explained, a local seafood wholesaler named John Kostandin had owed him nearly $30,000, and he was powerless to make him pay.
The usual legal remedies, he believed, were worthless.


Diner's Journal
Lutece Reverts
In March, Andre Soltner, the chef and owner of Lutece, hired a chef and a manager to shoulder some of the responsibility for running the restaurant.
He selected Pierre Shutz, who has worked as a chef with Jean-Georges Vongerichten and shares an Alsatian background with Mr.
Soltner, and Tony Fortuna, who was the manager both of Lafayette when Mr.
Vongerichten was there and more recently of Lespinasse.


In Second Move From Lotus, Executive Is Joining Shiva
Frank Ingari is leaving the Lotus Development Corporation for the second time, again to become president and chief executive of a small company with a promising new technology.
This time, Mr.
Ingari, who is Lotus's vice president of marketing, is leaving to join the Shiva Corporation, a leader in remote networking technology, Shiva announced yesterday.
Mr.
Ingari had left Lotus in 1991 for Ontos Inc., a provider of data base software using object-oriented technology, which is a modular approach to writing software code.
He returned to Lotus 15 months later as Ontos grappled with slow sales.


Zanzibar Journal; Where Ghosts Dwell, Free Enterprise Moves In
In the last few years, multiparty democracy, freedom of speech and plenty of tourists have come to Zanzibar, but in the town's twisting narrow alleys and crumbling buildings the ghosts still refuse to rest.
Like many Zanzibaris, Ahmed S. Ahmed says he has seen people possessed.
His uncle died of a mysterious illness -- a ghost's revenge, he says.
And thousands of ghosts are said to roam the town still.


Pleasures of Reading, Shared and Solitary
THE city sleeps; the city wakes.
Obedient to the daily imperative, I, too, get out of bed.
The breakfast ritual: tea and bread made of seven grains never heard of before last year. (Yeats's old mummy wheat baked slowly in an oven?) I swallow the vitamin supplement because it's said to hold cataracts at bay, read the paper and glare at my watch.
It is half-past 8.
The city wakes earlier than I.
This weekend, at this same early hour, the annual fair justly named New York Is Book Country will be in full swing.
Three full days have been set aside to celebrate the printed page under the theme "Make Time for Reading," with seminars on business, comics and detective stories, authors addressing adults and children, a curtain lifted to reveal the spicy magic of Harlem's literary past.
Every borough will pitch in; even rebellious Staten Island will have readings and performances by high school student authors and more.
My mood brightens.
I see that my wife, too, is reading.
Her glasses have settled at the tip of the nose I love above all others.
As if she didn't know it, I tell her I am glad to be a New Yorker.


Restaurants
My mother didn't care much about food, but she loved going to restaurants.
To her they were the best kind of theater, and when I was growing up we made weekly pilgrimages to see the latest show.
"Look," she cried, pulling me into the fledgling Four Seasons, "they change the sets every three months!" The 1950's and 60's were a halcyon time for her: she was constantly dragging us off to places that served ale by the yard.
Then New York restaurants started concentrating on food, and Mom more or less lost interest.
So you'll understand why she was so excited about the opening of the River Cafe in 1977.
Mom couldn't understand why I wouldn't rush right home from California to see this wonder: it took me a couple of years.
And by the time I got there, I was an utter disappointment to her.
Mom was like a kid, picking out buildings across the river, pointing out the boats.
I thought it was pretty fabulous too: New York's best bridge hovers just over your head and Lady Liberty toasts you off to the left.
Still, it was the food that captured my attention; it was wonderful stuff.


Old Hand at T.W.A.'s Controls
Soon after William R. Howard left as head of Piedmont Airlines in 1987, he began an enviable retirement: some work, travel and plenty of toys, including 15 motorcycles and two boats, not to mention 30 or so new and antique cars.
But for Mr.
Howard, it seems, no retirement can compete with the lure of running an airline.
So when Trans World Airlines beckoned this summer, he answered the call to lead the carrier he once tried to buy.


L.I. Philharmonic
The Long Island Philharmonic opens its 1993-94 season this weekend with two concerts, Saturday at 8:30 P.M. at the Staller Center for the Arts, State University at Stony Brook, L.I., and Sunday at 7:30 P.M. at Tilles Center, C. W. Post Campus of Long Island University, Brookville, L.I.
Christopher Keene is to conduct the orchestra in a program of Malcolm Arnold's English Dances (Set No. 1), Tchaikovsky's Piano Concerto No. 1 (Vladimir Feltsman, soloist) and the Second Symphony of Sibelius.
Remaining tickets are $27 to $43.
Information: (516) 293-2222.


By an Urban Lake, an Ancient Ritual


Suffolk Executive's Budget Seeks to Cut Property Taxes
Relying on a sales-tax increase to yield at least $120 million next year, the Suffolk County Executive proposed a $1.56 billion budget today that would cut property taxes for most residents.
After years of deficits, fiscal crises and warnings of layoffs, the Executive, Robert J. Gaffney, also proposed hiring more than 400 new employees, including 340 police officers, and requested raises of 2.5 percent for elected officials, including himself.


INSIDE
7 Shot in Bronx Apartment
Seven people were shot in a Bronx apartment, four fatally, in what the police said may have been a well-planned execution.
Page B1.
Taking Sides on Comptroller
Alan G. Hevesi picked up endorsements in his race with Comptroller Elizabeth Holtzman, but Mayor Dinkins has yet to intervene.
Page B1.
Hint of Chinese Atom Test
The United States has data suggesting that China is planning to set off an underground nuclear test, an Administration official said.
Page A3.


Japan Unveils a Third Plan To Stimulate the Economy
The Japanese Government today announced its third emergency stimulus package in 13 months, in what economists say is becoming an increasingly futile effort to jump-start an economy whose battery has died.
The program consists of about 6 trillion yen, or roughly $57 billion, of increased public works spending, low interest loans and tax incentives intended to pull the world's second largest economy out of its worst downturn in at least two decades.


COMPANY NEWS: Hotbeds for Start-Ups; Where Is Opportunity Knocking the Loudest?
With big companies shedding workers left and right, where are America's new jobs going to come from?
Try Charlotte, N.C., Huntsville, Ala., and Sunnyvale, Calif.
They are three of the winners in a new study of start-ups and job creation called "Entrepreneurial Hot Spots: The Best Places in America to Start and Grow a Company."


Dumas Is Suspended by N.B.A.
RICHARD DUMAS of the Phoenix Suns, viewed earlier this week as the key to a trade for Detroit's DENNIS RODMAN, won't be playing basketball in the National Basketball Association any time soon.
The N.B.A. suspended Dumas indefinitely without pay on Wednesday for violating his substance-abuse rehabilitation, and the Suns' president, JERRY COLANGELO, said the forward "is not in our plans."
Late Wednesday, the Suns said, the N.B.A. administered a drug test to Dumas.
The league declined to confirm the test, but confirmed Dumas's referral to the Houston clinic run by San Antonio Coach JOHN LUCAS or the N.B.A.-run Adult Substance Abuse program in Van Nuys, Calif.
The N.B.A. said Dumas, who missed the 1991-92 season and part of last season after failing a random drug test before ever playing in a regular-season game, now has one "strike" against him under the league's drug policy.


Review/Theater: The Madness of George III; Creating a Lovable George III
IF Yitzhak Rabin can shake hands with Yasir Arafat, then Americans should have no trouble wrapping King George III in a warm embrace.
Nigel Hawthorne, who plays the monarch who lost America in "The Madness of George III," makes it easy.
His astonishing performance, a cascading flow of endearing bluster, hot rage and scalding tears, begins where his dry comedic turn in television's "Yes, Minister" leaves off; it makes his Tony Award-winning portrait of C. S. Lewis in "Shadowlands" look like a cameo.
Who could not love a ruler who merges the accessible, everyman's nobility of Ralph Richardson with the plebeian, jocular vulgarity of Mel Brooks?
The play that provides the springboard for Mr.
Hawthorne's triumph is by Alan Bennett, who is arguably the best playwright in England whose major works remain unproduced in the American theater.
"The Madness of George III" is not one of those major works, but it would be silly to complain too much about a play that gives audiences a chance to savor an unforgettable performance.
And it's easy to see why "George III," in its original Royal National Theater production directed by Nicholas Hytner, has been sent on American tour while tougher Bennett works like "Single Spies" and "Talking Heads" have been limited to piecemeal presentation on public television.
With its 18th-century pomp and circumstance, large cast, flourishes of Handel and opulent rustle of costumes, "George III" is more readily marketable as the sort of Broadway entertainment the Colonies are thought to prefer.


Winfield Stands Atop the Summit: 3,000
Dave Winfield laughed, enjoying the delicious irony of the idea.
"Maybe that's been in the back of my mind," he said.
"Maybe that's why I haven't done it yet."
During a telephone conversation about his approaching 3,000th hit, Winfield was looking ahead to the Minnesota Twins' visit to New York next week to play the Yankees, and he was struck by the thought of getting the memorable hit in front of his longtime adversary, George Steinbrenner.


A Conscience Haunted by a Radical's Crime
They came together 16 months ago, a small-town Oregon therapist and a fugitive from a bank robbery and slaying two decades earlier.
The therapist, Linda Carroll, said she had never seen a psyche so battered as that of the fugitive, Katherine Ann Power.
It was impossible for her to believe that this bespectacled cook with the terrific polenta recipe, a person who would cry at any mention of family, had spent 14 years as one of the Federal Bureau of Investigation's 10 most wanted fugitives.


Airline Drops Suit Appeal
Northwest Airlines said today that it would not appeal last month's verdict by a Federal jury that cleared American Airlines of trying to drive Northwest and Continental Airlines out of business with illegally low, or "predatory," prices.
Continental announced last month that it would not appeal.


CHRONICLE
SIDNEY KIMMEL, the multimillionaire founder of the Jones Apparel Group, is not a regular concertgoer, but he does have an affection for Philadelphia, where he was born and educated.
That is why he is giving $12 million to help build a new concert hall for the Philadelphia Orchestra.
It is the largest sum the orchestra has received from an individual donor.
Mr.
Kimmel said recently that until now, the closest contact he had with the orchestra was in 1945, when his class at West Philadelphia High School was invited to use the stage of the Academy of Music, the orchestra's home, for graduation exercises.


Mexico Takes Giant Steps Toward a New Era; Things to Come?
To the Editor:
I am secretary general of a union of Mexicans and Americans who work at the Mexican-American Cultural Relations Institute (Instituto Mexicano Norteamericano de Relaciones Culturales), founded by Presidents Manuel Avila Camacho and Franklin Delano Roosevelt in 1944.
Here, generations of Mexicans and Americans have studied English and Spanish.


Review/Art; Decorative Images In a Delicate Medium
"That elegant Branch of the polite Arts" is the way watercolor painting was described by a contemporary observer two centuries ago, and the description perfectly fits the more than 70 examples of such work in "18th-Century Dutch Watercolors from the Rijksmuseum Printroom, Amsterdam," at the Frick Collection.
Maybe a little too perfectly.
Anyone coming to this show expecting to find the emotional gravity of the 17th-century Baroque golden age will be disappointed.
The silver age that followed, at least as represented in these watercolors, asked something different of its artists: polish rather than depth, and a secular, rational light in place of the spiritual dramas of chiaroscuro.
Drama itself, in fact, seems to have gone out of fashion.
Clouds pile up in the skies, the star-crossed lovers of classical myth appear, but there is little sign of storms or hearts breaking.
The only real narratives are illustrated scenes from popular stage farces, and the emblems of transience that ran like a subtle bass note throughout Dutch painting of an earlier day find little place.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.13
3.38
3.00
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
2.94
2.95
2.87
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.06
3.05
2.91
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
4.95
4.93
5.90
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
6.03
5.97
7.32
TELEPHONE BONDS
7.01
6.96
8.38
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
5.45
5.48
6.34
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Bond Prices Fall in Erratic Trading
The bond market continued its volatile performance yesterday, with prices falling early in the day and then recovering in the early afternoon.
But unlike the afternoon rally on Wednesday, which wiped out most of the day's losses, yesterday's rally lost its legs near the end of the day, leaving prices down and yields up for the day.


Home Video
A Slump in September
For whatever reasons (a new television season is one), video rentals customarily dive in September.
Anticipating the slump, studios often delay hot titles until customer interest revives later in the fall.
This year, though, with the exception of "Aladdin," available Oct. 1, and a few other titles, release schedules are slight even for September and October.


U.N. Gives Timetable for Somalia Democracy
The chief United Nations official in Somalia set out an 18-month timetable for the creation of a democratic government there today and stressed that while its capital, Mogadishu, remained in a state of near anarchy, normalcy was returning to other parts of the country.
But Adm.
Jonathan Howe, the former American naval officer who represents the United Nations Secretary General, Boutros Boutros-Ghali, in Somalia, was unable to predict when Gen.
Mohammed Farah Aidid's forces can be brought under control in the capital or when that fugitive warlord will be arrested.


News Devotes Front Page To an Attack on Holtzman
In a departure from usual journalistic practice and its own traditions, The Daily News yesterday devoted its front page to an editorial calling on Comptroller Elizabeth Holtzman to withdraw from her runoff race for re-election.
"Daily News to Liz Holtzman: Time to Go," declared a large headline over a picture of the embattled Comptroller and excerpts from an editorial, published in full on the editorial page, criticizing Ms.
Holtzman for taking a $450,000 campaign loan from a bank she later approved as an underwriter of city bonds.


YELTSIN RESTORING OUSTED ECONOMIST
President Boris N. Yeltsin said today that he was bringing Yegor T. Gaidar, the reformist economist who was forced out as Acting Prime Minister by opponents last December, back into the Government as First Deputy Prime Minister in charge of all economic matters.
Mr.
Yeltsin made the surprise announcement while fielding questions during a visit to Interior Ministry forces.
He said that Mr.
Gaidar had accepted and that the move would become official on Saturday.


CHRONICLE
Doctors successfully cleared a blocked blood vessel in the heart of MOTHER TERESA yesterday, leaving the Nobel laureate in stable condition at the B. M. Birla Heart Research Institute in Calcutta, The Associated Press reported.


Silicon Graphics to Use Kodak Photo CD's
The Eastman Kodak Company had some good news for a change yesterday, announcing that Silicon Graphics Inc., a producer of visual computing systems, would equip all its machines so they could use pictures stored on Kodak's Photo CD optical disks.
The acceptance of Kodak's Photo CD as a means of storing photographs by Silicon Graphics is an important step in Kodak's bid to combine the company's traditional chemical-based photography with electronic image manipulation.
Although Photo CD has not been notably successful as a consumer product, it has found commercial and industrial applications.


Returning Strikers Turned Away at Steel Plant


Holidays With Hope Ascendant: Visualizing Peace in Mideast
It was an inauspicious beginning.
Rabbi Harvey M. Tattelbaum was planning yesterday to put special emphasis on the customary procession to the East River for tashlich, an ancient cleansing ritual in which observant Jews celebrate the New Year by throwing bread into the water, symbolically casting out their sins.


Search for Tourist's Killers Divides Florida Town
The police search for the young killers of a British tourist has divided this normally quiet Deep South town, which finds itself in the uncomfortable spotlight of international publicity.
Some black residents of Monticello, population 2,600, have complained that dozens of young black men, some of whom were pulled out of school, have been questioned about the slaying of a British tourist, Gary Colley, at a rest area on Interstate 10 near here early Tuesday.


Shakespeare Will Survive Despite Editorials to the Contrary
To the Editor:
It is surprising to find an attack on Shakespeare criticism Sept. 3 sandwiched between editorials on the defense budget and election law violations.
In contemptuously ridiculing some observations about Shakespeare's plays that would not seem controversial in their academic context, you raise the banner of anti-intellectualism to defend an author who, you suggest, needs no defending.


QVC's Home Shopping Deal Is Said to Have Hit Snags
The outside directors of Home Shopping Network are holding out for some concessions in its pending merger with QVC Inc., according to several executives close to the discussions.
The delay could provide an opportunity for Barry Diller, QVC's chairman, to back out of the talks and proceed with a bid for Paramount Communications Inc.
Paramount has already agreed to accept an $8 billion takeover bid by Viacom Inc.


Where Readers Meet Writers: A Guide to New York Is Book Country
Events are planned throughout the city to coincide with the New York Is Book Country fair, which will take place on Sunday on Fifth Avenue in Manhattan.
Here is a schedule of events.
TODAY
Manhattan
"BUSINESS BOOK AND AUTHOR BREAKFAST," McGraw-Hill Reading Room, 50th floor, 1221 Avenue of the Americas, at 48th Street.
A breakfast featuring James Champy ("Re-engineering the Corporation") and Robert Shulman ("Marketing Myths That Are Killing Business").
Co-sponsored by Crain's New York Business. 8 to 10 A.M.
Admission: $25.
Reservations: (212) 210-0739.


Sounds Around Town
Run Silent, Run Loud
"Silent Movies/Loud Music," the American Museum of the Moving Image, 35th Avenue at 36th Street, Astoria, Queens, (718) 784-0077.
In a collaboration of the Knitting Factory and the American Museum of the Moving Image, musicians on the fringes of jazz, rock and classical new music will supply live soundtracks for silent films.
The series opens with Phillip Johnston's cracked-jazz Big Trouble, a successor to the Microscopic Septet, playing music for "The Unknown," Tod Browning's 1927 film, which, like the better-known Browning film "Freaks," is about carnival performers like Alonzo the Armless Wonder.
It is to be shown tonight at 8, tomorrow at 7 P.M. and Sunday at 3 P.M.
Samm Bennett, a percussionist, singer and composer with a broad sonic palette, will perform music for the surreal cartoons of Koko the Clown tomorrow at 3 P.M. and Sunday at 7 P.M.
Tickets are $10, $8 for museum members; a shuttle bus, for $4, leaves from the Knitting Factory, 47 East Houston Street, East Village, one hour before showtime.
Sonic Surprises
David First, Bob, 235 Eldridge Street, East Village, (212) 777-0588.
Strange things happen when notes with frequencies a few cycles apart are played simultaneously.
David First, a composer who plays electric guitar, knows all about such acoustic phenomena, and his music delves into throbbing notes, phantom overtones and unlikely resonances in structures that tend toward the hypnotic.
Tonight at 9; admission is $4.
Naked City Music
Naked City, the Knitting Factory, 47 East Houston Street, East Village, (212) 219-3055.
The club's month of John Zorn performances continues with his downtown supergroup, Naked City, tonight and tomorrow at 9 and 11.
The group -- Bill Frisell on guitar, Wayne Horvitz on keyboards, Fred Frith on bass and violin, Joey Baron on drums, and Mr.
Zorn on saxophone and noisemakers -- plays tunes that hop idioms every few seconds in a wild, funny display of eclecticism.
On Sunday at 8 P.M. and Monday at 9 and 11, most of the same musicians will participate in "Hu Die," "Que Tran" and "Hwang Chin-ee," Mr.
Zorn's musings on Orientalia: recitations in Asian languages that interweave with improvisations by a few musicians at a time.
Tickets are $14.


Abroad at Home; The Crux of the Deal
It was not altruism or a sudden access of affection for each other that moved Israel and the P.L.O. to the ceremony on the White House lawn.
It was self-interest: a realization that making peace with this enemy was better than the looming alternatives.
And self-interest is the key to making the agreement work.
It is ingeniously built into the deal, giving each party incentives to do what the other wants.


Corrections
A report by The Associated Press in the Company News column of Business Day last Saturday about Abbott Laboratories' plan to buy back up to 20 million shares of its common stock misstated the number of shares outstanding.
It was 832.8 million on June 30, not 362.8 million.


Woodson Signs Deal
All-Pro cornerback ROD WOODSON signed a contract with the Pittsburgh Steelers yesterday that will reportedly pay him $12 million over four years.
That would make him the highest-paid defensive back, surpassing TIM McDONALD of the San Francisco 49ers, who has a five-year deal reportedly worth $12.75 million.
Woodson, 28, would have become a free agent at the end of the season. (AP)


Devils Must Wait
GARY BETTMAN, the National Hockey League commissioner, will wait until Monday or later before making a decision on the Devils' dispute with Ottawa regarding the trade that brought goaltender PETER SIDORKIEWICZ to New Jersey.


There's Something About a 3-0 Team
When the Giants play the Los Angeles Rams on Sunday, the game will have more than the normal edge to it.
If the Giants win, they improve to 3-0.
And, if you believe statistics, a team that begins 3-0 has a strong chance of making it to the playoffs.
Since 1986, 30 teams have won their first three games.
Twenty-six -- or 87 percent -- advanced to the playoffs.


Willie Mosconi, 80, Who Ruled The World of Billiards With Style
Willie Mosconi, acknowledged as one of the greatest pocket billiards players in the history of the sport, died on Thursday afternoon at his home in Haddon Heights, N.J.
He was 80.
Mr. Mosconi died of a heart attack, said members of his immediate family.
"For hustlers like Minnesota Fats, billiards was just for fun," said Stanley Cohen, who, with Mr.
Mosconi, wrote "Willie's Game" (McMillan), an autobiography published last March.
"But for Willie Mosconi, billiards was strictly a business."


Reviews/Pop; Getting Older, Getting Louder
The guitarists wore black shirts and had shaved heads; the bassist's skinny braids had beads at the ends.
But the man leading the band on Thursday night at Irving Plaza was a 41-year-old in a striped shirt and blue jeans: John Hiatt, who has charged up his latest songs with some hard-rock blare and crunch.
Where many rockers turn introspective as they move toward middle age, Mr.
Hiatt has decided to howl louder.
Although he is one of the best word-slingers among American songwriters -- "You're under my skin like a submarine" -- Mr.
Hiatt delights in the wordless pleasures of rock: the impact of a power chord or a tom-tom socked on an offbeat; a vocal that turns into growls or falsetto whoops.
His voice is a baritone with a trapdoor into the bass range; he can invoke the nasal tension of country singing and the full-throated release of soul shouting.
Onstage, he mugs through his songs, rubber-faced and intent on every detail, putting thumb and forefinger together in a line about smoke rings, holding up both arms to gesture like a preacher, rolling his eyes and jerking his chin in happy reaction to one of Michael Ward's squealing guitar solos.


Japan Prime Minister Offers Political Reform Plan
Girding for a battle that may determine its ability to retain power, the fragile coalition Government of Prime Minister Morihiro Hosokawa proposed a far-reaching political reform plan today that for the first time would bar companies from contributing money directly to parliamentary candidates and establish public financing of campaigns.
Failed promises to reform Japan's corruption-ridden electoral process have ended the terms of the last two Prime Ministers, both from the Liberal Democratic Party.
The party was driven from office in July for the first time in 37 years, and Mr.
Hosokawa has promised to overhaul a system that has encouraged companies and gangsters to buy off leading politicians.


For Municipal Bonds, Scandals Spur Change
THE report issued this week finding that Comptroller Elizabeth Holtzman of New York City was "grossly negligent" in receiving a campaign loan from a bank she selected to underwrite city bonds was the latest episode in a series of political scandals roiling the $1.2 trillion municipal finance market.
Elsewhere, there have been allegations that Merrill Lynch &amp; Company made illegal payments to a firm close to a top gubernatorial aide in New Jersey, and reports of illegal fee-splitting arrangements in municipal bond deals in Louisiana and Massachusetts.


A Moral Victory: Mets Go 10 With Braves
"Reversal of Fortune" might make a nice headline for what the Braves have done in 1993.
But it's far too quaint to be adequate.
A pitiless revolution comes perhaps closest to capturing the full scope and depth of what the Braves have accomplished.
The Braves, with their 45-14 record since the All-Star Game break, have remade a division, and redefined again what is possible in the game.
And, like all revolutions, it has produced both wonder and hardship.
There is, after all, something unjust about what has happened to the Giants.
Awesome in their own right and ahead in the National League West for months, the Giants have been trampled by a force whose momentum appears inexorable.


Clinton Asks China to Halt Atom Test
President Clinton urged China today to "step away" from what American intelligence analysts say are strong indications that Beijing is preparing to resume underground nuclear testing, perhaps by early October.
It would be the first Chinese nuclear test in nearly a year; more important, it could undermine a 15-month moratorium on nuclear testing by the United States that President Clinton declared in July.


Dinkins Says He Is Neutral On Comptroller
Mayor David N. Dinkins said yesterday that he would not make an endorsement in the Democratic primary runoff for comptroller, in which Alan G. Hevesi is running against the incumbent, Elizabeth Holtzman.
"I have not taken a position in that contest, don't expect to, and I will support the Democratic nominee," Mr.
Dinkins said.


Dillard Munford, 75; Founded a Chain of Stores
Dillard Munford, the wealthy founder of a chain of convenience stores, died on Wednesday at Emory University Hospital in Atlanta.
He was 75.
A family spokesman said that the cause was heart failure, and that until his death Mr.
Munford continued to write editorial columns that appeared in 30 weekly newspapers in Georgia.


Last Gasp: Yanks Get Tanana From the Mets
Can a 40-year-old pitcher rescue the Yankees?
Of course not.
And the Yankees didn't get Frank Tanana from the Mets to save them.
They are just hoping that his tired left arm can crank out six or seven capable innings a start for the next two weeks because hardly anyone one else's can.
Call it desperation.
Call it realism.
Call it one of their last hopes to revive their suspect rotation.
Featuring three struggling rookie starters in the last three weeks, the Yankees decided that they needed someone with a chance of lasting beyond the fifth inning so they acquired Tanana for Kenny Greer, a reliever for Class AAA Columbus.


At Least 14 Missing as Storm Lashes Hong Kong and Macao


Hewlett-Packard Chairman, David Packard, Will Retire
David Packard, co-founder of the Hewlett-Packard Company and a founding father of Silicon Valley, said today that he would retire as chairman of the company he and William R. Hewlett started in a Palo Alto, Calif., garage in 1939.
"At my age, it's time for me to step aside," Mr.
Packard, 81, said in a statement.
"The company is in a strong competitive position and we have an excellent management team in place to meet the challenges ahead," he said.
"This is a good time to make the change."


Whitman Finds Her Voice in New Jersey Race
Christine Todd Whitman has surfaced.
After a long and leisurely summer, the Republican gubernatorial candidate has hit the road in her campaign to unseat Jim Florio, trailing a big-name Republican consultant, a staff of exuberant young aides and two unwelcome guests.
"It's just dumb, it's silly," Mrs.
Whitman said during a drive to a Mercer County campaign stop this week, talking about the two fresh-faced workers from the Governor's campaign who shadow her across the state, waiting for slips of the tongue.
She neglected to mention that Republican workers sometimes shadow Mr.
Florio for the same reason.


Cuban Air Force Captain Defects With a MIG
A Cuban Air Force captain landed an unarmed jet fighter at a Navy base here today in the second such defection in less than three years.
The pilot, identified by Federal officials as Enio Ravelo Rodriguez, 32, is being questioned by immigration and Navy officials.


Clinton Asserts Health Plan Will Solve Red-Tape Crisis
Citing the experience of a hospital here that is accumulating a six-and-a-half-foot stack of new paper records every week, President Clinton said today that his evolving health care plan would solve an expensive and growing paperwork crisis.
Mr.
Clinton, who visited the Children's Medical Center today with Vice President Al Gore, said that 20 cents of every dollar spent in the $880 billion-a-year health care system went for paperwork and regulation and that much of this spending was caused by "waste and inefficiency."


Corrections
A report in the Patents column of Business Day on Aug. 16, about a cargo holder for groceries in car trunks, misidentified the holder of the patent for the cardboard accordion sunshade for automobile dashboards.
The patent was issued to Abraham Levy, not Avi Fattal.
This correction was delayed by an editing lapse.


Review/Film; Making a Race on Skates the Reason to Exist
"Airborne" is a modest attempt to take a familiar genre, the surf movie, and spin it into a new subgenre, the Rollerblades film.
The movie's teen-age hero, Mitchell (Shane McDermott), is a baby-faced Southern California surfer who also skates.
When his parents break the news that he will have to live with relatives in Cincinnati for six months while they complete a research project in Australia, his lotus-land idyll is rudely interrupted.
Mitchell proves to be an unflappably good sport about his forced stay with an aunt and uncle (Edie McClurg and Patrick O'Brien) who suggest caricatures of the icky Lubner family from "Saturday Night Live" skits.
And he is a loyal pal to their teen-age son, Wiley, a dweeb with rebel pretensions.
But at the medium-tough high school they attend, Mitchell is resented for his golden-boy aura and his refusal to fight back when challenged.
After he makes a crucial error in an ice-hockey game, he becomes the butt of countless pranks.


Corrections
An article on Thursday about the Democratic primary runoff between Alan G. Hevesi and Elizabeth Holtzman for New York City comptroller referred imprecisely to the history of citywide runoffs for secondary offices.
There was also one in 1977, for City Council President, simultaneously with a mayoral runoff.
An article yesterday about Ms.
Holtzman's dealings with the Fleet Financial Group misstated the date she announced her candidacy for the United States Senate.
It was July 29, 1991, not 1992.


Bargain Price Reported In Hawaii Resort Sale
A luxurious Hawaiian resort that is being bought by the Hilton Hotels Corporation and Colony Capital Inc., a Los Angeles private investment company, was sold for about a quarter of its construction cost, people close to the deal said yesterday.
The 1,241-room hotel, the Hyatt Regency Waikoloa, has been operated by Hyatt and owned by a private investment company.
It was opened in 1988.


Review/Pop; Whimsy of the Canterbury Sound Survives
Canterbury, a small English town, boasts a major cathedral and its own slice of regional rock history.
From the late 1960's to the mid-1970's, Canterbury spawned a handful of overlapping bands that quietly invented a local version of progressive rock.
Richard Sinclair, who played bass and sang for four leading Canterbury bands -- Wildeflowers, Caravan, Camel, and Hatfield and the North -- showed that the style survives when he slipped into New York on Wednesday night for a solo show at Fez, at Lafayette and Great Jones Streets.
The early set was broadcast live by WFMU.
The Canterbury style was genial and free-flowing, tinged with folksy melody and jazz harmonies and always underplaying its musical gamesmanship; it channeled free-form psychedelic jamming into elastic song structures.
The music ambled along with asymmetrical tunes that interrupted themselves or sped up to cram more words in or wandered off on tangents.
The lyrics, too, meandered from declarations of love to everyday worries to philosophical shrugs: "The only thing to do is grin and bear it." Mr.
Sinclair's voice, a sleepy, breathy croon, was the perfect medium for such kindly tidings.


Premium Limits In Health Plan Draw Criticism
The Congressional Budget Office warned today that one of the most important elements of President Clinton's health plan, Federal limits on private health insurance premiums, could harm consumers by forcing a reduction in valuable medical care and restricting access to new medical technology.
More than any other factor, it is the soaring cost that has ignited public interest in efforts to overhaul the nation's medical system.
Mr.
Clinton asserts that his proposal would control costs primarily by encouraging competition in the health care market.


Property Swaps Avoid Capital Gains Tax
When Ann Heslop sold a rental property in Adelphi, Md., last year, she recorded a $58,000 capital gain.
Two months ago, when she sold a vacant lot in Emerald Island, N.C., she posted a $70,000 capital gain.
But Ms.
Heslop, a savvy real estate broker who lives in Silver Spring, Md., escaped capital gains taxes in both cases.
Using a little-known provision in the Federal tax code, she exchanged the properties for others and averted more than $40,000 in total Federal, state and local taxes. 'Like Kind' Property
The provision, Section 1031k, allows unlimited capital gains to be deferred indefinitely if the seller buys a "like kind" property within six months.
Under the definition of "like kind," any property used for investment, income or business purposes can be replaced with another property for such purposes.


Observer; Some Legal Sexcess
Reports filtering back to the rest home here indicate fierce strife raging out in the American sexual trenches.
Makes you glad to be in the rest home in spite of the food that doesn't need chewing and the nurses who think you really mean it when you wink at them, especially the ugly ones.
One of the new things, aside from condoms being displayed right out alongside the toothpaste and hair oil at the drugstore . . .


No, Not Term Limits, But Election Reform
To the Editor:
Ronald S. Lauder's arguments for term limits in "New York Needs Term Limits for City Council and Top Posts" (letter, Sept. 4) eschew a simpler and fairer solution to the legitimate concern caused by a 95 percent re-election rate: elections.
A lost election is the ultimate term limit, and ultimately the most democratic.
The trick is to strip incumbents of the structural advantages that handicap their underfinanced challengers.
Each of the advantages identified by Mr.
Lauder -- a taxpayer-financed staff, the franking privilege, special-interest fund raising -- would be better addressed by comprehensive election reform.


Militants Continue Protest of P.L.O. Pact With Israel


Make Cable TV Gang Truly Competitive
To the Editor:
A Sept. 1 article on changing cable television rates details differences that amount to pennies, but omits new, obese installation charges.
After I learned installation at Time Warner will jump from $40 to $60 the next time I move, I made some phone calls and found Paragon's charge goes from $32.42 to $55, and Staten Island Cable skyrockets from $21.60 to more than $59.
Only Cablevision dropped its rate from $37 to $30.


Chicago Loses Center
Chicago Blackhawks center CHRISTIAN RUUTTU will be out until mid-December after undergoing surgery to repair his broken right fibula. (AP)


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.00
3.10
3.02
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
2.94
2.94
2.86
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.06
3.06
2.89
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
4.93
4.95
5.92
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
6.04
6.03
7.32
TELEPHONE BONDS
7.03
7.01
8.38
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
5.46
5.45
6.35
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Traffic Alert
TODAY The Riverside Drive northbound approach to the George Washington Bridge will be closed from 6 A.M. to 4 P.M. today and 6 A.M. to 3 P.M. tomorrow for construction.
FEAST OF SAN GENNARO Mulberry Street will be closed between Canal and Prince Streets between Mott and Baxter Streets from 11 A.M. to 11:30 P.M. today and tomorrow.


Bridge
For a bridge player, the surest route to insomnia is losing a knockout match by one solitary imp.
The mental post-mortem is interminable: "If only I had done this, or my partner had done that, or my teammate had done the other. . . . "
A particular agony was suffered by Saul Bronstein of Manhattan on the diagramed deal from an early round of the Spingold Knockout Team Championship in Washington in July.
He was playing against a high-ranked team and landed in four hearts after East had pre-empted in diamonds.
His opponents, sitting East and West, were Gabriel Chagas and Marcelo Branco of Brazil, one of the world's great partnerships.


From Soupy To Super At Belmont
On the eve of one of New York's grandest days of racing, the main track at Belmont Park suffered so much erosion from the rain that yesterday's entire program of nine races was canceled while the track was repaired for about an eighth of a mile along the backstretch.
But racing officials promised that the full program would be run as scheduled today, including the four Grade I stakes billed as the Breeders' Cup preview: the $500,000 Woodward Stakes, the $400,000 Man o 'War and the two major tests for 2-year-olds, the Matron and the Futurity, which stars the undefeated prodigy Dehere.
And the officials said they expected no disruption in the program tomorrow, when the champion mare Paseana races the prize fillies Turnback the Alarm and Dispute in the $200,000 Ruffian Handicap.


INSIDE
Clinton Firm on Somalia
President Clinton said he would rather increase United States involvement in Somalia than withdraw before the famine-ravaged country has a stable political base.
Page 5. 2 Officers Shot in Brooklyn
Two plainclothes officers were seriously wounded in a gunfight with suspected drug dealers in the East New York section.
Six supects were being questioned.
Page 23.
Holtzman Faults City Report
Elizabeth Holtzman faulted a city investigative report that criticized a campaign loan she obtained from a bond underwriter.
Page 21.
Robbery on Metro-North
Five masked men held up a Metro-North commuter train Thursday night while the train was making a stop in Yonkers.
Page 21.
Billiards Master Is Dead
Willie Mosconi, one of the greatest pocket billiards players and a 13-time world champion, died of a heart attack.
He was 80.
Page 9.


RESULTS PLUS
HOCKEY  Islanders Win Opener The Islanders won their preseason opener, defeating the Boston Bruins, 5-4, in overtime last night before 9,039 at the Knickerbocker Arena in Albany.
The Islanders jumped out to a 3-1 lead only to give up three unanswered goals to Boston.
New York tied the score at 4-4 with 2 minutes 16 seconds gone in the second period, and the game remained tied until 1:33 of the overtime, when right wing Dan Plante got an unassisted goal against Boston's Mike Bales.
GOLF  Frost Ties for Lead  David Frost, the defending champion, shot a seven-under-par 63 yesterday to join two former champions, Dave Barr and D. A. Weibring, atop the leaderboard after two rounds of the Hardee's Golf Classic in Coal Valley, Ill.
Frost closed his bogey-free round with four straight birdies, finishing with a two-day total of nine-under 131. (AP)


Sarajevo Meeting on Peace Pact Is Set
International mediators moved ahead today with plans for a meeting in Sarajevo on Tuesday at which the mediators hope to win agreement for a peace accord from the three warring sides in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
But the mediators' hopes for an early end to the fighting were still unsettled by some of the thorny problems that torpedoed previous bids for a peace pact.
As mediators continued their shuttle diplomacy, Lord Owen, the European Community envoy, spoke as if an end to the war could be in sight.


Mayoral Report Credits Administration With Better Crime-Fighting and More Services
Mayor David N. Dinkins released his annual management report yesterday, saying the city had made gains in fighting crime and delivering services under his leadership.
He used the opportunity to criticize Rudolph W. Giuliani's proposal to curtail services for some homeless people.
Pressing his re-election campaign against Mr.
Giuliani, the Mayor said the improvements cited in the report, in areas ranging from lowering infant mortality to instituting citywide recycling, came despite economic constraints he said were brought on by the Reagan and Bush Administrations.


How To Drive Your Dancers Up a Wall
Four bodies walk, jump and somersault across the surface of a yellow-stained floor to clanking electronic music.
Nothing extraordinary about that.
But the "floor" happens to be a 40-foot wall, the dancers happen to be dangling from ropes over spectators' heads and the score is the sound of the dancers' miked harnesses grinding as they perform and reverberating through vaulted catacombs.
The dancers are members of Elizabeth Streb's Ringside company, which specializes in bone-crushing feats of physical control and endurance.
The catacombs are the atmospheric Brooklyn Bridge Anchorage, a hollow leg of the bridge on the Brooklyn side that proves, on entry, to be a series of high-brick-walled chambers that look as if a pair of small English princes might once have been tortured there.
The dance is a new one, called "Lookup," created for performances opening last night and being repeated tonight and then Wednesday through next Saturday.
Two Premieres
Ms.
Streb will present new and old dances in four chambers of the anchorage, each a short walk from the others.
"Lookup" is one of two premieres.
The other is "Surface," in which the racing, tumbling dancers manipulate two supple 100-pound, 6-by 8-foot boards, creating shelters, bridges, body sandwiches and moving surfaces to dive against and to climb.


West Is Welcoming Reformer's Return in Moscow
Western diplomats and economists today welcomed former Prime Minister Yegor T. Gaidar's return to government as a desperately needed bolstering of support for market-oriented policies in the badly divided administration.
President Boris N. Yeltsin acted under considerable pressure from the United States and international lending institutions like the International Monetary Fund, the diplomats said.
Some wondered whether Mr.
Yeltsin was once more responding to a crisis by an essentially symbolic gesture.


Masked Men Rob a Train In Yonkers
In a minute-long stop at a station in Yonkers, five masked men shoved their way onto a Metro-North commuter train Thursday night and announced a holdup, railroad officials said.
Brandishing a revolver and firing at least one shot to get the passengers' attention, the five stuffed wallets, purses and jewelry into a sack.
They then fled as the doors slammed shut and the train pulled out of the station, the officials said.


Sports of The Times; Early Birds Getting The Worms
BY 10 A.M. yesterday, Chinatown had hit full stride.
Sidewalks were thick with shoppers, narrow streets jammed bumper to bumper with honking cars.
The traffic in Grace Ho's store -- Kam Tat Chinese Herbs Company -- was equally hectic as a steady stream of customers buzzed in and out.
They asked for ginger and ginseng, or directions for cooking herbs, or hints on the all-important art of mixing the right herbs for a particular ailment.


Rocket Still Grounded
RAGHIB (ROCKET) ISMAIL's debut with the Raiders will be put on hold for another two weeks because of back spasms. (AP)


The Eyes of the Nation Are Upon Syracuse
Syracuse has an opportunity to show off its considerable talents today against Texas in Austin, a game that will be televised in many parts of the country.
The Longhorns (0-1) will be something of a measuring rod because they floundered a little in their opening game, a 36-14 loss to Colorado, which, like Syracuse, is a Top 10 team.
Texas Coach John Mackovic is certain to be asked to compare the Orangemen with the Buffaloes, especially in terms of speed.


No Fine for Lott Hit
The good news for free safety RONNIE LOTT is that there will be no fine for his hit against Miami receiver FRED BANKS last Sunday.
Lott drew a penalty for unnecessary roughness, but after reviewing videotapes, the league announced that it had determined the penalty did not warrant a fine because he did not use the crown of his helmet.


Corrections
An article in Your Money on Aug. 28, about changes in Medicaid eligibility for nursing home care, misstated the waiting period for people who have transferred assets to others within three years before applying for coverage.
The waiting period is calculated by dividing the value of the assets by the monthly cost of care; it is not limited to 36 months.


Lemieux Out of Opener
MARIO LEMIEUX, who underwent surgery July 28 to repair a strained muscle in his back and to remove scar tissue, is expected to miss the Pittsburgh Penguins' opener in Philadelphia on Oct. 5.
However, the Penguins owner, HOWARD BALDWIN, said, "We are confident that he will play no later than the end of October."


Make Cable TV Gang Truly Competitive; Illusory Alternative
To the Editor:
"You're the Viewer. Choose a Program." by Robert X. Cringely (Op-Ed, Aug. 31) is filled with misinformation.
Suffice it to say that the cable industry was not surprised by Bell Atlantic's adoption of a technology to deliver "video on demand" to homes.
This technology is not miraculous, is not new and was not discovered days after a related Federal Communications Commission opinion, as Mr.
Cringely suggests.
Moreover, the technology does not of itself allow for delivery of any video to anyone, as the author maintains.
Phone companies are using this technology experimentally, despite its many limitations, because copper telephone wires cannot deliver multiple channels simultaneously.
For a variety of reasons, consumers would not find video service based on this technology an acceptable alternative to cable television.


Chronicle
They won't rule on any cases or hand down decisions, but given the guest list, there's sure to be more than one legal opinion expressed tomorrow at a lunch to celebrate the 90th birthday of STANLEY H. FULD, who was Chief Judge of the New York State Court of Appeals from 1967 to 1973.
The guest list includes some 50 Federal and state judges, lawyers, professors and friends.
Among those expected at the Charlotte restaurant in the Hotel Macklowe are JUDITH S. KAYE, the present Chief Judge; LAWRENCE H. COOKE, a former Chief Judge, and Judge JACK B. WEINSTEIN of Federal District Court in Brooklyn, who was a law clerk to Judge Fuld in 1949, three years after he joined the appeals court.
A dozen or so other former clerks will also be there.


Unshackle the Press in Slovakia
In Slovakia, which split from the Czech Republic earlier this year, democracy is skin-deep and its party bosses thin-skinned.
Even the slightest mention of a Slovak blemish in the local or foreign press inevitably provokes finger-wagging lectures from Prime Minister Vladimir Meciar and his deputies on the "responsibility" of the press or, when that seems too mild, accusations that a wicked press is out to crush the infant republic.
The problem is not, of course, unique to Slovakia.
A combination of governmental ham-handedness and near-zero understanding of an independent press has choked off free discussion in many former Communist states, including many of the recent breakaways from the former Soviet Union.
But despite the country's highly literate population, Slovakia's politicians -- most of whom are recycled apparatchiks from the bad old days -- seem particularly uptight and hellbent on chilling even the mildest criticism.


NEWS SUMMARY
International 2-5  U.S. AND JAPAN DISCUSS MISSILES
In response to a potential threat from North Korea, Tokyo and Washington are discussing plans for a new antimissile system for Japan to deter short-range attacks.  1  A NEW EFFORT AT REFORM IN TOKYO
The Japanese Government proposed reforms to create public financing for campaigns and to prevent direct contributions from business to candidates, but their chances of being approved appear slim.  2  U.S.
ASKS CHINA TO FORGO TEST
President Clinton appealed to China not to conduct an underground nuclear test that Washington believes may be planned for October.  3  FROM PRINCE TO PRESIDENT
Under a new political agreement in Cambodia, Prince Norodom Ranariddh is become President and his father, Prince Norodom Sihanouk, is to become King again.
Hun Sen, who leads the main opposition party, is to be the "Second President." 3  CLINTON DEFENDS U.S.
IN SOMALIA
Defending American action in Somalia, President Clinton said the United States was willing to increase its military role there to help insure the viability of a new government.  5  OPTIMISM FOR PEACE IN SARAJEVO
Mediators preparing for talks in Sarajevo speak as if an end to the war in Bosnia is in sight, but the major roadblocks to an accord remain.  4  ECONOMIC TETHERS TO ISRAEL
Despite visions of new prosperity, the reality of Palestinian self-rule in the territories is likely to be an economy that remains tied to Israel's.  5  WEST PLEASED AT GAIDAR'S RETURN
The return of Yegor T. Gaidar, former Acting Prime Minister, to the Russian Government was good news to experts who saw it as a sign of support for free-market policies.  4  Lodz Journal: Nostalgia and desperation for workers.  4  National 6-8  TROUBLED FEDERAL HOUSING
The Roxse Homes in Boston, mired in debt and disrepair, may be a harbinger of what the Federal Government -- and taxpayers -- may be facing in the next few years as hundreds of owners of apartment buildings default on Government-insured mortgages.  1  WARNING ON CLINTON HEALTH PLAN
Limiting the cost of health insurance premiums, a central element in President Clinton's plan, might reduce some medical care and limit access to new technology, a Congressional study warned.  1
In a hospital visit, Clinton promises less paper work.  6
Ford workers may forgo some wage increases for health care.  33  ABORTION AND THE BENCH
Some judges who have openly opposed abortion rights may be appointed to the Federal bench, partly because the Clinton Administration wants to show that it is even handed and not making abortion a litmus test.  1  CABLE RATES MAY BE RISING
The F.C.C. confirmed what many cable television consumers have argued: that six months after the agency promised $1 billion in annual rate rollbacks, cable rates actually seem to be rising.  1  RULING IN M.I.T.
TUITION CASE
A Federal appeals court ruled that the Massachusetts Institute of Technology should get another chance to argue that it did not violate antitrust laws in providing student-aid packages.  6  DISTINCTION, DEATH AND DISGRACE
An Army sergeant whose record had been as spotless as his uniform stands accused of murder.
Two proud military families, his and that of the woman he is accused of killing, have been shattered.
What went wrong at 2:53 A.M. on July 10 at Fort Bragg, N.C.?  7  A Cuban Air Force pilot landed his MIG-21 in Florida.  6  The space shuttle closed in on a telescope it will retrieve.  6  Metro Digest 21  SCHOOL CRISIS: POCKETS OF REVOLT
As the first day of school nears after an 11-day delay caused by the asbestos crisis, school officials in New York City face pockets of revolt from parents, teachers and district officials who say they will not participate in the opening of the city's 1,000 schools on Monday.  1  WHITMAN HITS THE ROAD
Christine Todd Whitman has surfaced.
Frederick C. Steward, a botanist and cell biologist.
Willie Mosconi, world champion billiards player.
Dillard Munford, founded a chain of do-it-yourself stores  Varindra T. Vittachi, retired executive of Unicef.
Editorials/Op-Ed 18-19  Editorials  Iraqi arms: an unsolved case.
The prodigal daughter.
Well spoken, Mr.
Carter.
Unshackle the press in Slovakia.
Letters  Russell Baker: Some legal sexcess.
S.
Fred Singer: Send people, not probes, to Mars.
Allen Questrom: What sucking sound?
Robert L. Bernstein: Torture is not an Olympic sport.
Ann Markusen: Bring back the old Les Aspin.
Bridge 15 Chronicle 20  Crossword 14


U.S. Housing Errors Take Financial and Human Toll
The walls cracked, the roof leaked, the foundation sank and the sewage boiled up into the bathtubs.
Rents fell and repair costs rose, but the owners of the sprawling, private apartment complex did not bear the burden.
They had a Government-insured mortgage, so when they failed to repay their $9.5 million loan, the Government did so for them.


Dow Drops 17.60, to 3,613.25, In Heaviest Trading of Year
Heavy program trading and concerns about corporate earnings battered stocks yesterday, a "triple witching" day on which Big Board volume was the highest of the year and among the heaviest in history.
After having lost nearly 30 points by midafternoon, the Dow Jones industrial average recovered somewhat to close down 17.60 points, at 3,613.25, thanks to a spurt of late buy orders.


Corrections
An article in Science Times on Tuesday about global warming misidentified an author of the book "Apocalypse Not: Science, Economics and Environmentalism." He is Harold Lyons.


Ethyl Plans A Chemical Unit Spinoff
The Ethyl Corporation says it plans to spin off its chemical business to shareholders, creating a new $1 billion publicly traded company.
Its announcement of the plan late Thursday capped a week in which several industrial companies announced spinoffs or sales of their chemical operations.


Broadway Musicians Continue Contract Talks
Contract negotiations continued yesterday between Broadway producers and Local 802 of the American Federation of Musicians, but no progress was announced.
A strike was averted on Sunday, just before the union's contract expired, when the union and the producers agreed to continue negotiating this week.
Yesterday's meeting began at 1 P.M. in the Manhattan offices of Proskauer, Rose, Goetz &amp; Mendelsohn, the law firm of the League of American Theaters and Producers.
The main issue is the producers' proposal to reduce the minimum number of musicians required for Broadway shows.


Court Gives M.I.T. Another Chance in a Federal Price-Fixing Case
The Massachusetts Institute of Technology won another chance yesterday to argue in Federal court that it did not violate antitrust laws by participating in a decades-long conspiracy with Ivy League universities to fix the amount of student-aid packages.
The United States Court of Appeals for the Third Circuit, in Philadelphia, in a 2-to-1 ruling, sent the case back to a Federal District Court judge for the Eastern District of Pennsylvania.


Corrections
A picture caption on Sept. 2 about the Lions Sensory Garden for the Disabled in Staten Island misidentified its developers.
It was a project of the Staten Island Botanical Garden and the Lions Club, not Snug Harbor.


Garth Fagan Cancellation
Radio City Music Hall Productions yesterday announced the cancellation of "Griot New York," which was to be performed by Garth Fagan Dance and the Wynton Marsalis Septet from Sept. 28 through Oct. 1 at City Center.
The cancellation does not affect the company's national tour, which includes a performance on Oct. 3 at Tilles Center, Long Island University, C. W. Post Campus in Brookville.
Refunds are available where tickets were purchased.


Frederick C. Steward, 89, Leading Botanist, Dies
Dr.
Frederick Campion Steward, a botanist and cell biologist whose research in the late 1950's reshaped scientific knowledge of how plants regenerate, died on Monday at his home in Tuscaloosa, Ala.
He was 89 and had been in poor health for several years.
Dr.
Steward, a Cornell University professor emeritus of biological sciences, was a leading scientific figure in the development of modern plant physiology.
His most important contribution came in 1958, when he established that plants could be totally regenerated from one cell.


Sunday in the Bois With Tout Paris
To the Editor:
Karl Meyer's "Paris, for the Few" (Editorial Notebook, Sept. 5) would read like a bad joke, except that its out-of-date stereotypes about the French seem humorlessly sincere.
To characterize the Bois de Boulogne's dining facilities by the Pre Catalan (a Michelin two-star restaurant) is like saying you can't eat in New York City unless you reserve at Lutece.
There are at least four other restaurants in the Bois (all outdoors, at least two offering delicious meals for less than $20 a person).


President Defends American Presence in Somalia
President Clinton defended the United States presence in Somalia today, saying he is willing to step up American political involvement there rather than withdraw in the face of continuing armed conflict.
Mr.
Clinton, who met today with Prime Minister Carlo Azeglio Ciampi of Italy, said that although he had been "disturbed" by recent confrontations in Somalia involving American and United Nations troops, the United Nations should not leave until a government has been established there and has been stabilized so it will not collapse once foreign troops leave.


A Correction
A caption yesterday with a diagram accompanying the analysis of Game 5 between Gary Kasparov and Nigel Short on Thursday in London erroneously combined moves from two hypothetical sequences.
The caption, with the diagram for the position after 14 . . .
Bg4, should have read:
Short sets another trap: if 15 f3, then 15 . . .
Qc5 16 Qd2 Rfd8 17 e4 Be6 18 0-0-0 Bd5 19 ed Bc3 20 Qc3 Qf2! 21 Kb1 Rac8 22 Qe1 Qc2 23 Ka1 Nd3! 24 Qe2 Qc1! forces mate.


Key to Israel-P.L.O. Pact Is Seen in Economic Ties
Israeli political leaders have talked this last week of lowering trade barriers and building new roads to create what Foreign Minister Shimon Peres called "a triangle of political triumph and economic prosperity" among Israel, Jordan and the Palestinians.
But if the transition to Palestinian self-government is to succeed, the economy of the occupied territories will have to remain umbilically tied to Israel for at least the next few years, even if it means keeping neighboring Jordan on the sidelines, Israeli and Palestinian economists say.


Well Spoken, Mr. Carter
Former President Jimmy Carter has had many useful things to say lately on Somalia and the Middle East.
But perhaps nothing he has said needed saying so badly as his comment on Ross Perot's campaign against the North American Free Trade Agreement.
"Unfortunately in our country now we have a demagogue who has unlimited financial resources and who is extremely careless with the truth, who is preying on the fears and uncertainties of the American public."


Turner Said to Be Weighing A Role in a Paramount Bid
Ted Turner, the chairman of the Turner Broadcasting System, is exploring ways to become involved in a bid for Paramount Communications Inc., according to two executives close to Mr.
Turner.
Earlier this week, Paramount accepted an $8 billion takeover offer from Viacom Inc., stirring speculation about the possibility of rival bids.


Westinghouse Expects 50% Net Drop; Stock Falls
The Westinghouse Electric Corporation, rocked by losses in its finance subsidiary, said yesterday that profits in its other operating divisions would be "down substantially" in the third quarter and that it probably would report a 50 percent earnings decline for the period.
Its announcement provoked heavy trading in its stock early in the day.
The share price fell 7.5 percent, to $13.75, closing down $1.125, on volume of nearly 4 million shares on the New York Stock Exchange.


At Empire Blue Cross, Only a Rate Raise Could Stem the Tide
To the Editor:
I am compelled to respond to "The Sound of Snoring at Empire" (editorial, Aug. 21).
My 10 years of active participation and tenure as a director of Empire Blue Cross-Blue Shield would be reason enough, but I also was chairman of the board's special ad hoc committee that brought about significant change in the company's management and, further, was thrust into a transition role as Empire's board chairman.
Your charge that the board "failed to intervene early on when losses mounted" is not borne out by the record.
The board not only recognized what trends were developing early on, but even long before those trends became a cause celebre for the news media and politicians, the board acted promptly and decisively to turn the heat up on management to take corrective action.


Philadelphia Orchestra Pact
The Philadelphia Orchestra Association announced last night it had reached a tentative contract with its musicians, who are to vote on the agreement tomorrow evening.
The musicians had threatened a strike that would have meant the cancellation of the orchestra's performance at Carnegie Hall on Thursday evening.
The concert, which opens Carnegie Hall's season, will go on as scheduled if the contract is ratified.


G.M. to Sell Parts Plants to Newly Formed Group
The General Motors Corporation said yesterday that it had agreed to sell five parts plants and the assets of a sixth to an investor group headed by a former Chrysler manufacturing executive, Richard E. Dauch.
Terms of the proposed transaction, which is to be completed by Dec. 31, were not disclosed.


New Missile Defense in Japan Under Discussion With U.S.
Concerned about North Korea's recent tests of a new generation of missiles, Japan and the United States have begun discussions about developing and deploying a new antimissile system on Japanese soil to deter short-range attacks.
Preliminary talks about combining technological talents to build the system, which would be a major expansion of the postwar military relationship between the two countries, were held this week in Honolulu.
But Japanese officials say they expect to receive a fuller American proposal next week, during a visit to Tokyo by John M. Deutch, the Pentagon's Under Secretary for Acquisition and Technology.
Existing Missile System Aging
American and Japanese officials say the new system may include major improvements on an existing antimissile system, like the Patriot, combined with some kind of satellite detection system that would warn of an attack.


Business Digest
Companies
The F.C.C. conceded what many cable television consumers have argued: that six months after the agency promised $1 billion in annual rate rollbacks, cable prices seem to be rising.
Amid complaints from consumers and lawmakers, the agency said it would survey the prices charged by big cable companies.  [ Page 1. ]


N.A.S.D. Is Expanding Information on Brokers
INFORMATION that's critical to choosing a stockbroker or fighting a dishonest one is becoming easier to get.
The National Association of Securities Dealers recently added more data about brokers to its consumer hot line and plans to make further enhancements on Oct. 1.
The system, though much improved, will still lack information about brokers that can be obtained elsewhere -- through state officials, for instance.
So investors may need to bone up on what's available where.


Clinton Is Considering Judgeships For Opponents of Abortion Rights
The Clinton Administration is considering naming some judges to the Federal bench who have publicly opposed the legal right to abortion, in part to demonstrate evenhandedness and the end of the era of the abortion litmus test, Congressional and Administration officials said today.
The officials said that while President Clinton would retain his commitment to choose supporters of abortion rights for the Supreme Court, he and his senior aides did not believe that abortion should be a make-or-break issue for candidates to the lower Federal courts.


Gunman Wounds 4 at Wyoming School


Social Security: Better to Pass at Age 62 to Collect More at 65?
Thousands of people each year must decide whether to start collecting Social Security benefits at age 62 or to wait until 65 or even later.
Some people, of course, need the money desperately.
But others are still working, if only part time, or drawing on other resources.
They have to weigh the advantages of having a little more now or much more later.


Waste-Management Experiment
The farmer has a seat on the stock exchange and a degree in philosophy from Princeton.
The cow manure has been inoculated with microbes.
And scientists from Houston are teaching laboratory techniques to the farmhands.
Here in Columbia County, where agriculture is still the biggest industry, a 400-acre dairy operation known as Odyssey Farm is moving ahead with high-tech biological management of manure.


French Film Industry Circles the Wagons
French movie directors have long been enchanted by the bucolic way of life of la France profonde, where wrinkled old farmers spout aphorisms, young couples make love in the hay and kitchen tables are weighed down by fresh vegetables and homemade pates.
Now the movie industry has discovered it has even more in common with the farming world: Both benefit from generous Government subsidies.
Both claim to be keeping alive the cultural soul of the French nation.
And both suddenly feel threatened by the United States.


Excerpts From Holtzman's Response to Loan Inquiry
Following are excerpts from Elizabeth Holtzman's response to a New York City Department of Investigation report on an inquiry into a campaign loan to her from Fleet Bank.
The report said that Holtzman was "grossly negligent" in failing to ascertain whether Fleet subsidiaries were doing or seeking business with her office.
Treatment by Fleet
Comptroller Holtzman got no special treatment from Fleet Bank.
There is no finding in the D.O.I. report that either the interest rate on the loan to the Comptroller's Senate campaign or other loan terms were favorable or better than what any candidate for office could obtain.
To the contrary, the D.O.I. report lists other campaign loans Fleet Bank made on similar or better terms.
. . .
Comptroller Holtzman did not get a favorable loan from Fleet Bank, so under the provisions of the City Charter, she was not obliged to determine if the bank was doing business with the City.
Thus, the Comptroller was not negligent, let alone "grossly negligent."


OPENING OF SCHOOL IN NEW YORK CITY DRAWS OPPOSITION
As the first day of school finally approaches in New York City after an 11-day delay caused by the asbestos crisis, school officials face pockets of revolt across the system from parents, teachers and local district officials who are threatening not to participate in the opening of the city's schools.
Two local school boards have voted to close their schools on Monday in defiance of orders from the Board of Education and the new Schools Chancellor, Ramon C. Cortines.
Another, on Staten Island, grudgingly agreed yesterday to open its schools after Mr.
Cortines offered his help in getting results of asbestos tests in their schools.


Mollen Panel on Police Corruption Will Begin Hearings
In the same gloomy midtown hall where the Knapp Commission exposed New York City's worst police corruption scandal 20 years ago, another panel opens long-awaited hearings on Sept. 27 into a new era of police wrongdoing.
Experts say the results may reshape the police fight against corrupt officers for years to come and could affect the mayoral election this fall.
The panel, known as the Mollen Commission after its chairman, Milton Mollen, is expected to announce the opening date of its hearings at a news conference on Monday, but law-enforcement officials familiar with its operations confirmed the date yesterday as other officials and political experts considered their impact.


It's as Clear as the Score on the Board
Every 20 seconds during last night's Yankee-Red Sox game, the scoreboard beyond left field flashed the inning-by-inning progress of the other major league games.
Every 80 seconds, the scores of the Toronto Blue Jays game and the Baltimore Orioles game were up there for everybody, including the 48,051 spectators, to see.
But some of the Yankees weren't watching. Or so they say.


Holtzman Offers Rebuttal to Critical Report
New York City Comptroller Elizabeth Holtzman last night faulted a city report that concluded that she had been grossly negligent when she took a campaign loan from a bank seeking city business, saying it was replete with errors and omissions.
In a statement released at 6 P.M., Ms.
Holtzman laid out the main points of her defense: that the $450,000 loan to her 1992 Senate campaign was not a favorable deal and that she did not participate in choosing Fleet Securities as an underwriter of city bonds.
The selection of Fleet was made seven months after her campaign received the loan.


F.C.C. Reviewing Cable TV Rates As Rollbacks Turn Into Increases
Six months after the Federal Communications Commission promised cable television customers $1 billion in annual rate rollbacks, the agency conceded today that cable rates seem to be rising, as many consumers have argued.
"It's obvious there's a problem, but we'll have to find out the extent of it," said James H. Quello, the acting chairman of the commission.
Amid a torrent of complaints from angry consumers and members of Congress, the F.C.C. announced that it would start a detailed survey of the prices charged by the 25 biggest cable companies.


Chinese Boycott Threat Is Denied
A Chinese Olympic official was quoted yesterday as having said last month that China might consider a boycott of the 1996 Games in Atlanta if Beijing is denied the 2000 Games because of human rights concerns.
Within hours after his remarks were released, they were met with firm assurances from other Chinese Olympic officials that there would be no such boycott.
The conflicting statements stirred a new controversy about the Chinese bid six days before the International Olympic Committee will meet in Monte Carlo to select the host city from among five applicants.
Besides Beijing, they include Berlin; Istanbul, Turkey; Sydney, Australia, and Manchester, England.


Beliefs
The Dalai Lama, whom Tibetan tradition considers an incarnation of a divine figure, the Buddha of Compassion, is both a temporal and a spiritual leader.
Many people who meet him are unsure what protocol to observe.
One visitor, explaining his nervousness to a young Buddhist monk some years ago, was reassured by the reply that the Dalai Lama "is a very laid-back deity."


Iraqi Arms: An Unsolved Case
Will the Clinton Justice Department mount a serious investigation into the illegal arming of Iraq during the Bush Administration?
Federal prosecutors can't seem to find anyone to blame but a lowly bank manager in Atlanta, who was allowed to plead guilty to three minor charges.
By allowing the case to end there, the prosecutors are asking us to believe that one minor functionary masterminded a multibillion-dollar scheme that helped arm Saddam Hussein to the point where, not long thereafter, he felt strong enough to invade Kuwait.


Company Briefs
FOURTH FINANCIAL CORP., Wichita, Kan., completed the purchase of Commercial Landmark Inc. in a stock swap valued at $57.2 million.
MORRISON KNUDSEN CORP., Boise, Idaho, has been selected to negotiate a contract for program management consultancy services for the Taiwan High Speed Rail Project, a $17 billion development.
NEW WORLD POWER CORP., signed a letter of intent to acquire 25 percent of the common stock of Photocomm Inc., Scottsdale, Ariz., a solar electrical systems company, with the option to increase its stake to 55 percent.
Terms were not disclosed.
SONESTA INTERNATIONAL HOTELS CORP., Boston, agreed to manage a 243-room hotel in New Orleans.
The hotel, to be called the Chateau Sonesta, is being established by Historic Restoration Inc., a local developer, and is expected to open in early 1995.


A Risk He Might Take
Atlanta Falcons running back ERIC DICKERSON says he has been cleared for practice and may play in San Francisco on Sunday.


CHRONICLE
Going, going . . . this evening, one illustrious career as an auctioneer will be gone.
With her last sale of a treasure or memento at a benefit for Broadway Cares/Equity Fights AIDS, at 5 P.M. today in Shubert Alley, LORNA KELLY will hang up her gavel for good.


U S West to Eliminate 9,000 Jobs in 3 Years
U S West Inc., laying the financial groundwork for impending competition in the local telephone market and construction of the electronic superhighway of the future, said yesterday that it would cut 9,000 employees and take $3.8 billion in accounting charges.
The job cuts mean that the regional Bell company is eliminating one of every seven employees, mostly through layoffs in Arizona, Washington State, Oregon and Minnesota.
The cuts are the largest announced by U S West since a similar program in 1991 and the largest in the telephone industry since the Nynex Corporation announced the elimination of 9,900 positions that same year.


Divided by Shared Grief: Slaying Shatters Two Proud Army Families
Sgt. 1st Class Ervin M. Graves spends his time these days in the suffocating brig here, contemplating his cloudy future.
A spartan prison jump suit has replaced the immaculate dress blues he wore in three Presidential inaugurations.
The legs that took him down Pennsylvania Avenue or paraded on the White House lawn are in irons when he is not in his cell.
For a decade the 33-year-old Sergeant Graves belonged to the Old Guard, the prestigious Army unit that performs in ceremonies both solemn and festive.
But a man whose record had been as spotless as his uniform now stands accused of murder.
And two proud families, of Sergeant Graves and of woman he is accused of killing, have been shattered.


Executive Changes
AMERICAN SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING INC., Cambridge, Mass., named Ralph S. Sheridan president and chief executive.
EQUITABLE COS., New York, named Kevin R. Byrne treasurer.


Sarajevo Meeting on Peace Pact Is Set; U.S. May Ease Sanctions
Secretary of State Warren Christopher has sent a message to the Belgrade Government hinting at the possibility of easing economic and political sanctions against Serbia in the event of a Bosnian peace settlement.
The message, delivered on Sept. 1, combined the hint on easing sanctions with a warning that further military action by Bosnian Serbs against the Muslim-led Government in Sarajevo would invite "the use of air power" by the North Atlantic Treaty Organization.


Health Cost Payment in Ford Pact
The tentative labor contract negotiated this week between the Ford Motor Company and the United Automobile Workers union contains a provision under which workers would forgo a small portion of their wage increases partly to help pay for their health care.
According to one estimate, the change could be worth about $180 million to Ford over the life of the three-year contract, and $400 million to the General Motors Corporation should a comparable provision be negotiated there.
Last year, Ford spent $1.5 billion on health care for its blue-collar workers.


Q and A
Executors and Beneficiaries Q. The executor of my will is a beneficiary.
Will this create any problems?
MORTON MOSKOWITZ, Brooklyn  A. There is nothing illegal about naming as executor a person who is also a beneficiary.
For example, it is common for a spouse to designate the surviving spouse as both executor and beneficiary.
Executors have a fiduciary responsibility to all beneficiaries, however, and must act fairly.


Tables Provide Ratings On Return and Risk
COMPARING mutual funds just got easier.
Beginning today, The New York Times is providing return and risk ratings for each fund on Saturdays.
The system, created for The Times by Morningstar Inc., rates return and risk on a scale of 1 to 5.
A return rating of 5 means a fund is a superior performer in its group.
A risk rating of 5 means a fund is relatively low risk.


Daimler Says Profits Fell In First Half
It makes a big difference which accounting rules you use.
But under any set of rules, Daimler-Benz A. G. clearly has run into problems.
Yesterday, the largest industrial company in Germany reported sharply lower profits -- or a loss, depending on the accounting policies you prefer -- and announced plans for large layoffs.


Let's Go Full Speed Ahead on Law of the Sea
To the Editor:
The United States should rapidly negotiate the few changes it seeks in the Law of the Sea Treaty and ratify it as soon as possible.
The idea for such a treaty originated in 1967 when the World Peace Through Law Conference, an international gathering of more than 2,000 lawyers and judges, adopted a resolution urging the United Nations to assume jurisdiction over the resources of the sea and declare them the common heritage of all humankind.
This was prompted in part by the discovery that vast riches of manganese, cobalt, nickel and copper lie in the seabed.
It was thought that the profit from mining these resources could be used to improve the lot of underdeveloped countries.


Flea Market for AIDS
Broadway Cares/Equity Fights AIDS is having its Seventh Annual Broadway Flea Market today from 10 A.M. to 7:30 P.M. in Shubert Alley (west of Broadway between 44th and 45th Streets).
Actors including Linda Lavin, Tony Randall and Ruth Warrick are scheduled to appear, and an auction starting at 5 P.M. will offer walk-on roles in several musicals.
Other items for sale include a silk top hat from "A Chorus Line."


The Prodigal Daughter
After 23 years on the run, Katherine Ann Power has given herself up to authorities, ready to face punishment for a crime she committed as a student radical in 1970.
Ms.
Power drove the getaway car for a bank robbery in which a policeman was killed.
Along with her comrades, she planned to use the money to buy explosives to sabotage trains carrying military weapons and to help arm the Black Panther Party.


Lodz Journal; Job Shake-Out Pushes Poles to Ex-Communists
Theoretically, Isabela Kozlowska, young, educated and street smart, should be one of the winners in Poland's economic shake-out.
But as she looks around this city, where a cluster of slick new stores lend a patina of prosperity in the face of climbing unemployment and closing textile mills, Miss Kozlowska does not see it that way.
She bristles with anger.
Her new technical diploma in textiles is useless, the loans offered by the Government to set up a business are too small, and the courses in finance that she dreams about taking are beyond her means.


No Headline
"It's obvious there's a problem, but we'll have to find out the extent of it." -- JAMES H. QUELLO, acting chairman of the F.C.C., on why so many cable television bills are going up, not down.  [ 1:1. ]


Club Offers to Integrate
The 117-year-old Florida Yacht Club of Jacksonville, Fla., an all-white club that was denied a regatta earlier this year because of its membership policies, has extended membership invitations to two blacks: Dr.
ORRIN MITCHELL, an orthodontist, and WILLARD PAYNE JR., a Jacksonville restaurant owner.
It is unclear whether either will accept the invitation.


Sunday in the Bois With Tout Paris
To the Editor:
Yes, the Bois de Boulogne is pricy and less than accommodating to visitors (Editorial Notebook, Sept. 4).
But the Bagatelle is not difficult to reach by mass transit.
It was my good fortune to live in Paris last winter, and the Bagatelle was a favorite haunt.
It is accessible by the No. 1 Metro to Porte Maillot, followed by a short ride on the No. 244 bus.


Confession Reported In Jordan Murder Case
LARRY MARTIN DEMERY has admitted playing a role in the death of MICHAEL JORDAN's father, according to an affidavit filed by the State Bureau of Investigation in Lumberton, N.C.
Demery, 18, of Rowland, N.C., and DANIEL ANDRE GREEN, 18, of Lumberton, are each charged with first-degree murder, armed robbery and conspiracy to commit armed robbery.


CAMBODIAN PRINCE WILL BE PRESIDENT
Cambodia's two major political parties agreed today that Prince Norodom Ranariddh should be the principal civilian leader of Cambodia's first postwar government, with his 70-year-old father, Prince Norodom Sihanouk, restored as King.
The agreement will end an interim arrangement in which Prince Rana riddh, the French-educated legal scholar who leads the royalist party that won United Nations-supervised elections in May, has shared power equally with Hun Sen, the leader of the rival party and the former Prime Minister in the Vietnamese-installed Government that came to power in 1979.


NEW LINE OF COMPUTER TERMINALS TO BE INTRODUCED
In an attempt to expand into untapped markets, the Digital Equipment Corporation will introduce a new line of computer terminals next week that will not carry the Digital logo.
The terminal, called Dorio, will be sold exclusively through resellers and will not be offered through Digital's own sales force.
The $399 terminal, which can be hooked into networks of personal computers and servers, is compatible with 33 computer operating systems including DOS, Windows and Unix.
Larry Cabrinety, vice president of Digital's Components and Peripherals Business Unit, said the new line would be aimed at distributors who have not sold Digital products in the past.


No More Bosses: A Couple Starts a Fast-Food Franchise
In 1990, Ed Stufano, a sheet metal worker, and his wife, Stella, owner of a hair salon, began investigating franchise opportinities near their home in Yorktown Heights, N.Y.
Both nearly 50, thay decided a franchise was an affordable venture that would give the, a chance to work together and to be their own bosses.
They considered printing companies and various food franchises before settling on Subway, which has more thasn 8,000 restaurants with average annual sales of $275,000 to $350,000 each.
The Stefano's Subway opened June 1991, and thay expect to break even in mid-1994.
Here is a chronology of the venture and a breakdown of costs and revenues.


Two Officers Shot in Brooklyn
Two police officers, a man and a woman, were shot and seriously wounded last night in a gunfight outside what the police described as a known drug location in East New York, Brooklyn.
Both were listed in critical condition early today at Jamaica Hospital in Queens, according to the police.
A police spokeswoman, Sgt.
Tina Mohrmann, said that the officers, both in plain clothes and assigned to the 75th Precinct, were investigating some men who they though might have guns.
As they approached the men about 10:30 P.M., shots were fired from the group, striking both officers.


Cliffhanger: Yankees Come Back to Edge Red Sox
The Blue Jays had already won, so the eighth inning was tenser then it might have normally been.
Everyone knew the ramifications of another loss.
If the Yankees lost to Boston again, they would drop even deeper into a precarious position, deeper behind first-place Toronto and deeper into their pennant race funk.
So when Wade Boggs hit a soft, looping liner toward shortstop with runners on first and third and the score tied, 4-4, it looked as if Scott Taylor's sinker had produced a double play.
Boggs thought it was a double play.
Manager Buck Showalter thought it was a double play.
Even pinch-runner Andy Stankiewicz thought that he was sprinting home from third base to race right into the dugout after the missed opportunity.


From Mixed Messages, Miss America Emerges
A few years ago, a beautiful starlet named Brooke Shields enrolled at Princeton University and a lot of very intelligent people in and around the campus knit their brows and went, "Hmmmm."
On the one hand, there she was, doing difficult undergraduate work like any other Ivy Leaguer.
On the other hand, there she was, gorgeous and, sometimes, patiently posing cute for photographers by the tiger statues.
Somehow, for some people, the two sides were irreconcilable.


Foreign Aid Overhaul Proposed
A review of United States foreign aid programs by the Clinton Administration has concluded that they are wasteful and should be replaced by a system in which money is no longer designated country by country, but instead devoted to goals like promoting democracy or slowing the spread of weapons.
A State Department official said tonight that the review called for an overhaul of foreign aid policies.
Pressure for change has already been mounting as new candidates for aid, like Russia and most recently the Palestine Liberation Organization, compete with traditional beneficiaries during a period of budget cutting.


Gish Gift to the Modern: $1.2 Million
The actress Lillian Gish has left the Museum of Modern Art's film department a trust fund of $1.2 million.
Gish, who died in February at the age of 99, specified that the money be used for the acquisition, preservation and storage of films starring Gish and her sister, Dorothy, and films directed by D. W. Griffith and for related research and publication.
"This is by far the largest gift by a film artist to any archive for the preservation of film," said Mary Lea Bandy, the chief curator of the museum's film department.
Ms.
Bandy said that Gish set up the trust fund in the 1970's and built up its value over the years.


METRO DIGEST
WHITMAN HITS CAMPAIGN TRAIL  Christine Todd Whitman has surfaced.
After a long and leisurely summer, the Republican gubernatorial candidate has hit the road, trailing a big-name Republican consultant and a staff of exuberant young aides and offering a consistent message at every stop.
Page 1.
NEW YORK CITY
REBELLION ON ASBESTOS NEARS  As the first day of school finally approaches after an 11-day delay caused by the asbestos crisis, school officials in New York City are facing pockets of revolt across the school system from parents, teachers and district officials who say they will not participate in the makeshift arrangements being set up to have the city's 1,000 schools open on Monday.
Page 1.


Varindra Vittachi,Ceylonese Journalist And U.N. Aide, 69
Varindra Tarzie Vittachi, a retired executive of Unicef, died yesterday at the home of his daughter, Anuradha Armstrong, in Oxfordshire, England.
He was 69.
She said the cause was cancer.


Shooting Deaths of Four Stun a Neighborhood
Outside the apartment building in the Castle Hill section of the Bronx where four people were killed and three others were critically wounded on Thursday evening, the police and local residents tried to find answers to how such violence could take place on their block.
"This is a quiet neighborhood," said Tony Pinelo, who was tending his daughter's bodega, which takes up much of the first-floor corner of the six-story apartment building where the shootings occurred.
"You never see anything happen around here."


Rushed Into Service, He Delivers It
ED MILLER was moving fast.
He had been at work since 7 A.M., loading up tubs with hot meals prepared by staff cooks and volunteers at a kitchen on Amsterdam Avenue at 103d Street.
Now it was almost 9, and the 38-year-old Mr.
Miller was starting out on his daily 83-mile journey through Queens and Brooklyn delivering meals to 68 people sick with AIDS.
"It's raining and that will slow me down a bit," Mr.
Miller said.
"I really hate that. For some of my clients this is the only hot meals they get. You know they are waiting. You know how important it is to them. You don't want to disappoint them."


Dr. Louis Zetzel, 84, Professor of Medicine
Dr.
Louis Zetzel, a gastroenterologist on the faculty at Harvard University Medical School and a private physician who made house calls until he was 77, died on Monday at the Newton and Wellesley Alzheimer Center in Massachusetts.
He was 84 and lived in Cambridge, Mass.
His family said the cause was complications from Parkinson's disease.


Mideast Accord Could Hasten a Visit by Pope
The peace agreement signed by the Israelis and Palestinians this week will hasten a long-discussed papal visit to the Holy Land, some people here say.
Others have suggested that -- as an Italian newspaper reported -- the accord will lead to Vatican jurisdiction over part of the city that is holy to Muslims, Jews and Christians.


EAST LONDON TORN BY RACIAL TENSIONS
Derek Beackon, a 47-year-old avowed racist and unemployed truck driver, looked a bit dazed late on Thursday night as he stood in a community center celebrating his surprise victory in a race for a local council seat in east London.
But he was able to get his message across clearly enough: if Britain is to be great again, it must deport all nonwhites.
"The British people have had enough," said Mr.
Beackon, a member of the neo-Nazi British National Party.
"We're going to take our country back."


Quaint Cottage Mixes Old and Modern
LONG ISLAND has two few restaurants like the tiny Station House Cafe.
It is a one-of-a-kind charmer, unlike many new restaurants that have a predictable sameness.
This quaint cottage hugging the railroad tracks in Glen Head has had many incarnations in its 74 years, including a real-estate office, home, bar and restaurant.
Late last year, Donald Schneckenburger, who previously operated the Right Bank Restaurant in Manhattan, transformed the languishing landmark into a stylish cafe.
Outside, the tiny gabled building sports beige stucco trimmed in deep red, flower-filled window boxes and wood signs featuring train motifs.


Water Rites
A cove at Central Park Lake is dedicated to the late Mayor Robert F. Wagner, Sept. 14.


INSIDE
King Hussein's Choice
To Jordanians, a minority in their own land, and to their King, accustomed to political leverage, the future may depend on how the Israeli-Palestinian agreement plays out.
Page 12.
Recycling Goes to the Office
The next battleground in the fight to reduce New York's waste is the trash basket at work, be it in an office, a restaurant or a factory.
Page 45.
The Talk of Kentucky
For more than a year, Kentuckians have been transfixed by a relentless stream of revelations about corruption in state politics.
Page 26.


BRINGING THE KIDS
It is just not true that Americans no longer appreciate the joys of childhood (About Men: "Bringing the Kids," by David Updike, Aug. 29).
In my neighborhood, there are summer parties where packs of kids run free until after the fireflies are out.
And child-friendliness has evolved into big business.
Does Updike think his parents had the advantage of changing rooms for babies in airports and babysitting services in stores?


A Regular Sweet Heart
WHO IN THE MODERN WORLD can't relate to an artichoke?
As the clock runs down, who doesn't toughen and grow a layer of armor around the softest spot of all -- the heart?
The artichoke, of course, has centuries more experience than man, at least in the frustrated desire department.
A relative of the daisy, the artichoke is actually a giant bud whose sole purpose on earth is to strain its bonds and burst into a violet bloom on a par with the sunflower, to which it is also related.


FALLING INTO PLACE
Jaime O'Neill portrays the uncertainly balanced male ego well in his About Men column "Falling Into Place" (Aug. 15).
But I laughed at "Tarzan's" description of the "cute" girl's budding breasts as "cupcakes." He's a long way from the jungle.
What ever happened to comparing breasts to fruit -- casabas, melons, peaches?
At least that comes closer to their real function -- nourishment.


Family Ties


A Diner's Story: Found, Then Lost Again
The Lost Diner, hard by the lumbering traffic of West Street, is not really lost.
But neither is it so easy to find, sitting in mid-block, recessed a few feet behind adjacent buildings and bearing a modest sign.
Still, a following of celebrities found its way to the unimposing site at No. 357.
They included performers like Ellen Barkin and Gregory Hines and officials like Police Commissioner Raymond W. Kelly, a breakfast and lunch customer who craves the jambalaya.


Kasparov Squirms Out of a Furious Attack
Nigel Short created a blistering attack against Gary Kasparov in Game 6 of their world championship match yesterday in London, but could not find the coup de grace and had to settle for a draw.
After surviving the scare, the Russian retained his 3-point lead in the 24-game series, with the score now at 4 1/2 to 1 1/2.
Short began by logically building up positional pressure against Kasparov's center.
When the Russian held him off, the Englishman sacrificed a pawn for a violent attack on the enemy king.
Still, Kasparov continued to show his skill and tenacity under fire and refused to let Short achieve the ultimate stroke that would have clarified the game into a victory.


Susan Brandes, David Hilger
Susan Brandes, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Fred Brandes of Bremen, Germany, was married yesterday to David Hilger, the son of Milton Hilger and Thelma Hilger, both of Baltimore.
The Rev.
George Greer performed the Episcopal ceremony at the United States Merchant Marine Academy Chapel in Kings Point, L.I.
Mrs.
Hilger, 30, is a marketing representative in New York for Freudenberg Nonwovens, a distributor of nonwoven textiles.
She graduated from Connecticut College.


World Markets; The Mark Also Rises, Mr. Soros
WHEN it comes to the German mark, even George Soros may have gotten it wrong.
In June, the Hungarian-American investor predicted publicly that the German currency was bound to fall.
Mr.
Soros, who has had a nearly impeccable investing record of late, was joined in his view of the currency's prospects by most economists and speculators.
For a while he was right, but three months later the mark is showing a pronounced strengthening against the dollar.
From a low point of about 1.75 to the dollar in late July, the mark was trading at 1.61 to the dollar on Friday.
When Mr.
Soros made his prediction in June, the mark was at 1.625 to the dollar.


SEPT. 12-18: Huge Yucatan Crater; How Did Dinosaurs Die Out? Try This Blast from the Past
Scientists last week disclosed the biggest explosion known to have shaken the planet -- one with the power of an estimated 300 million hydrogen bombs that occurred 65 million years ago.
It was caused by a doomsday rock from space that hit the Earth in a fiery collision and carved a 185-mile-wide crater on what is now the northern Yucatan Peninsula.
The findings, published in Science magazine, add weight to the hypothesis that the dinosaurs and other species were wiped out at the end of the Cretaceous period by celestial violence.


TRANSACTIONS
Hockey  National Hockey League  DETROIT RED WINGS -- Assigned Scott Cashman and Kevin Hodson, goaltenders; Benoit Larose and Igor Malykhin, defensemen; Jim Bermingham and David Lacouture, centers; Mike Casselman, Brett Harkins and John Hendry, left wings; and Dave Flanagan, Craig Martin and Mark Woolf, right wings, to Adirondack of the American Hockey League; Dave Gagnon, goaltender, to Fort Wayne of the International Hockey League.
Returned C.J.
Denomme, goaltender; Jeff Walker, defenseman; Sylvain Cloutier, center, and Ryan Shanahan and Tim Spitzin, right wings, to the Ontario Hockey League; Norm Maracle, goaltender; Trevor Hanas and Scott Loucks, right wings, to the Western Hockey League; and Frederic Barbeau, defenseman, to the Quebec Major Junior Hockey League.


Growing Your Own Salsa Verde
PLANTS make very good ambassadors.
They don't lord it over anybody.
They don't have a hidden agenda.
They just sit there, posing interesting questions.
Like the tomatilloes I'm growing this year.
I'd come across them last year at the Garden of Happiness, a community garden on Prospect Avenue in the Bronx, a project sponsored by the New York Botanical Garden's Bronx Greenup program.
A man named Juan Guerrero had reached into a bush that grew over his head and handed me what looked like a sticky green golf ball in a husk.
He explained in a mixture of Spanish and English that the tomatillo was the basis of salsa verde and many other favorite dishes from his homeland: the state of Puebla in central Mexico.
Having just spent a week with a few chili pepper farmers in New Mexico -- they wouldn't let me back on the plane without some seeds of their favorite varieties -- I figured it was time to grow a salsa garden down on the family farm in Maryland.
So this spring, I planted two varieties of tomatilloes (the verde, or green type, and the Purple de Milpa, which has a purple skin), along with my tomatoes and chilies.


Artists of the Underground
THE DELANCEY Street IND station may not rank high on every New Yorker's list of attractions, but on this day, Sandra Bloodworth and Anne Marie Baranowski are eyeing it with satisfaction.
It's looking good.
The iron platform columns and girders have recently been painted Purple Grape to match the wall mosaics, creating a sense of unity and well-being -- a classical poise, if you will.
"Less is more," Ms.
Baranowski says, "because there is so much going on in a subway station." Ms.
Bloodworth nods and says, "If you can get five colors that work in these stations, wow!"


Garlic Farmers Aiming For Healthful Profits
Although Grace Reynolds does not like the taste of garlic, she eats a clove a day as a health measure.
She minces it, puts it under her tongue and masks its taste by drinking milk with it.
For her two daughters, Kim, 12, and Karen, 10, she puts slivers of garlic in a gelatin capsule, which they swallow without tasting.


Jennifer Alderson, Nathaniel Benson
Jennifer Alderson, an assistant marketing manager at Estee Lauder International, was married yesterday to Nathaniel Lawrence Benson, a vice president and the general manager of Clinique International.
Both work in New York.
The Rev.
Richard W. Reifsnyder performed the ceremony at the First Presbyterian Church of Oyster Bay, L.I.
Mrs.
Benson graduated from Barnard College.
She is the daughter of Carol Alderson and Dr.
Thomas Alderson of Laurel Hollow, L.I.
The bride's father is a family practitioner in Massapequa, L.I.
Her mother is a travel consultant at Three Harbor Travel in Huntington, L.I.


Planting Bulbs? The More the Merrier
SPRING-FLOWERING bulbs require patience as well as trust.
Although the bulbs are planted anytime now, no results will be seen until spring.
So all good gardeners have ordered their bulbs, right?
Or, at least, they have thought about it.
Those who have gone through this bulb-ordering ritual know well that bulbs must be planted in quantity to make a statement.
A few bulbs here or a line or two planted there will never do.
Quantities are the answer.
Perhaps this is why bulb catalogues increasingly offer bulbs in quantities of 25, 50 or more.


Now the Candidates Gear Up for November
WESTCHESTER'S Democrats selected Assemblyman Richard L. Brodsky over County Clerk Andrew J. Spano last week as their candidate for County Executive, and the party then embraced Mr.
Brodsky's twin themes of alleged corruption and economic failure in county government as the party's theme for the fall elections.
Mr.
Brodsky won the primary on the basis of an exceptionally large turnout in the town of Greenburgh, spurred by a vigorous race for supervisor between the incumbent, Paul J. Feiner, and the Town Clerk, Susan P. Tolchin.
Mr.
Feiner won handily, gaining 63 percent of the vote.


To Our Readers
Starting next week, The Times's suggested Sunday newsstand price will increase to $2 in the greater New York metropolitan area.
The weekday price, and the newsstand price outside the New York region, will be unchanged.


Choosing Free Flights Over Free Nights
SEVERAL major hotel chains have decided that their guests would rather earn mileage credit on their frequent-flier programs than free hotel nights.
Marriott came first in the spring, followed by Holiday Inn, and Sept. 1 brought a major overhaul in the Sheraton program.
Hyatt is just offstage.
Although airlines' frequent-flier plans customarily have "partners" in the hotel field as well as among car-rental companies, earning air-mileage points in these programs has required that the hotel visit or car rental take place within a day of a trip on the particular airline.
These new programs generally produce mileage credit however or whenever the participant arrives.
As with the American Express Membership Miles program, credit from these hotel programs can be used to "top off" an airline mileage account to earn a free trip.


Developers Reclaim Some Spokes Around the Hub
After two decades of urban decline, the first tangible step has been taken toward reclaiming the eastern outskirts of the Hub.
At the city's invitation, developers have been bidding on 100,000 square feet of land to be dedicated to retail use.
Two large plots of land are involved -- one along East 149th Street, between Brook and Bergen Avenues; the other along East 156th Street, between Third and Brook Avenues.


Recalling Sarajevo
To the Editor: We spent two weeks in June 1989 seeing Yugoslavia.
My most vivid memory is how different Slovenia, Croatia and Bosnia and Herzegovina were.
Little did I dream that these differences would rip apart this country.
"Remembering a Different Sarajevo," by Francine Prose (Aug. 8) brought me back to my scrapbook of the trip.
Most of the spots we visited have since been enmeshed in violence and bloodshed.
My pictures now seem surreal, especially those of Sarajevo.
I commented then: "Sarajevo is so vital and alive. We walked late at night among throngs of young, interesting people who were always ready to talk to us."


The Color of Fashion
ON the steps of the New York Public Library a black-clad crowd gathers like a flock of crows.
Women in shrouds of calf-length coats or pentitentially plain jumper dresses.
Men with black shirts, sweaters, jackets, backpacks, jeans, socks, boots.
Licorice-black vinyl raincoats over matte wool cardigans; supple velvet jackets with the inky depth of a night sky; stiff leather combat jackets oozing aggression; a black lace petticoat peeking over dusty-black boots.
An innocent passer-by is moved to ask the inevitable question: "Who died?"


Columbia Proves No Match For Giardi and Harvard
The Ivy League opener for Harvard and Columbia was pitched as a battle of two generals.
In the end, the Crimson had the better army and defeated the Lions, 30-3, today on a soggy field at Harvard Stadium.
Quarterbacks Mike Giardi of Harvard and Chad Andrzejewski of Columbia are both seniors, scramblers and spinoffs -- both of their fathers were exceptional football players.
Both were highly touted coming into this season.
Yesterday, only one of them performed up to expectations.


Finding Tomatillo and Cilantro Seeds
If you want to grow tomatillos and cilantro for salsa verde next summer, it's best to start them from seed.
Sources for tomatillos: Abundant Life Seed Foundation, P.O.
Box 772, Port Townsend, Wash. 98368; Native Seeds/Search, 2509 North Campbell Avenue, Suite 325, Tucson, Ariz. 85719, and Shepherd's Garden Seeds, 30 Irene Street, Torrington, Conn. 06790.
For cilantro: Johnny's Selected Seeds, Foss Hill Road, Albion, Me. 04910; Nichol's Garden Nursery, 1190 North Pacific Highway, Albany, Ore. 97321, and the Twilley Seed Company, P.O.
Box 65, Trevose, Pa. 19047.


Reunited


As Poland Votes, Walesa Is Pushed to the Sidelines
The workers in the shipyard here who braved the strikes, bloodshed and martial law on the way to democracy recognize that they owe their opportunity to vote in parliamentary elections on Sunday in large part to the triumphs of their old leader.
But as they contemplate the multitude of choices at the ballot box, Lech Walesa, once head of the Solidarity movement and now President of Poland, seems irrelevant, even an embarrassment, and his name evokes shrugs of dismissal.


Saved By the Fan: Yanks Win It in 9th
If the Yankees manage to rise from their precarious position and somehow win the American League East, they will remember yesterday's wacky game and smile.
They will remember the overzealous fan who charged onto the field near third base in the ninth inning, caused the third-base umpire, Tim Welke, to call timeout and nullified Mike Stanley's game-ending flyout.
The Yankees never made that final out again.
Somewhere, that kid was smiling.
Buoyed by their new opportunity and what amounted to getting an extra out, four straight Yankees reached base after the bizarre incident and helped them rebound from a seemingly insurmountable 3-1 deficit to emerge with a 4-3 victory over the Red Sox at Yankee Stadium.
Don Mattingly clubbed a single off Greg Harris to deliver the tying and winning runs and climax the game that had two distinct endings, but the Yankees understood the thrilling rally might not have happened without the teen-age instigator.


Stephanie Jeong, W. F. Gleason 3d
Stephanie Anne Jeong, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Edward Jeong Jr. of Huntington Beach, Calif., was married yesterday to William Franklin Gleason 3d, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Gleason Jr. of Greenwich, Conn.
The Rev.
Michael Rowe performed the Episcopal ceremony at St.
Thomas's Church in Camden, Me.
Mrs.
Gleason and her husband, both 28, are vice presidents in the corporate finance department of J. P. Morgan &amp; Company in New York.
She graduated from Brown University.
Her father owns Edward Jeong &amp; Associates, a real-estate investment advisory concern in Newport Beach, Calif.


A New Camera For the Serious
STARTING on Oct. 1, photographers will be able to find the new Mamiya RZ67 Pro II camera at photo dealerships and camera shops.
The camera is designed to take pictures of medium size -- 6 by 7 centimeters -- but is able to produce pictures in other sizes when accessories are added.
The new camera, a refined model of the company's RZ67, is not for halfhearted photographers or for those who want a fast, easy route to picture taking.
It is a camera for those who demand excellence and are willing to devote the time and effort to master a technically demanding device.


A Careful Game Plan Goes Awry
For many of the 13 years that he lived here and for the 10 that he hasn't, Jerrod Mustaf has always looked forward to the annual fall gatherings that bring 200 aunts, uncles, nephews, nieces and cousins to the family farm in Rosehill, a small rural community near here.
Mustaf left this town of 5,600 after the seventh grade and went to live in Maryland with his father, Shaar Mustaf, and his stepmother, Gwen.
Even though his departure ultimately ruptured his relationship with his mother, Mustaf continued to make the annual pilgrimage here, some 100 miles south of Raleigh, as he grew in height and stature -- from DeMatha High in Hyattsville, Md., to the University of Maryland and finally to the National Basketball Association, where he became the New York Knicks' first-round draft pick in 1990.


Mutual Funds; Tables Revamped to Aid Investors
BECAUSE mutual funds are the investment of the 90's, more people need more comprehensive information about funds.
To provide the data, The New York Times has overhauled its Sunday financial tables, starting today.
The tables, produced by Morningstar Inc., mutual fund researchers in Chicago, have more information about funds than before.
And a new feature -- the list next to this column -- lets you find out quickly whether your own fund is doing better or worse than similar funds.


Having the Dream Is Hard. Living It Is Harder.
EVER since Franklin D. Roosevelt mused, at the height of World War II, that he might someday try to make peace between Jews and Arabs, every American President has fantasized about his own chances of reaching that goal.
Now it's Bill Clinton's turn to dream.


Maradona Is Left Out
DIEGO MARADONA was left off Argentina's national team roster for a two-game series with Australia that will determine which country plays in the World Cup in 1994.
A spokesman for the Argentine Soccer Association said Friday that the 33-year-old midfielder, who recently returned to his native country to play professionally, could still be added to the team.
Maradona led Argentina to the 1986 World Cup title and a second-place finish in 1990.
He has played just two games for Argentina's national team since the 1990 World Cup -- Feb. 18 and Feb. 24 this year. (AP)


Lindalee Knight, R. F. Mulligan Jr.
Lindalee Carpenter Knight, a daughter of Donald S. Knight Jr. of Huntingdon Valley, Pa., and the late Barbara C. Knight, was married yesterday to Richard F. Mulligan Jr., a son of Anne B. Mulligan of Towson, Md., and Mr.
Mulligan of Ruxton, Md.
The Rev.
Herbert B. Anderson performed the ceremony at the Brick Presbyterian Church in New York.
Mrs.
Mulligan, 31, is a vice president in New York with Tucker Anthony Inc., the securities brokerage in Boston.
She graduated from Colgate University.


Medical Students Take to the Streets
FOR 1,560 students returning to the University of Connecticut Health Center in Farmington this fall, there's going to be less time in the classroom and more time in clinical settings.
The school is arranging for many medical and dental students to care for the homeless and indigent in shelters in the Hartford area.
Others will work with primary care doctors in general practice.


Looking Ahead


Mower and Barbecue Storage for Winter
BY the end of summer, many veterans of the lawn wars would probably prefer to roll the power mowers into the garages or storage sheds, close the doors and think about other things until next year.
But abandoning motorized equipment like mowers, string trimmers and hedge clippers at season's end shortens their lives and invites start-up problems in spring.
Similar ill treatment can also sabotage a propane-fueled barbecue.
For electrical items like hedge clippers, the most important storage requirement is that they be kept dry.
If a device has to be stored outdoors or in a damp location, wrap it securely with plastic sheeting to protect it.
Electric equipment requires no storage maintenance other than surface cleaning and lubrication of mechanical parts like control cables.
Do not try to lubricate parts of an electric motor unless the owner's manual says to.
Many motors do not need lubrication and can be damaged if oiled.


THE TRIALS OF BOB PACKWOOD
The sexist premise of your article -- that there is a distinction between "illegal harassment" and "an awkward and boorish pass" -- is precisely the type of faulty reasoning that permits longtime harassers like Senator Packwood to prey on women.
STEVEN S. BERIZZI Riverside, Conn.


Got a Parking Ticket? Here's How to Fight It
IF YOU get one of the 18,000 or so parking tickets issued in New York City each day, you don't have to give in and pay up.
If you did not commit the violation for which you were ticketed, follow the directions on the back of the ticket for pleading not guilty.
Basically, you can either mail the summons to the Parking Violations Bureau or take it to a Help Center.
There is one in each borough; for the addresses, call the bureau at (212) 477-4430.


Good Economics Meet Protective Politics
"THIS is a debate," President Clinton said at the White House last week, launching his campaign for Congressional approval of the North American Free Trade Agreement, "about whether we will embrace change and create the jobs of tomorrow, or try to resist those changes, hoping we can preserve the economic structure of yesterday."
That was the Bill Clinton talking who has mastered the fundamentals of economics like no other President in the 20th century.
But good economics are not necessarily good politics.
On no other issue before the country is there such dissonance between scholars and politicians.


CONNECTICUT GUIDE
29 ROLES IN 1 PLAY
Anna Deavere Smith plays the roles of 29 people in a Long Wharf Theater production of "Fires in the Mirror," the playwright-actress's account of the events surrounding the violence in the Crown Heights section of Brooklyn in August 1991.


Susan P. Russo, Frank J. Cerza
Susan P. Russo, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Enrico Russo of Rochester, was married yesterday to Frank J. Cerza, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Dante Cerza of Watchung, N.J.
The Rev.
Ralph Firneno performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at the Church of St.
Ignatius Loyola in New York.
Mrs.
Cerza, a graduate of the Rochester Institute of Technology, is to become a designer for the Phillips Janson Group, New York architects, next month.


Not All Californians Flee Their State's Schools; They'll Have to Teach
To the Editor:
Your Sept. 1 front-page article about the troubles of public colleges and universities in California is an instance of a larger story -- the end of the golden age of universities in the United States.


High Tech and Non-Techies
To the Editor:
There are undoubtedly risks for developing technology into products when corporations are led by executives lacking technical expertise, as reported in "The Risks for High Tech, When Non-Techies Take Over" (Technology, Sept. 5).


The Fight Over the Carvel Foundation
DURING his long life, Tom Carvel tasted success as sweet as the ice cream that bears his name.
A native of Greece who came to the United States at the age of 5, he built an empire of ice cream shops along the East Coast and reveled in helping other immigrants run successful businesses with his franchises.
Known for nicknames like Tom the Terrible and Carvel the Marvel, he demanded from his employees the same thriftiness and devotion to work that he himself showed until selling the Carvel Corporation in 1989, running his business here with a gruff but hearty style much chronicled by journalists and familiar to millions through his radio and television commercials.


Muriel Castadot, Lucius N. Palmer
Muriel Astrid Castadot, a daughter of Dr.
Marie-Jeanne L. Castadot of New York and Dr.
Robert G. Castadot of Baltimore, was married yesterday to Lucius Noyes Palmer, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
A.
Wright Palmer of New York.
The Rev.
John F. Halborg performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at the Church of St.
Thomas More in New York.


Something New Every Day
To the Editor:
In "Once More Unto la Difference" (Letters, Aug. 29), Janet Scarpati announces that women in ancient Crete were responsible for developing everything from "modern construction techniques" to "law, government and religion" and "trade by land and sea."


THE DEVIL IN LONG ISLAND
Ron Rosenbaum does a fairly good job of mashing together some theories about why Long Island is fertile ground for a small but visible subculture of very warped people.
Unfortunately, he doesn't give enough details.


Frederica Wald, Roger Sherman
Frederica Nora Wald, a daughter of Judge Patricia M. Wald and Robert L. Wald of Washington, was married yesterday to Roger Sherman, a son of Justice and Mrs.
Burton S. Sherman of New York.
Judge Wald and Justice Sherman officiated at the Cosmos Club in Washington.
Ms.
Wald, 35, is keeping her name.
She is a senior marketing manager at Time Warner Inc. in New York.
She graduated cum laude from Wesleyan University and she and her husband received M.B.A. degrees from the University of Pennsylvania.


Upheaval Mounts in Georgia


Asha Shetty, Steven Cutting
STEVEN CUTTING often begins the day in one city and ends it in another thousands of miles away.
In a single week, Mr.
Cutting, a 32-year-old fashion consultant and designer based in New York City, might meet with clients in India, shop for fabrics in France, have dinner with a friend in the Netherlands and oversee a fashion photo shoot in California.
"He's really a gypsy of today," said Arie Vervelde, a Dutch fashion illustrator and longtime friend.
"He works and feels at home in a lot of places."


Frances Stone, Nathanael Burke
Frances ter Meulen Stone, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Charles L. Stone of Greenwich, Conn., was married yesterday to Nathanael Augustine Burke, a son of Marjorie W. Burke of Marblehead, Mass., and the late William C. Burke Jr.
The Rev.
Brendan Griswold, an Episcopal minister, performed the ceremony at St.
Aidan's Chapel in South Dartmouth, Mass.
Mrs.
Burke, 29, is the business manager at the Ardea Research Corporation in Newton, Mass., a company that advises retailers on bar codes and related systems.
She graduated from Boston University, as did her husband.
Her father is the owner of S O S Technologies, a distributor of emergency equipment in Greenwich.
Her mother, Jaqueline Hekma Stone, is the director of the middle school at the School of the Holy Child in Rye, N.Y.


Can't Live With 'em, Can't Live . . .
To the Editor:
As a faithful citizen, I read The New York Times every week.
True, I skip the sports section, simply glom the society doings and quarrel with Mr.
Overwriter William Safire before heading for the recycling bin.


The Secret War Over Secrecy
The Central Intelligence Agency, it is said, has decided to release edited versions of secret documents about major covert operations from 1950 to 1963.
Thus much more may be learned about the 1953 coup that re-enthroned the Shah of Iran, the 1954 overthrow of an elected leftist president in Guatemala and the Bay of Pigs debacle in 1961.
But it speaks volumes about old habits of secrecy and the timidity of reformers that this policy of openness was heralded by unnamed sources who spoke on condition of anonymity.
The backstage struggle over secrecy is not over.
And that's because the main reason for secrecy is less to protect U.S. security than to preserve the tattered myth of omnicompetent clandestine services.


Nicole L. Salerno, Cristopher F. Pace
Mr. and Mrs.
Nicholas J. Salerno of Bayville, L.I., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Nicole Lynn Salerno, and Christopher F. Pace, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Peter L. Pace of Matinecock, L.I.
A December wedding is planned.
Ms.
Salerno, 26, graduated from Gettysburg College.
She is an account executive at the Salerno Brokerage Corporation and the vice president of the Towns and Villages Risk Management Corporation, insurance brokerages in New Hyde Park, L.I., of which her father is president.


Ownership In a Recession
To the Editor:
Your article on the "Trials of Home Ownership in a Recession" (Aug. 8) very nicely highlights the financing problem "negative equity" creates for owners of co-op apartments.
But there is a tangential, perhaps more serious, problem in a building where the units are not substantially sold and where the underlying mortgage is coming due -- the reluctance of lenders to refinance underlying mortgages where a large number of units are owned by sponsors or investors.


One Popular Canuck
The Vancouver Canucks' enforcer, GINO ODJICK, an Algonquin who was raised on a reserve in Maniwaki, Quebec, had a captive audience when he recently visited the Kamloops Indian school on the Shuswap reserve.
SHANE GOTTFRIEDSON, the school's recreation director, visited Odjick in Vancouver last season and asked him to stop by during training camp. (AP)


Toward Repatriating the Inventory of History
IN 1978, a Greek archeologist began excavating 18 ancient tomb chambers at Aidonia.
His heart sank at what he found: There was freshly dug earth, and in one tomb a discarded man's jacket, an empty cigarette pack and pickaxes -- just the sort of thing, Kalliopi Krystalli-Votsi told Archaeology magazine, that "a grave robber would happily abandon when his hands become filled with plunder 3,500 years old."
The tombs had indeed been looted.
Villagers said the artifacts had been smuggled north in trucks carting apricots.
Then they disappeared.
Or did they?
In May, the Greek Government claimed that they had resurfaced in a collection of gold seal rings, beads and ornaments being offered for $1.5 million by the Michael Ward Gallery of Manhattan.
Greece is suing for their return, and Mr.
Ward, who says he purchased the Mycenaean jewelry from an unidentified European source, is contesting Greece's claim.


THE TRIALS OF BOB PACKWOOD
The people who are going to sit in judgment of the flawed Senator are those paragons of virtue, his fellow Senators.
It's too bad that George Orwell or Will Rogers is not around to comment on this.
I am sure they would have some pithy observations about those who profess to be, shocked! shocked! at Packwood's behavior.
ANDREW J. MACDONALD Fanwood, N.J.


U.N. Sends Atom-Detecting Copters to Iraq
In a new trial of strength with President Saddam Hussein, the United Nations has sent helicopters equipped to detect atomic radiation in an effort to sniff out any secret nuclear weapons sites in Iraq.
Baghdad, which has said it fears that the United Nations arms inspectors may try to assassinate Mr.
Hussein, delayed the start of the flights while it sought assurances that the radiation detectors were not really laser guns that could zero in on the Iraqi leader.


Residential Resales
In the following reports, the "listed at" price is the asking price when negotiations began that ended in the sale.
Time on market is from most recent listing to contract.
Manhattan
CHELSEA  $207,000
313 West 22d Street  1-bedroom, 1-bath, 815-sq.-ft. condo in a postwar building; part-time doorman, terrace; common charge $388, taxes $4,092, listed at $235,000, 12 weeks on market (Broker: Herbert H. Kliegerman &amp; Associates)


Shantytowns, Bulldozers, And Patience: A Dilemma
IN the Depression's early days, residents of Fifth Avenue were not happy about the tarpaper shacks topped with smoke-spewing stovepipes that went up in clusters around Central Park.
But few complained.
Sympathy ran high in the first cold winter of the Hoovervilles.
"Effort is made in virtually all the villages to preserve the decencies of life, to maintain the spirit of self-respect that surrounds a home or the lowly semblance of one," this newspaper wrote in March 1933.
"Hooligans are few. The life of an honest squatter is too austere for their kind."


THE TRIALS OF BOB PACKWOOD
Rarely have the deceit and insensitivity that can go hand in hand with the pursuit of power for power's sake been so distastefully on display as in the life and career of Bob Packwood ("The Trials of Bob Packwood," by Trip Gabriel, Aug. 29).
His treatment of those closest to him -- berating his wife at dinner parties, leaving the family on his son's birthday and cornering and kissing co-workers and campaign volunteers -- is indicative of a man who has no "higher power" other than his own (his visit to Hazelden notwithstanding).


Mexican Party Pushes Through Electoral Changes
Turning aside complaints from the political left and winning back support from the right, Mexico's governing party has pushed through the legislature measures that would limit some of the overwhelming advantages that have helped keep it in power for 64 years.
The political reform process has been closely watched in the United States, where some critics of the Mexican Government have argued that the Congress should not approve a regional free-trade agreement with a country that does not hold what they consider to be free elections.


Can't Live With 'em, Can't Live . . .
To the Editor:
Edward Stephens's "Why I'll Stand By My Selectric III" (Viewpoints, Sept. 5), all about computerese, is the funniest thing I've read in a lo-o-o-ng time.
Away with Selectric III's!
How about we just write?


K. A. Harragan, R. J. Polutchko Jr.
Betty Lehan Harragan of New York has announced November wedding plans for her daughter, Kathleen Ann Harragan, and Robert J. Polutchko Jr., the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Polutchko of Potomac, Md.
Ms.
Harragan, 30, is the technical services manager in the Boston office of Seer Technologies, a software development company based in Cary, N.C.
She graduated from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology.
Her mother, a lecturer and an author, wrote "Games Mother Never Taught You: Corporate Gamesmanship for Women."


A Chock-Full Block Full Of Art
A Wooster Street party and open houses in SoHo kick off the new art season, Sept. 11.


POSTINGS: At the Urban Center; Discussing The Future of Central Park
Even before the first word is said at a panel discussion called "110 Acres: The Future of the Central Park Reservoir," Elizabeth Barlow Rogers, the Central Park administrator, wants you to know something.
"It's going to be a water body for a long, long time," she said.
"Our job will be to see how we can make it more pleasurable. And the running track is going to remain."


Sound Bytes; What Evil Lurks in the Chips of Men? The Shadow Knows
Robert X. Cringely is the nom-de-poison-plume for the back-page gossip columnist of Infoworld, a computer industry weekly newspaper.
Citing his obvious need for anonymity, Mr.
Cringely declined to reveal his real name, but did volunteer that in real life he once taught journalism at Stanford and was a foreign correspondent for a major newspaper.
"Rumors and gossip," the columnist said, "become institutionalized in cultures that are in constant flux. Politics, financial markets, the entertainment industry and the personal computer business live by rumors." As those industries become ever more entwined, the popularity of his column has grown.


Sports Business
To the Sports Editor:
"Haven't we learned anything from history?" Donna De Varona asks.
What she's learned, we learn, is that there's practically nothing -- not the massacre in Tiananmen Square, not thousands of political prisoners, not pervasive political censorship, not torture, not summary executions -- horrible enough to stand in the way of big-time sports' business as usual.


Collecting Crocodiles? Don't Forget The License
Perhaps you have decided that it is high time you opened a bingo parlor.
You've got the boards, you've ferreted out those little chips, you've even lined up an expert caller.
That's fine, but don't think you can simply set up shop in a church basement and start calling out numbers.
It takes a license to have official bingo games.


Hollywood's Black History
ALMOST everyone has heard of "The Birth of a Nation," the 1915 D. W. Griffith melodrama that romanticized the Ku Klux Klan and set a standard for feature film making in the United States.
But few probably know of "Birth of a Race," the N.A.A.C.P.'s cinematic response to the Griffith film.
Shot in 1918, it lost financing and was taken over by white producers who changed the film's themes.
The original was almost completely lost to history.


Ruinous


A Charming Prince Turns 50, His Luster Intact
Long before Sputnik orbited Earth and man walked on the moon, Antoine de Saint-Exupery's space fable "The Little Prince" made the cosmos seem accessible to millions.
Now, to mark the 50th anniversary of its publication, the manuscript, which is handwritten in French, and all the author's extant illustrations are on exhibit for the first time at the Pierpont Morgan Library, through Jan. 2.
The show also features a love letter from Saint-Exupery to his wife, Consuelo; first editions of his earlier books, including "Wind, Sand and Stars" and "Flight to Arras," and photographs taken of him by John Phillips of Life magazine in 1944, shortly before he disappeared on a reconnaisance flight over France at the age of 44.


A Trail of Small-Town History


Car Owners vs. the Odds
GWEN KRAUSE has a problem. She has a car in New York City.
One rainy night, vandals smashed a window, and the passenger compartment turned into a little lake.
Another day, another headache: a double-parked BMW boxed her into a parking space.
She had to interrupt a drug deal to get the BMW to move.
Then there was the morning she created a traffic jam on Franklin D. Roosevelt Drive.
When a police officer stopped to help fix her flat tire, she prayed he would not look at the windshield and notice that her registration had lapsed.
He didn't.


Keyboards and Strings: Recitals to Master Classes
STRINGS and keyboard instruments dominate the concert scene this week, starting this afternoon at 2 when the Connecticut Classical Guitar Society opens its season with the first of about a dozen presentations, ranging from solo recitals and master classes to open stage performances and even a potluck supper with guitar music and musical conversation.
Today, the proceedings at the Connecticut Historical Society are free, because of a grant from the Evelyn W. Preston Memorial Trust.
The music is mostly from Latin America, as Jose Gonzalez and Claudio Ragazzi, playing the Puerto Rican cuatro as well as classical guitar, offer original compositions and classical transcriptions.
The society president, Larry Spencer, said: "Their music is an exciting blend of Latin, jazz, and classical styles that has wide-ranging appeal." No tickets are required for this event.
For details on the season, call 249-7041.


Capitals' Goalie Ailing
Washington Capitals goaltender RICK TABARACCI will miss three to six weeks because of a torn medial collateral ligament in his right knee.
Tabaracci injured the knee during a scrimmage Thursday at the Capitals' training camp.
The 24-year-old goaltender was acquired from the Winnipeg Jets on March 19.
He went 3-2-0 with a 1.75 goals-against average in six starts with the Capitals last season, including two shutout victories.
He had a combined 8-12-0 record with a 3.69 goals-against average last season. (AP)


THE TRIALS OF BOB PACKWOOD
The impression I got from the article on Packwood is that the poor guy is being victimized precisely because he wasn't enough of a Don Juan.
If he had been a more effective lover, all would have been forgiven.
PETER CORTLAND Wallingford, Conn.


State Rests in Los Angeles Trial of 2 in Beating of White Driver
After presenting witnesses and videotapes that they said completed a jigsaw puzzle of proof, prosecutors have rested their case against two black men accused of beating a white truck driver and seven other people in last year's riots.
Using more that 40 minutes of graphic videotape of the beatings, shot both from a helicopter and from street level, much of the prosecution's case has focused on identifying the assailants on the tape.
The final day of prosecution testimony on Friday involved a possible gap between the front teeth of one assailant.


Technology; The Tools of a New Art Form
When the photographer Rick Smolan decided to create a multimedia version of "From Alice to Ocean," his coffee-table book about a young woman's walk across the Australian desert with four camels, he had rich material to work with: his own photographs and narration by the woman, Robyn Davidson, reading from her own best seller on the trip, "Tracks." To these Mr.
Smolan added short video clips on Australian cultures, animal life and his photographic techniques.
The challenge was to put it all together in an interactive form that could be viewed on a personal computer with a CD-ROM player and allow the user either to sit back and let the story unfold or use a mouse to select annotated side trips, like a photo essay on life in an aboriginal village.
Mr.
Smolan said the project may not have been possible without a software tool called Director, produced by Macromedia, a San Francisco company whose multimedia development software has become a de facto standard.
Director enables multimedia producers to link text, video, graphics, animation and sound, without writing the many lines of software code that such an undertaking might otherwise require.


Hothouse-Grown Witticism
To the Editor:
Regarding the wit of Dorothy Parker, I cherish one of her more memorable sallies:


All Stops Pulled


Three Takes on Manhattan; A Grand Shopping Tour, Then Beluga and Sevruga
THERE'S no point luxuriating in bed when there's a posh day ahead of us.
True, that means luxury and luxury isn't getting up at the crack of dawn.
But it's either early to rise or snoozing away valuable hours that could be spent inhaling, absorbing, enjoying as much as possible of this special (to most people, anyway) day.
There's also no point -- well, not much -- in even thinking posh in Manhattan without a car and a driver.
Needless to say, this type of transportation isn't enjoyed by most of the natives, but most of the natives aren't posh and this day we are.
Gliding along, cocoon-like, may not be absolutely necessary, but on this gridlocked island it's the next thing to heaven logistically.


Florence Starts Safety Measures For Monuments
In an effort to protect art treasures and historic monuments from terrorist attacks and vandalism, officials in Florence have begun implementing stringent security measures around some of the city's most famous landmarks.
Beginning this month visitors will find traffic-free zones and no-parking areas around Florence's central cathedral, the Santa Maria del Fiore, and the Franciscan church of Santa Croce as well as around numerous museums.


Corporate Consolidations Cause a Rise in Office Vacancies
JUST five years ago, White Plains had a 6 percent office vacancy rate, the lowest in the nation.
Today, however, according to Oncor International, a group of independent brokerage firms in Europe and North America, White Plains has 34.9 percent of empty office space, making it the second highest in the United States in office vacancies and the third highest in the world.
"Only Dallas in Texas, with a vacancy rate of 35.8 percent, and Amsterdam in Europe, with 35.3 percent, are higher than White Plains," said John H. Rostenberg, a partner in Rostenberg-Doern Company, a brokerage firm in Purchase and Stamford that specializes in corporate real estate.
Rostenberg-Doern is Oncor's Fairfield-Westchester affiliate.


Which Schools Will Be Open? No Final Word
Compounding the disarray as the opening of New York City's schools approaches tomorrow, the Board of Education failed yesterday to release as promised a complete list of the elementary and junior high schools that would have to be closed because of asbestos problems and those whose schedules would be reshuffled.
Superintendents of the city's 32 local school districts frantically continued to try to determine which of their schools could not open and to find alternatives.
Their efforts, however, appeared hampered by the enormousness of the task and by a logjam of results from asbestos tests and visual inspections.


Anna Doyno, Skip Tague
Anna Jo Doyno, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Victor A. Doyno of Williamsville, N.Y., was married there yesterday to Barry Elwert Tague Jr., a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Tague of Rosemont, Pa.
The Rev.
Beryl Choi performed the Episcopal ceremony at Calvary Church.
Mrs.
Tague, 24, is a senior business analyst at Empire Blue Cross-Blue Shield in New York.
She and her husband graduated from Cornell University.
Her father is a professor of English at the State University at Buffalo.


New &amp; Noteworthy Paperbacks
A MAN'S PLACE By Annie Ernaux.
Translated by Tanya Leslie.
Ballantine, $9.
In "A Woman's Story," the author wrote of her estrangement from her mother.
This fictionalized autobiography deals with her father, a humble man who was proud of his educated daughter but never understood her.
Last year our reviewer, Miranda Seymour, praised Annie Ernaux's "bleak honesty" and "refusal to let herself off the hook of guilt."


Business Diary/September 12-17
COMPANIES Ford Looks Out for No. 2; G.M. Is on Its Own


Low Standards, Bad Business
To the Editor:
It is difficult to read articles about sex and violence on television without expressing some thoughts.
The one program that seems to be the catalyst for much concern over content is Steven Bochco's new series for ABC, "N.Y.P.D. Blue."


UP AND COMING: Patricia Arquette; She's the Embodiment Of the Spacey Flower Child
Patricia Arquette's Washer and dryer are broken, one of the cats has urinated on every bed, the pet snake has eaten the pet lizard, and the corn has died.
"You have to sacrifice for your art," says the actress, who returned to this chaos the previous day from a movie location in Montana.
"But it's hard to lose your corn."


Corrections
An article last Sunday about a community garden on the Upper West Side referred incorrectly to housing to be built on the site.
It will be for the homeless and other low-income residents, not just for the homeless.


Eve M. Lawler, Clarke Hood
Eve Margaret Lawler, a daughter of Mrs.
William C. Ridgway 3d of Old Lyme, Conn., and Dr.
Edward E. Lawler 3d of Beverly Hills, Calif., was married yesterday to Clarke B. R. Hood, a son of Mrs.
Thomas R. C. Hood of Larchmont, N.Y., and the late Mr.
Hood.
The Rev.
Richard Martin performed the Presbyterian ceremony at the Larchmont Avenue Church, in Larchmont.
The bride, 26, is a photo researcher at Bettman News Photo in New York.
She graduated from Tulane University.


SIDE AGREEMENTS TO TRADE ACCORD VARY IN AMBITION
The environmental side agreement that President Clinton negotiated to the North American Free Trade Agreement is much broader and ambitious than the companion labor agreement, one reason why many environmentalists now support free trade with Mexico and Canada while labor leaders are united against it.
Final legal texts released this week by the White House have made labor unions even more unhappy.
They show that while the environmental pact will create a powerful three-nation bureaucracy to pursue a wide array of environmental problems, the labor pact will create a much smaller and tamer apparatus limited in its enforcement powers to a narrow range of specific issues.


THE ANGUISHED POLITICS OF BREAST CANCER
The current status of breast-cancer research is less gloomy than depicted in Susan Ferraro's article "The Anguished Politics of Breast Cancer" (Aug. 15), even though we have not yet identified all the risk factors.
With the latest tools of molecular biology, we can obtain crucial data by analyzing the genes (DNA) of women with familial, early-onset breast cancer.
By demonstrating the spectrum of their genetic mutations (both inherited and acquired), it will be possible to identify their mutational pattern or "DNA fingerprints" that can be used to identify women at risk.
This will increase the odds in our battle against breast cancer.
KURT J. ISSELBACHER, M.D.
Director, Cancer Center, Massachusetts General Hospital  Boston


Corrections
Because of programming changes caused by the scheduling of President Clinton's address on health care, pictures and captions on the cover of the Television section today, and on the Wednesday highlights page, are outdated.
"Grace Under Fire" and "Joe's Life" will have their premieres on ABC on Sept. 29.
The Presidential address is at 8:30 on Wednesday.


Call of Waterfowl Seasons in Northeast: Duck, Duck, Goose
Waterfowl hunting regulations for the 1993-94 season in the Northeast are much like those of the previous year and the few changes mostly involve special seasons that focus on proliferating flocks of resident Canada geese.
Two such seasons, aimed at reducing populations of geese that have caused damage to crops and contributed to water pollution, recently took place in New York State and New Jersey.
They were timed to take place before any significant numbers of migratory geese were on hand.


Darcy Davisson, John Rigas
Darcy Davisson, a daughter of Zita Davisson Hendrickson of New York, was married yesterday to John Rigas, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Panayotis Rigas of Athens.
The Rev.
Dr.
Robert Stephanopoulos performed the ceremony at the Greek Orthodox Archdiocesan Cathedral of the Holy Trinity in New York.
Mrs.
Rigas graduated from American University in Paris.
Her mother is a portrait artist.
The bride's stepfather, Robert A. Hendrickson, is an author and a partner in the New York law firm of Eaton &amp; Van Winkle.
Her maternal grandfather, the late John P. V. Heinmuller, was the president of the Longines-Wittnauer Watch Company.


A Deep Breath In Oak Bluffs
To the Editor:
I write in response to Burroughs York Jr.'s letter denigrating African-American vacationers on Martha's Vineyard.


Pity These Homeless Wigs
The Patricia Field store, the emporium of wigs and wild clothes at 408 Avenue of the Americas (Eighth Street), is facing eviction.
"She didn't pay the rent in three months," said Irwin Steinhauser, an owner of the lease on the building.
"She tried to renegotiate the lease, which we chose not to do."


Steuben Day Marchers Ready to Step Out


Prolonging the Freshness of Summer
SUMMER is about over, but produce stands still offer an inviting harvest.
Ripe scarlet tomatoes and fragrant basil extend the taste of summer while sweet Italian prune plums herald fall.
Both can provide the foundation for a weekend lunch or weekday supper.
The advantage to using fresh ripe produce is that such ingredients require the barest cooking, so preparation time can often be trimmed to a minimum.
A food processor also speeds up the timing.


A Center to Help Women With AIDS
Some of the dreams and demands of women with the AIDS virus will be realized tomorrow when Iris House opens in East Harlem.
Organizers say the center, at Second Avenue and 117th Street, is the first in the city, and maybe the country, to focus on issues facing women with H.I.V. or AIDS.
The purpose of Iris House -- named for Iris de la Cruz, an AIDS activist who died in 1991 -- is to help women deal with the many aspects of living with an impaired immune system, from fighting opportunistic infections to finding care for their children.


IT ALL COMES OUT IN THE WASH
A load of wash drying on a line is a line of music.
Light and wind create a score that is always changing, always new.
JUDITH TAYLOR Highland Park, Ill.


Connecticut Tribe Gathers Indians From Around Nation


Heather O'Brien and Charles Murphy
Heather Lindsay O'Brien, a daughter of Noelle C. Wall of Loudonville, N.Y., and J. Kevin O'Brien of Meridian, Miss., was married yesterday to Charles William Murphy, the son of Mary and William Murphy of New York.
The Rev.
Dr.
Arthur Caliandro, a minister of the Reformed Church of America, officiated at Marble Collegiate Church in New York.
Mrs.
Murphy, 24, and Mr.
Murphy, 32, are graduates of Columbia University.
She is to begin doctoral studies in theology next month at the University of London.
Her father is a controller for Apache Products, makers of sound systems, in Meridian.
Her mother is the director of marketing and creative services for WNYT-TV in Albany.


Margaret Nelson, Willard S. Moore
Margaret Else Nelson, a vice president and senior counsel of Merrill Lynch &amp; Company, was married yesterday to Willard Sean Moore, an assistant counsel at the New York State Housing Finance Agency.
Both work in New York.
The Rev.
Thomas Cushman performed the ceremony at St.
James' Episcopal Church in New York.
Ms.
Nelson, who is keeping her name, received undergraduate and law degrees from Boston University.
She is a daughter of the late Mr. and Mrs.
Richard A. Nelson.
Her father was a vice president of Carroon &amp; Reynolds, an insurance company in New York.


High Tech and Non-Techies
To the Editor:
The example of R.&amp; D. not paying off for the Xerox Corporation is misleading.
Clearly, the research led to highly successful products.
But those products took a technologically savvy organization, like Apple Computer Inc. of the 1980's, to capitalize on the specific innovations.


THE DEVIL IN LONG ISLAND
It is interesting to see how Ron Rosenbaum defines the parameters of the "evil" island.
In leaving out Queens and Brooklyn, he escapes having a contract put out on his life.
In excluding the Hamptons and Fire Island, and in contemplating the exclusion of Great Neck, he avoids offending "Manhattan transfers" and Long Island's "old money."


2-Income Couples Face New Health Care Strategies
Denise Viviani, a 29-year-old Cleveland accountant, gets free health insurance for herself and her husband at her job.
Her husband, Greg, a 34-year-old lawyer, receives $25 from his law firm every month as a bonus for not carrying insurance through the firm.
"It's great for us," Mr.
Viviani said.
"The insurance I would get through the firm would be very expensive. This way, we've basically got free coverage, and her insurance is very good."


Tawdry World, After All
After officials in New York disclosed last week that the Walt Disney Company was considering moving into a theater on 42d Street at Times Square, the jokes were predictable: Bambi meets Hot Burning Lust?
While a Disney spokesman declined to comment, city officials were exuberant about the possibility that such a big-name entertainment company might commit itself to the seamy Times Square area, where a plan to root out the raunchy and build four office towers has been put on hold indefinitely because of the commercial real estate crash.


Why Clinics Should Stay In the Health Department
To the Editor:
The article "Dinkins Will Shift Running of Clinics to Hospital Corporation" (Aug. 12) gives the impression that protection of turf was largely responsible in the past for preventing a transfer of Department of Health clinics to the Health and Hospitals Corporation.


Regina Martin, John G. Youngman
Regina Theresa Martin, a daughter of Regina C. Martin of Walker Valley, N.Y., and Robert D. Martin of Beacon, N.Y., was married yesterday to John Gray Youngman, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert P. Youngman of New York.
Dr.
Olin C. Robison, a Baptist minister, officiated at the Mead Memorial Chapel at Middlebury (Vt.) College.
Mrs.
Youngman, 24, is a registered nurse in the pediatric department at Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center in New York.
She graduated from Middlebury College and received a B.S. degree in nursing from the State University at Binghamton, N.Y.
Her mother owns Hairstyle in Motion, a beauty salon in Walker Valley.


THE TRIALS OF BOB PACKWOOD
In the 1920's, when I was a reasonably attractive, young businesswoman, a fresh guy like Senator Packwood might make a pass at me.
The occasional, unpleasant encounter didn't make me fall apart, thank heavens.
Although I was only 5 feet tall and 100 pounds, I'd quickly put the harasser in his place with an elbow jab or a kick in the shins.
How come the robust-looking victims pictured in your article couldn't handle the Senator?
ANNA MARIA FRANCIS Stamford, Conn.


On Language; Linguaclip
Language is speeding up.
It began with ini tialese, that deliberate shortening of names and phrases by way of initial caps (a clip of "initial capital letters"; there is no clipping penalty in professional writing).
Government agencies known by their initials were attacked in the 1936 Alf Landon campaign: "Up With Alf, Down With the Alphabet" was a slogan that went nowhere, as F. D. R. -- whose initials are better known than his whole name -- swamped the G.O.P., which most new Republicans don't know stands for "Grand Old Party."


SEPT. 12-18: Eyes on Sarajevo; After Some Finessing, Bosnian Foes Again Seem On the Brink of Peace
Negotiations to end the war in Bosnia seemed close to success just hours before they broke down on Sept. 1.
Last week, new cease-fires signed by the three parties encouraged international mediators to predict that an agreement was again within reach.
On Tuesday, they will meet Bosnia's Muslim, Serb and Croat leaders in Sarajevo to hear their answer.
Yet there is little public evidence that the parties have changed their positions.
They have already agreed to form three autonomous ethnic republics, but the Muslims insist on more Serb-held land and an access to the sea through Croat territory.


Choosing Evil
A SIMPLE PLAN By Scott Smith. 335 pp. New York: Alfred A. Knopf. $21.


Legal Services Agency Is Hampered by State Budget Cuts
WESTCHESTER-PUTNAM Legal Services, a major provider of free legal advice and representation in civil cases for low-income people, is facing devastating cuts in its budget, Michael J. Hampden, the organization's executive director, reported last week.
Throughout the state, grants made to legal services organizations from Interest on Lawyers Accounts, known as the Iola Fund, are being reduced to $8 million next year from $12 million this year.


They're Waiting for You
Just the phrase hot line evokes excitement.
Calling a customer-information line is well and good, but a hot line somehow feels connected to your living room, perhaps even to your life.
It may be only a recorded message, but they recorded it with you in mind, knowing that at any moment, you might want to know, right then, what the sky is going to look like tonight.
The Hayden Planetarium Sky Report hot line is waiting for your call.


An America's Cup Coup: Koch's All-Female Team
With secrecy more befitting a military coup than a yacht race, Bill Koch and a small team of advisers have developed a plan that would man the front lines of the next America's Cup defense with women.
The sailors involved, all top racers from the United States, include J. J. Isler, Dawn Riley and Dory Vogel.
People close to Koch have indicated that the women have been asked to sign statements that they will not reveal details of the plan.
Isler, Riley and Vogel all declined to comment.


An American's Respite From Disillusionment
FOR years I have explained the longevity of the Arab-Israeli conflict with a joke about a very religious Jew named Goldberg who wanted to win the lottery.
He would go to synagogue every Sabbath and pray: "God, I have been such a pious man all of my life. What would be so bad if I won the lottery?" And the lottery would come, and Goldberg would not win.
This went on week after week, month after month.
Finally, one Sabbath, Goldberg couldn't take it anymore, and said to the Almighty: "God, I have been so good, so observant. What do I have to do to win the lottery?"
And suddenly the heavens parted and the voice of God boomed out: "Goldberg, give me a chance. Buy a ticket."


Iditarod Gets a Lift
A petroleum distributor, Tesoro Alaska, says it will donate $50,000 in fuel to the Iditarod Trail Sled Dog Race, saying a healthy Iditarod is good for Alaska business and tourism.
The 1,100-mile race lost the important sponsors ABC-TV, Chrysler Dodge and the telecommunications company Alascom Inc., as it prepared for the next running of the internationally known event in March.


State and Cities Join Forces To Fight Gangs
FOR a graphic reminder of gang violence in Hartford, Tom Hashem, the communications director for the State Department of Public Safety, doesn't have to leave his office.
"We were sitting around talking one afternoon recently when we heard a shot fired," he said in an interview.
"It was startling, to say the least."


Susanna Gordon, Eli Rotenberg
Susanna Poythress Bland Gordon, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
James P. Gordon of Rumson, N.J., was married there yesterday to Eli Rotenberg, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Aharon Rotenberg of Philadelphia.
Judge William P. Kirkpatrick of Rumson Municipal Court officiated at the home of the bride's parents.
Ms.
Gordon, 28, is keeping her name.
She and her husband are candidates for doctoral degrees in physics at the University of California at Berkeley.
They graduated from Cornell University.


In the Rag Trade, They Also Serve Who Pleat
THE BUSINESS of putting pleats into skirts, dresses and sleeves is under siege.
The aggressor?
In a word, pants.
"There's nothing worse for pleating than pants," Anthony Bonanno, owner of the S.F.
Pleating and Stitching Company in Brooklyn, said gravely.
In the rag trade, people read hemlines the way fortune tellers read tea leaves.
Sudden changes, in this case up or down, bode ill for business.
But even worse for the handful of pleaters still in operation these days are the mixed messages designers have sent over the last few seasons.
The ambiguity -- is the style long or short or a hybrid? -- has left women standing on the sidelines in pants.


At a Retreat, a Zen Monk Plants the Seeds of Peace
First came the clear, resonant sound of the bell, a shining brass bowl held delicately on the fingertips of a Buddhist nun.
Then came the sound of more than 500 people rhythmically inhaling and exhaling, among them a contingent of American Vietnam veterans, a large number of psychotherapists and social workers, and Jewish students of Zen Buddhism who gathered for a Rosh ha-Shanah service between meditation sessions.


Clash


The Gorilla in the Living Room: New Jersey's Annual Budget Gap
With Election Day six weeks away, Gov.
Jim Florio and his rival, Christine Todd Whitman, are fully engaged in baiting and bickering over one thing or another.
But they have yet to grapple publicly with the phantom that will haunt the next administration, no matter who runs it: New Jersey's annual dance of the budget deficit.
Mr.
Florio, a Democrat, has talked about jobs: how he has created them or helped attract them.
Mrs.
Whitman, a Republican, intends to talk about jobs, when she puts forth her own economic-stimulus program next Tuesday.
Legislative leaders on both sides of the aisle are eager to talk about jobs too.
Jobs bring revenue, they say, and revenue will enable the Governor and the Legislature to avoid quick fixes or gimmicks to close gaps in an annual budget that has grown beyond $15 billion.


THE DEVIL IN LONG ISLAND
In his desire to portray central Long Island as the mother of all dysfunctional communities, Rosenbaum takes too myopic a view of the condition he seeks to convey.
If anything, it is a condition that is woven into the fabric of American life.
In the early part of this century, authors like Sherwood Anderson and Sinclair Lewis created entire communities of dysfunctional Midwesterners; lesser writers have propagated dysfunctional communities for consumption in popular fiction and on soap operas.
Surely, some must have drawn on conditions they observed where they lived.
Could it be that Long Island is only experiencing a generous allotment of the sort of fame that Andy Warhol talked about?
ROBERT WANERMAN Brooklyn


Helping Addicts And Families, Too
By Robin Johnson will never forget the date: Feb. 10, 1992.
That's the last time she smoked crack, her last binge before checking into a detoxification program.
She is one of 30 people at the Pathway Center for Family Treatment, which helps women overcome their addictions while keeping their children at home.
Financed by the Child Welfare Administration and run by the New York Foundling Hospital, the Pathway Center moved last week from a temporary base on 18th Street to its permanent home on Broadway at 132d Street.


When It Comes to Bullies, Skin Color Doesn't Matter
To the Editor:
I find it interesting that Ms.
Bray, while addressing how racial stereotypes cut both ways, inadvertantly reveals a stereotype of her own.
That is, by virtue of the fact that the family is white and the son owns a bike, said family is "economically secure."


Juliette Smith, James Aston 3d
Juliette Cantrell Smith, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Frederick M. Smith 2d of Dallas, was married on Sept. 11 to James William Aston 3d, a son of Mrs.
Richard D. Bass of Dallas, and Dr.
Aston Jr. of Winnsboro, Tex.
The Rev.
Robert Ratelle performed the ceremony at St.
Thomas Episcopal Church in Camden, Me.
Mrs.
Aston, 30, is an admissions officer at the Hockaday School in Dallas.
She is a graduate of Mary Baldwin College.
Her father is a partner in Smith Allen, an oil and gas investment company in Dallas.
Her mother, Jerrie Smith, is an art consultant in Dallas.
The bride is a granddaughter of Stanley Marcus of Dallas, a founder and former chairman of Neiman Marcus, the specialty-store chain.


The Madness of a King Explored
BYPASSING Broadway, the Royal National Theater of Great Britain's production of "The Madness of George III" has begun a nine-week American tour in Stamford, a corporate center, once known as a bedroom community.
The acclaimed production won't take Manhattan, that mythical hub of culture where theater once reigned.
Look no further for evidence that real theater is regionally defined.
And what makes the occasion altogether right for Stamford is that the Rich Forum (757 seats) is identical in size -- the production's director, Nicholas Hytner said -- to the Lyttelton, the second of the Royal National's three theaters, where Alan Bennett's play had its debut in November 1991.
There it is to return following the current itinerary: Brooklyn Academy of Music (2,000), Morris Mechanic Theater (1,604) in Baltimore and Colonial Theater (1,658) in Boston.


No Room On the Radio For Classics?
About twenty-five years ago, Robert Sherman, then program director of WQXR in New York, one of the country's most important classical-music radio stations, developed three shows that have themselves attained classic status: "First Hearing," a taped weekly show in which three critics are heard reacting on the spot to new recordings; "The Listening Room," Mr.
Sherman's daily live exploration of musical life, complete with visits from composers and performers, and "Woody's Children," Mr.
Sherman's weekly tour through the world of contemporary folk music.
All three shows are now heading toward extinction.
"First Hearing" will be heard this evening for the last time in New York.
The show will continue to be produced by WQXR (which is owned by The Times) but will appear only in national syndication.
WQXR will no longer broadcast it.


Three Takes on Manhattan; From the Cloisters to the Planetarium, With a Bookstore Detour
AT the drive-in movies in my hometown of Mount Carmel, Ill., I fell in love with New York's West Side.
And as it turns out, Woody Allen did not exaggerate the self-conscious charm of its bookstore-loving, art-film-watching, Chinese food-eating culture.
There are a few bona fide tourist attractions west of Central Park, such as Lincoln Center, the American Museum of Natural History and Zabar's, the mammoth food emporium on Broadway at 80th Street.
But it's the less-traveled spots and the street life that add up to a grand excursion here.
Maybe you'd like to tell a cabdriver, "Grant's Tomb, and take your time," because that's where Nick sent Nora on a detour in one of the "Thin Man" movies. (If he needs directions, it's at 122d and Riverside.) Or else you're keen to see the street where Edgar Allan Poe worked on his weird oeuvre. (There is now a cafe called Edgar's at No. 255.) These are just the sort of caprices that should be indulged on a trip to the West Side, where the slightly off-center is appreciated.


Kitty Douglas, Mark Sargent
Catherine Lewis Douglas, the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
R.
Gordon Douglas Jr. of Lawrenceville, N.J., was married yesterday to Mark Adams Sargent, a son of Joan Sargent of New Canaan, Conn., and Daniel I. Sargent of North Salem, N.Y.
The Rev.
Dr.
David W. Good performed the ceremony at Old Lyme (Conn.) Congregational Church.
Ms.
Douglas, 27, who is known as Kitty, is keeping her name.
She is studying for a master's degree in elementary education at the Antioch New England Graduate School.
She graduated from Skidmore College.
Her father, a former chairman of the department of medicine at the New York Hospital-Cornell Medical Center in New York, is a vice president of Merck &amp; Company and the president of the Merck Vaccine Division in White House Station, N.J.


Georgia Truce Collapses in Secessionist Attack on Black Sea Port
A Russian-brokered cease-fire between Georgia and its breakaway province of Abkhazia appeared to crumble today before a new drive by secessionist forces on the regional capital of Sukhumi.
A flurry of talks and trips by officials of Georgia, Abkhazia and Russia seem to have yielded no results, and both sides urgently marshaled forces for a battle for Sukhumi.


Dear Conan: A Letter From Harvard
Eight years before Conan O'Brien made his debut last week as the host of NBC's "Late Night" show, he was the president of the Harvard Lampoon.
Styles of The Times asked three of the Lampoon's present staff members to comment on Mr.
O'Brien's first week.: Dear Conan,
Though flattered by the opportunity to offer you some constructive criticism, we feel it's a bit like the snotty little reprobate back-talking a well-respected teacher. (You have long been admired at our little magazine.) Anyway, everyone knows we would be fools to make any negative comments about a man to whom we will all soon be groveling for jobs.
That said, we are snotty little reprobates, and we're still shielded enough from the real world to be able to give anyone back talk, particularly you.
So here then is our thoroughly unbiased and utterly honest impression of your first week.
*
Our generation isn't as cool as yours.
But we think the show's on too late.
Put it on earlier.
* Shave Max Weinberg's head. Bald band leaders are funny.
* When it's nice outside, maybe you could have the show outside just once.
*
The talking Clinton and Schwarzenegger heads with the animated mouths are hilarious.
Of course, Clutch Cargo's perfected it, but we won't say anything if you don't.
* When you tell a joke, say some of the words with italics. Works for us!
*
The leg wrestling was funny and all, but we do not appreciate you displaying secret Lampoon rituals.
*
You asked a trivia question about the Partridge family and the answer provided was "we don't know." A disregard for learning is never funny.
*
We laughed ourselves silly at your casting of Andy Richter as your sidekick.
He does look exactly like that mean old Dean Phruple!
Wink!
Wink!
Attaboy, Conan!
*
And what's with this name change, "Conan"?
We like you just fine with your given name, and you will always be Cy Kugenspiel in our hearts.
In summary, we think you're doing a great job.
We're all really proud of you, and you're doing the Lampoon proud.
But we know that any of us kids could do your job at least as well -- and we sleep better knowing this.
JOHN ABOUD DENNIS MC NICHOLAS SCOTT SILVERI


Never Mind the Ending
A WOMAN'S VIEW How Hollywood Spoke to Women, 1930-1960.
By Jeanine Basinger.
Illustrated. 528 pp.
New York:  Alfred A. Knopf. $30.


Miss Saigon, U.S.A.
Her long blond hair, blue eyes and round, healthy face evoke the sunshine of Indiana, where she was born.
Her full, melodious voice, with its mysterious minor undertones and subtle quaver, seems to flow directly from the mist-shrouded valleys of Vietnam, where she has never been.
Although she sings in a language she does not understand, a young American woman who calls herself simply Dalena has become one of the hottest pop stars in the culture of overseas Vietnamese.
Her casettes and compact disks of Vietnamese popular songs are top sellers, her concerts are sold out.
When she walks through the mall here in the area known as Little Saigon, as she did one day last month, she is mobbed.


The Man Who Kept Stalin's Secrets
DEADLY ILLUSIONS By John Costello and Oleg Tsarev.
Illustrated. 538 pp.
New York: Crown Publishers. $25.


Ice Beer
WHAT: A brew produced partly in freezing temperatures, hence the name.
It is the newest fad-cum-nascent-trend in an industry erupting with new processes and products intended to pique the interest of fickle, free-spending consumers in their 20's and 30's as overall beer consumption remains stagnant.
It seems even the dullest supermarket beer aisle will soon resemble a college-town rathskeller.
HOW?
OR THE NEW ICE AGE: Beer is brewed and filtered at 24 to 28 degrees Fahrenheit -- "superchilled," as one brand's label breathlessly explains -- until ice crystals form.
Filtering the crystals produces what ice beer's enthusiasts describe as a richer, smoother, cleaner taste.


. . . And Everybody Gets His Own Room
The Met has discovered the room.
That is the real news contained in the handsome, sprawling new galleries for 19th-century European painting and sculpture: the works of art are in rooms!
And not just any rooms, but rooms that look for all the world as if they had been a part of the Met since the grandly classical wings by Richard Morris Hunt and McKim, Mead &amp; White went up in the years before and after the turn of the century.
These new galleries are not part of the Hunt and McKim wings at all, of course: they are a stage set, a stylized fantasy of classical architecture that has been built by the Met's own designers within a starkly modern section of the museum.
This is a 1990's classical interior inside a 1970's glass box, and if that isn't a metaphor for what has happened to architecture in the last generation, nothing is.


Hevesi's Primary Victory Jump-Starts His Career
So just who is Alan Who?
Above all, Assemblyman Alan G. Hevesi, perhaps now the front-runner to become the Democratic nominee for New York City comptroller, is a candidate who finally seems to have found his political footing.


Gregory Van Buren, Norma Brandon
Norma Kate Brandon, a daughter of Jacqueline Evans Brandon of Yorba Linda, Calif., and the late Col.
Eddie L. Brandon, was married yesterday to Gregory Carlton Van Buren, the son of Frances K. Van Buren of Hempstead, L.I., and the late Dr.
John D. Van Buren.
The Rev.
Peter B. Grandy, a Congregational minister, performed the ceremony at the Asylum Hill Congregational Church in Hartford, assisted by the Rev.
Williams Van Buren, a United Church of Christ minister and an uncle of the bridegroom.
Mrs.
Van Buren, a graduate of St.
Francis Xavier University, is an account manager with Aetna Health Plans in Boston.
Her father retired from the United States Army to become a senior manager for Army programs at the McDonnell Douglas Aeronautics Company in Huntington Beach, Calif.
Her mother is a retired pharmacist.


You Don't Have to Be Italian . . .


SEPT. 12-18: Tests Called Unnecessary; Fetal Sonogram Study Helps Clinton's Health Juggernaut
As the Clinton Administration last week launched its campaign to sell the nation its overhaul of health care, it got some unexpected help from a study that wasn't even part of the sales pitch.
The study concluded that the sonograms routinely given to healthy pregnant women fail to make a significant difference in the health of the babies they bear; thus it lent timely support to the Administration's argument that medical costs can be trimmed significantly by ending wasteful practices.


Discord Over SummerStage
The Central Park SummerStage has closed down for the season, but the controversy it has generated continues to reverberate.
At issue is the sound of SummerStage, or more specifically, how much of it should be heard from the brownstones and apartment buildings on Fifth and Madison Avenues and the side streets in between.


REALLY ROSEANNE
Patricia Volk's paean to the television sitcom "Roseanne" shows the depth to which taste and manners have declined in our society (Hers: "Really Roseanne," Aug. 8).
People wonder why Americans are slovenly, narcissistic, uncaring, poorly spoken and uncouth -- just take a look at Roseanne.
She epitomizes what ails our society.
C.
A.
CARROLL Woodcliff Lake, N.J.


Candor Helps Turn Tide In Uphill Mayoral Battle
Four weeks ago William A. Johnson Jr.'s campaign to become the first black to be elected mayor of this city seemed to be foundering.
Some said the first-time candidate's inexperience was showing as he and his staff worked away on a 32-page booklet outlining his platform while the other candidates held news conferences and raised money.


'In the Shadow of Moloch'
To the Editor:
May I reply to Wendy Doniger's review of my book "In the Shadow of Moloch: The Sacrifice of Children and Its Impact on Western Religions" (Aug. 1)?


The Rise of Fall
IN the burly mountains of New England, between mid-September and late October, hardwood and conifer forests draw thousands of tour buses, tens of thousands of foliage hot-line calls, a million tourists and more than $1 billion.
For six pivotal weeks, nature is stage-managed for maximum return.
"We have been aggressively marketing the fall as a season," said Christopher Jennings, New Hampshire's director of travel and tourism.
"Vermont. Accept No Substitutes" its neighbor's promotional literature warns.
No wonder there was an uproar last year, when courtly Virginia touted its nascent foliage aspirations with a stock photo of a flame-red sugar maple taken in . . .
Vermont.


LONG ISLAND JOURNAL
Newest and Hottest Dolls
TENSION was running high backstage at the fashion show. One model was clutching a doll.
Whoops. All the models were clutching dolls.


SEPT. 12-18: HUD Seizes Housing Project; A Showdown in Texas Over Desegregation
"We don't, in America, in 1993, anywhere tell anyone they can't live anywhere because of the color of their skin," Henry G. Cisneros, the Secretary of Housing and Urban Development, told the townspeople gathered at a church in Vidor, Texas.
With such words as guide, Federal housing officials last week swept into the racially troubled east Texas town and took control of a housing complex where repeated efforts at desegregation have failed despite a court order that black families be moved there.


Past and Present Form a Ham Sandwich
For the spanish director Bigas Luna, the huge cured hams that hang in almost every bar from Galicia to Andalusia are the best that his native land has to offer.
So when the 47-year-old Mr.
Luna decided to film a portrait of Spain, he promptly thought of ham.
What better captures the essence of the country than a solid leg of jamon?
Indeed, what better title for his movie than "Jamon Jamon"?
Happily perhaps, the film itself is not about ham.
Rather, it is a caustic and humorous parody of a Spain that is rushing to modernize at the same time as it remains deeply traditional, a Spain of Japanese motorcyles and maternal prostitutes called Carmen, a Spain, as Mr.
Luna likes to put it, of "computers and ham." But ham does have a role in the film.
In fact, it is ham that abruptly transforms a comedy into tragedy.


Where Coffee's Weak and Patrons Are Strong
THE WAR between coffee shops and their patrons is centuries old, at least.
New Yorkers know that while you don't exactly take your life in your hands whenever you enter a coffee shop here, you certainly risk your nerves being rattled and your ego bludgeoned.
And your coffee served weak.
I have been a devoted soldier on this battleground for much of my adult life and so speak with consummate authority on survival techniques in coffee shops.


Profile: William S. Lerach; The Pit Bull of Silicon Valley
The most hated man in high tech? That's easy: Bill Lerach.
William S. Lerach is by most accounts the most prolific and successful practitioner of the class action that accuses companies of securities fraud.
Typically filed when bad news causes a company's stock price to drop, such suits accuse management of misleading positive statements to the public in advance of and with knowledge of a debacle to come.
The suits are filed on contingency, with no plaintiff's fees, on behalf of shareholders said to have invested in response to the misleading statements.


Of Mud And Cloth
Textiles and fashion from far and near are celebrated at three parties.


BRINGING THE KIDS
I agree with David Updike that we need more get-togethers where children of all ages are welcome.
Many children I know are far more interesting than adults.
However, Updike has perhaps never attended a function where a few of the younger set, who are old enough to know better, go through the house spilling food and beverages and climbing on furniture.


Vacant Lot Awaits Its Pool and Beach
It's still vacant except for the parked cars, that fenced-in lot of dreams on the east side of the Avenue of the Americas between 22d and 23d Streets.
It's been vacant for something like 40 years.
Some years ago, the lot sprouted a sign proclaiming "Future Home of the New York Health &amp; Racquet Club." The lot's owner, a real-estate developer named Fraydun Manocherian, planned to transform it into the jewel of his Health and Racquet Club chain.


Kilburg Reedy, Philip Ragona
M.
Kilburg Reedy, a lawyer with the Legal Aid Criminal Appeals Bureau, was married yesterday to Philip J. Ragona, an associate at the law firm of Cahill Gordon &amp; Reindel.
Both work in Manhattan.
The Rev.
Jerry Bonjean performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at SS.
Peter and Paul Church in San Francisco.
The bride, a graduate of the University of Minnesota, is keeping keep her name.
She and her husband, a cum laude graduate of the University of California at Los Angeles, are 1992 graduates of the Columbia University School of Law.


Nazism Is Not for Styles
To the Editor:
To have included the feature article about Jonathan Haynes, white supremacist by his own admission, in the Styles of The Times Section ("No Remorse," Sept. 5) is to subscribe to his point of view.
I have come to expect major articles on fashion, the horsy jet set and the beautiful people, but murder in the pursuit of Mr.
Haynes's twisted, idealized concept of beauty strikes an absurd note.


NOTES
Cafe Tabac, the model-infested restaurant at 232 East Ninth Street, in the East Village, has begun selling ad space on its awning.
The first buyer is EMI Records Group, which includes the labels SBK, EMI and Chrysalis.
The anti-smoking campaign hasn't been getting much of a boost at some recent parties.
At both the opening of the uptown Barneys and at Vanity Fair's 10th-anniversary celebration, women with cigarette trays passed out free smokes.


Planting Bulbs? The More the Merrier
SPRING-FLOWERING bulbs require patience as well as trust.
Although the bulbs are planted anytime now, no results will be seen until spring.
So all good gardeners have ordered their bulbs, right?
Or, at least, they have thought about it.
Those who have gone through this bulb-ordering ritual know well that bulbs must be planted in quantity to make a statement.
A few bulbs here or a line or two planted there will never do.
Quantities are the answer.
Perhaps this is why bulb catalogues increasingly offer bulbs in quantities of 25, 50 or more.


Prolonging the Freshness of Summer
SUMMER is about over, but produce stands still offer an inviting harvest.
Ripe scarlet tomatoes and fragrant basil extend the taste of summer while sweet Italian prune plums herald fall.
Both can provide the foundation for a weekend lunch or weekday supper.
The advantage to using fresh ripe produce is that such ingredients require the barest cooking, so preparation time can often be trimmed to a minimum.
A food processor also speeds up the timing.


2 Suspects Arrested in Shooting of 2 Police Officers in Brooklyn
A teen-ager and a young man were arrested yesterday in a shooting that seriously injured two police officers in East New York, Brooklyn, the police said.
Tywan Price, 16, of 417 Montauk Avenue, and Chris Holland, 20, of 3332 Fulton Street, both in East New York, face two counts of second-degree attempted murder, first-degree assault and criminal possession of a weapon, said Sgt.
Anthony Barlanti, a police spokesman.


Political Memo; Streetwise Politics Put to Use In Quest for Health Overhaul
The civics books suggest that the real wheeling and dealing over restructuring the health care system will begin Wednesday, when President Clinton formally presents his proposals to a joint session of Congress.
But in fact, for seven months, in a marathon series of meetings within the Government and with 1,100 outside groups, the Administration's health planners have already agreed to a complex series of political trade-offs.
One way of comprehending the intricacy of this plan, which is a challenge even to those who have spent their careers in health policy, is to understand the basic political strategy behind it.


IT ALL COMES OUT IN THE WASH
Yes, clotheslines are great, but there was nothing like an empty Laundromat at dusk after a hectic day.
Back then, saturated in motherhood, I'd sit and watch the porthole reflecting my face against the tossing clothes.
Then, smoothing the warm flannel with the palms of my hands, I'd dream.


A Wary Acceptance of a New Juvenile Detention Center
People in the South Bronx have given up their fight to stop the new Spofford juvenile detention center from being built in their midst, but their surrender has been far from unconditional.
For months, civic leaders, residents and politicians campaigned to stop the city from constructing the detention center near the Hub, the bustling commercial strip in a neighborhood struggling to overcome poverty and crime.


THE ANGUISHED POLITICS OF BREAST CANCER
When will everyone stop arguing about 1 in 8 or 1 in 9?
Once you have breast cancer, it is 1 in 1.


Protests Mount, A Bar Covers Up
Last year, Ernest Barbieri opened Night Dreams, a topless bar, in a middle-class community of two-family brick homes in Bay Ridge.
Last month, in the face of opposition from residents, he closed it.
"I've been in the community for over 20 years," said Mr.
Barbieri.
"I didn't want to mess up my good name and ruin my relationship with the people here. It was a fairly simple decision."


Decision On Heliport Awaits
The future of Flushing Airport -- the small, 1920's field in College Point -- remains unclear, as civic leaders and residents continue to oppose a plan to convert it into a 10-acre heliport.
The airport, which was purchased by the city in 1955, has been closed since 1984 because its runways regularly flooded.


This Week's Numbers
Last
Consensus
Period
Estimates
(I.D.E.A. Inc.)
Tuesday
Housing starts, August, millions, annual rate
1.21
1.25
Thursday
Weekly jobless claims, thousands
324
320
Auto sales, mid-Sept., millions, ann. rate
6.3
6.5
Friday
Durable-goods orders, August, pct. change
-3.1
1.3
Monday: U.S.-Japanese trade talks start in Hawaii  Tuesday: Federal Reserve Open Market Committee meeting  Two-year Treasury note auction  Wednesday:Clinton to present health plan to Congress  Five-year Treasury note auction  Friday: Annual I.M.F./World Bank meeting starts


Beethoven: Among The Great Washed
To the Editor:
In his essay "Everything Is Great! Just Great!"  [ Aug. 29 ] , Bernard Holland needled more than was necessary in citing the Pittsburgh Symphony, among others, for hyperbole in their announcement of programs for the coming season.
Their "Season of Musical Greats," wrote Mr.
Holland, "will be filled with the major works of that musical titan . . . you know, the short, deaf one who didn't wash very often."


Lisca Coyle, Stephen Regine
Lisca van Lockhorst Coyle, the daughter of Isabel van Lockhorst Coyle of Newport, R.I., and the late Robert O. Coyle, was married yesterday to Stephen Anthony Regine, the son of Dr.
Anthony Regine and Angela Regine of Middletown, R.I.
The Rev.
Alan Neale performed the Episcopal ceremony at St.
Columba's Chapel in Middletown.
Mrs.
Regine is a clinical social worker at St.
Anne's Hospital in Fall River, Mass.
She graduated from Barnard College and received a master's degree in social work from Boston College.
Her father was a management consultant in London.
Her mother is a saleswoman with Prudential Prime Properties, a real-estate agency in Newport.


Habitat/Hayden's Point; A Redolence of History
WHEN Chester Bowles ad man and ambassador -- owned the place, his five children ran through its huge servants' kitchen and Ravi Shankar played his sitar in its drawing room.
Eleanor Roosevelt stopped by for tea.
The flagpole on the front lawn was from the owner's favorite schooner and the oak paneling in the library from Connecticut Valley tobacco barns.
"The children were treated with as much respect as the adults, and the dogs were treated with almost as much respect as the children," said Sally Bowles, the fourth of those five children.
"It was a perpetual open house. Sure, Eleanor Roosevelt was there, but she was probably sitting next to my third-grade teacher."


Corrections
The listing for this afternoon on page 12 of the Television section today misidentifies the team that will play the Cleveland Browns.
It is the Los Angeles Raiders, not the Rams.


Traffic Alert
The Riverside Drive northbound approach to the George Washington Bridge will be closed today from and 6 A.M. to 3 P.M. for construction.
FEAST OF SAN GENNARO: Mulberry Street will be closed between Canal and Prince Streets between Mott and Baxter Streets from 11 A.M. to 11:30 P.M.
OLD ST.
PATRICK'S FESTIVAL: Mulberry Street will be closed between Prince and Houston Streets from 6 P.M. to 11:30 P.M.
COLUMBUS AVENUE FESTIVAL: Columbus Avenue will be closed between 66th and 96th Streets from 11 A.M. to 6 P.M.
MUSLIM DAY PARADE: Madison Avenue will be closed between 23d and 41st Streets from 2 to 5 P.M. for the Muslim Day Parade.
NEW YORK IS BOOK COUNTRY: Fifth Avenue will be closed between 48th and 57 Streets from 10 A.M. to 3 P.M.


Pope By a Hair
THE AGE OF MIRACLES, TO ECHO Thomas Carlyle, is indeed forever here.
If in doubt, behold the creation of Hagop Sandaldjian: Pope John Paul II, faithfully assembled from flecks of dust and bits of human hair, painted and perched in the eye of a needle.
A violin instructor by trade, Sandaldjian, who died in California in 1990, was also one of only four micro-miniaturist sculptors in the world.
Other needle-eye renderings included Little Red Riding Hood, Napoleon and Donald Duck; Mount Ararat etched on a grain of rice, and a Lilliputian Christ of glue and gold dust, crucified on a single, bisected hair from Sandaldjian's head.
Each was the product of painstaking effort.
Sandaldjian fashioned carving tools by attaching motes of crushed gems to the ends of sharpened needles.
He worked late at night, when the day's dust had settled and the rumblings of traffic were stilled.
Minute drops of paint, which dried in seconds, he applied between heartbeats.
Canopies of acrylic now shield his handiwork from the micro-elements.


PLAYING IN THE NEIGHBORHOOD
MIDTOWN  Flip Wilson, In Living Off-Color
Those of the so-called twentysomething generation might have vague memories of "The Flip Wilson Show." But their parents, who may have had "The Flip Wilson Show" blaring in the background at dinnertime, could be a bit nostalgic.
The show, which brought the expression "the devil made me do it" into the mainstream, ran on NBC from 1970 to 1974 and was one of the first black television comedy-variety shows.
The Museum of Television and Radio will screen highlights from the show's history during a seminar with Mr.
Wilson on Thursday.


Avis Testing Day Headlights
The effectiveness of using headlights in the daytime for safety reasons is being tested by nonprofessional drivers in the United States.
The Avis Rent A Car company has begun installing headlights that go on automatically whenever the car's engine is started.
The eight-city test, which began two weeks ago, is an expansion of Avis's program in Seattle, which was initiated last month.
The cities involved are Portland, Me., Buffalo, Rochester and Syracuse, N.Y., Detroit, Minneapolis, Portland, Ore., and Seattle -- selected because tests indicate lights are most effective in northern latitudes.
The way was cleared for the plan in February, when the Department of Transportation issued a ruling that supersedes any state regulations that might have prohibited day running lights.
The lights, which are less bright than regular headlights, have been required in Canada since the 1990 auto model year, and in Sweden since 1977.
Based on research from these countries, and from tests with commercial fleets in the United States, most driving experts believe that the lights reduce the frequency of head-on and sideways collisions.


A Little Italy Festival Marco Polo Would Love
As the 67th annual San Gennaro Festival celebrates its finale tonight, throngs at the booths along Mulberry Street will sample not only pizza and calzone, but also lo mein and pork buns, pirogis, tamales, empanadas and souvlaki.
"It used to be 99.9 percent Italian, but now you're seeing a different flavor, vendors of different backgrounds," said Louis Lisi, a native of the neighborhood and director of a nearby senior citizen center.


Sin Of Omission
To the Editor:
Although he was neither as inebriated or as self-destructive as his fellow members of the Algonquin Round Table, the playwright George S. Kaufman surely deserves better than to be excluded from the list cited in "Back to the Round Table With Dorothy Parker and Pals"  [ Aug. 29 ] .
His character is, in fact, in Alan Rudolph's forthcoming film "Mrs. Parker and the Round Table."


Columnist Injured in Car Crash
Mike McAlary, a columnist who has worked for all of New York's three tabloid newspapers, was in critical condition yesterday after the car he was driving smashed into a concrete divider on the Franklin D. Roosevelt Drive.
Mr.
McAlary, 35, suffered injuries to his chest, abdomen and head, said a spokeswoman for Bellevue Hospital, where he underwent surgery.


Latin Music Crosses New Borders
As befits a pop music idol whose last record sold more than 4.5 million copies, Luis Miguel chose to do things on a grand scale when it came time to release his new album, "Aries," early this summer.
Reporters and disk jockeys from all over the United States and as far away as Argentina were flown here to hear the 23-year-old singer discuss the making of the record (reported to have cost more than $1 million), watch him perform at a pair of sold-out concerts and see the premiere of a lavish, romantic music video, shot in three versions by three different directors.
Three months later, Luis Miguel, now in the midst of an American tour that took him to Madison Square Garden earlier this month and will peak in December with a five-day engagement at Caesar's Palace in Las Vegas, Nev., has proved to be worth every penny of that investment.
Some 1.5 million copies of "Aries" have flown out of record stores throughout the Western Hemisphere, and the album's first single, "Ayer," can be heard on radios everywhere Spanish is spoken.
Once again, Luis Miguel -- a Mexican born in Puerto Rico of Spanish-Italian parents whose full name is Luis Miguel Gallego -- has been confirmed as Latin heartthrob numero uno, the Julio Iglesias of his generation.


Seeing the Arctic In a Museum
Arktikum, a new museum-cum-science center in Rovaniemi, Finland, near the Arctic Circle, is designed to let visitors explore the ancient but still exotic Arctic environment and its hardy inhabitants.
Burrowed deep into the banks of the Ounasjoki River with only a long, completely glass-roofed, central arcade exposed, the structure containing Arktikum best tells its own story.
"People in Lapland," explains Kati Kemppainen, Arktikum's spokeswoman, "have always sheltered themselves in the snow, underground."


Carol J. Malouf, Roger Chartouni
Carol J. Malouf, a daughter of Aida N. Malouf of New York and the late Naseeb A. Malouf, was married yesterday to Roger J. Chartouni, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Joseph R. Chartouni of Beirut, Lebanon.
The Rev.
Edward Nedder, a Maronite Catholic priest, officiated at St.
Ann's Church in Lenox, Mass.
Mrs.
Chartouni is the director of marketing development for the Elizabeth Arden Company in New York.
She graduated from Georgetown University.


BEST SELLERS: September 19, 1993
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Fiction
1
1
58
THE BRIDGES OF MADISON COUNTY, by Robert James Waller. (Warner, $16.95.) A photographer and a lonely farmer's wife in Iowa.
2
2
4
WITHOUT REMORSE, by Tom Clancy. (Putnam, $24.95.) John Kelly becomes involved in a Pentagon project to rescue prisoners held in North Vietnam.
3
4
23
LIKE WATER FOR CHOCOLATE, by Laura Esquivel. (Doubleday, $17.50.) Frustration, love, hope -- and recipes -- sampled by a woman on a Mexican ranch.
4
3
6
VANISHED, by Danielle Steel. (Delacorte, $23.95.) The abduction of their young son creates a crisis for a New York man and woman and for the woman's first lover.
5
5
27
THE CLIENT, by John Grisham. (Doubleday, $23.50.) A deadly secret, revealed by a lawyer just before he kills himself, presents problems for an 11-year-old boy.
6
6
7
STREETS OF LAREDO, by Larry McMurtry. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $25.) A Texas bounty hunter goes south of the border in pursuit of a train robber and killer.
7
7
2
THE GOLDEN MEAN, by Nick Bantock. (Chronicle Books, $17.95.) Concluding the "Griffin &amp; Sabine" trilogy, about an artist and his secret admirer.
8
10
2
STRIP TEASE, by Carl Hiaasen. (Knopf, $21.) The problems, political and sexual, of a Florida Congressman.
9
12
2
THE DEATH AND LIFE OF SUPERMAN, by Roger Stern. (Spectra/Bantam, $19.95.) A novel about the comic-book hero, including his rebirth in the near future.
10
8
10
THE NIGHT MANAGER, by John le Carre. (Knopf, $24.) A Zurich hotelman's life in the world of arms dealers, dope smugglers and international terrorists.
11
9
13
PIGS IN HEAVEN, by Barbara Kingsolver. (HarperCollins, $22.) The stresses and strains that befall a mother and her adopted Cherokee daughter.
12*
1
STARLESS NIGHT, by R.A.
Salvatore. (TSR, $16.95.) A fantasy tale about an elf who returns to his birthplace to deal with the legacies of his past.
13
13
8
A CASE OF NEED, by Michael Crichton writing as Jeffery Hudson. (Dutton, $18.95.) A 1968 novel about the mysterious death of a surgeon's daughter.
14
14
16
PLEADING GUILTY, by Scott Turow. (Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux, $24.) A lawyer in pursuit of his firm's missing partner and a multimillion-dollar fund.
15
1
CONSIDER THIS, SENORA, by Harriet Doerr. (Harcourt Brace, $21.95.) Four emigres from north of the border try to get accustomed to a Mexican village.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Nonfiction
1
2
2
SEINLANGUAGE, by Jerry Seinfeld. (Bantam, $19.95.) Observations on life's pleasures and ordeals by the star of the television show "Seinfeld."
2
1
19
EMBRACED BY THE LIGHT, by Betty J. Eadie with Curtis Taylor. (Gold Leaf Press, $14.95.) A woman's near-death experience.
3
3
5
MAYBE (MAYBE NOT), by Robert Fulghum. (Villard, $19.) Essays suggesting that inspiration can be found in most unexpected ways and places.
4
4
58
WOMEN WHO RUN WITH THE WOLVES, by Clarissa Pinkola Estes. (Ballantine, $23.) How myths and folk tales can enable women to understand their psyches.
5
6
4
THE HIDDEN LIFE OF DOGS, by Elizabeth Marshall Thomas. (Davison/Houghton Mifflin, $18.95.) An analysis of canine behavior.
6
5
10
LISTENING TO PROZAC, by Peter D. Kramer. (Viking, $23.) A psychiatrist discusses mood-changing medications and their effects on a person's self.
7
7
15
REENGINEERING THE CORPORATION, by Michael Hammer and James Champy. (Harper Business, $25.) A manifesto for business innovation.
8
8
53
THE WAY THINGS OUGHT TO BE, by Rush H. Limbaugh 3d. (Pocket, $22.) Anecdotes and opinions offered by the talk-show host.
9
10
40
CARE OF THE SOUL, by Thomas Moore. (HarperCollins, $22.50.) A psychotherapist's discussion of spirituality and everyday life.
10
9
14
THE FIFTIES, by David Halberstam. (Villard, $27.50.) A journalist's social, political, economic and cultural history of the 1950's.
11
1
CASE CLOSED, by Gerald Posner. (Random House, $25.) A reassessment of the assassination of President John F. Kennedy.
12*
13
13
DAYS OF GRACE, by Arthur Ashe and Arnold Rampersad. (Knopf, $24.) The memoirs of the late tennis star.
13
11
15
MAMA MAKES UP HER MIND, by Bailey White. (Addison-Wesley, $17.95.) Life in a tiny Georgia town; by a first-grade teacher and radio commentator.
14
12
10
GIRL, INTERRUPTED, by Susanna Kaysen. (Turtle Bay/Random House, $17.) An account of a young woman's mental illness.
15
14
31
HEALING AND THE MIND, by Bill Moyers. (Doubleday, $25.) Conversations with physicians and others about the relationship of sickness to thoughts and emotions.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous
1
1
8
AGELESS BODY, TIMELESS MIND, by Deepak Chopra. (Harmony, $22.) A physician's advice about aging.
2
3
12
EAT MORE, WEIGH LESS, by Dean Ornish. (HarperCollins, $22.50.) Counsel from a physician about diet and nutrition.
3
2
18
MEN ARE FROM MARS, WOMEN ARE FROM VENUS, by John Gray. (HarperCollins, $20.) Communicating.
4
4
3
FOOD -- YOUR MIRACLE MEDICINE, by Jean Carper. (HarperCollins, $25.) Ways to prevent and treat many illnesses and complaints.
Rankings reflect sales figures, for the week ending Sept. 4, at 3,050 bookstores plus wholesalers serving 28,000 other retailers (gift shops, department stores, newsstands, supermarkets), statistically weighted to represent sales in all such outlets nationwide.
An asterisk indicates that a book's sales are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
ACROSS THE BRIDGE: Stories, by Mavis Gallant. (Random House, $19.) In these 11 lucid urban stories, most of which are set in Paris or Montreal, Mrs.
Gallant's wit and exactitude subvert her old-fashioned material.
"DADDY'S GONE TO WAR": The Second World War in the Lives of America's Children, by William M. Tuttle Jr. (Oxford University, $30.) A historian finds that some "home front children" still feel indoctrinated in fright and hate, while others believe the war enhanced their understanding of this country and its culture.
EPSTEIN: Artist Against the Establishment, by Stephen Gardiner. (Viking, $35.) This polemical book defends at every point a major artist who all his life defied bourgeois conformity yet managed to die the proprietor of a knighthood.
HENRY JAMES' MIDNIGHT SONG, by Carol De Chellis Hill. (Poseidon/Simon &amp; Schuster, $23.) A grand, ebullient novel, set chiefly in 1890's Vienna, where James, Freud, Jung and Edith Wharton are up to some naughty conduct.
LET THE SEA MAKE A NOISE ... : A History of the North Pacific From Magellan to MacArthur, by Walter A. McDougall. (Basic Books, $30.) Lively narrative, bold analysis and prodigious research adorn this popular history of a vast sea surrounded by mutually mistrustful peoples.
MUDDY BOOTS AND RED SOCKS: A Reporter's Life, by Malcolm W. Browne. (Times Books/ Random House, $23.) The memoir of a bold foreign correspondent who has seen 20th-century mayhem from Indochina to the Persian Gulf.
NEW YORK DAYS, by Willie Morris. (Little, Brown, $24.95.) Mr.
Morris's memoir of his star-crossed romance with Harper's Magazine, where he became editor in chief in 1967, just in time for the weirdest part of the 60's, and held on till 1971.
NO OTHER LIFE, by Brian Moore. (Nan A. Talese/ Doubleday, $21.) A brilliant meditative novel about a place that is and is not Haiti and a visionary who is and is not Jean-Bertrand Aristide, Haiti's once and future President.
NOT WHERE I STARTED FROM, by Kate Wheeler. (Houghton Mifflin, $19.95.) This first collection of stories is about searchers shopping for enlightenment and the cross-cultural dislocations that come from such a hunt.
SECOND SIGHT, by Robert V. Hine. (University of California, $20.) A splendid personal account by the recipient of a miracle, a historian who slowly lost his eyesight and suddenly got it back.
A TIDEWATER MORNING: Three Tales From Youth, by William Styron. (Random House, $17.) The author's memory plays upon the painful moments of his life at the ages of 10, 13 and 20; the result is a trio of stories, each of whose sadness is multiplied by the presence of the others.
A VERY LONG ENGAGEMENT, by Sebastien Japrisot. (Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux, $23.) In this evocative, outlandishly realistic French novel, a young woman pieces together how her fiance became a casualty of World War I.


Lillian de la Torre, 91, an Author of Mysteries From British History
Lillian de la Torre Bueno McCue, an author who specialized in historical mysteries both fictional and nonfictional, died Monday at a nursing home in Colorado Springs, Colo., where she lived.
She was 91.
Her pen name was Lillian de la Torre, a part of her maiden name.


The Comptroller Fight
Assemblyman Alan G. Hevesi, perhaps now the front-runner to become the Democratic nominee for New York City comptroller, is a candidate who finally seems to have found his political footing.
And as their runoff approaches, he and the incumbent, Elizabeth Holtzman, are mounting field organizations to get out the vote.
Articles, page 48


Q and A
Reverse Mortgages Q What are reverse mortgages and how can I find an issuer in the Palm Springs, Calif., area? . . .
Helene Morgensterne, Westport, Conn.


The United States of Asylum
Dong Yishen looks a lot better in person than in his lawyer's photo of him.
The picture, taken the night of his arrival in Queens on the Golden Venture, shows him wearing a thin, ragged blazer and dark turtleneck, his hair still plastered down from the Atlantic Ocean.
Now, in the crisp blue uniform of the Salisbury Interim Correctional Facility in Pennsylvania, he looks composed, if a bit nervous.
Fellow prisoners in the visitors' room of the medium-security jail stare as he bows to me and my interpreter.
They are in for crimes ranging from burglary to drug offenses.
But Dong is a different kind of prisoner -- accused not of any crime but of "an administrative violation" of United States immigration rules.
Technically, he and the other 60 Chinese held at the jail are free to leave -- but only for China.
And Dong, who is 34, does not want to go back to China.


Molly Dyke, Christopher Dillon
Molly Caroline Dyke and Christopher David Dillon, associates in the New York law firm of Shearman &amp; Sterling, were married yesterday in Lakeville, Conn.
The Rev.
Jean P. Mahoney performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at St.
Mary's Church.
Mrs.
Dillon, 28, is the daughter of Dr.
Peter C. Dyke of Dana Point, Calif., and Dr.
Perry H. Dyke of Redlands, Calif.
The bride graduated from Duke University and received her law degree from Boston University.
Her father is a retired pathologist.
Her mother is a retired pediatrician and former president of the California Board of Education.


THE TRIALS OF BOB PACKWOOD
It seems to me that Packwood is sick.
Hence, any judgment in his case would make poor precedent.
Certainly, at the least, he should be reprimanded for his failure to seek proper counseling and to change his ways.


Ellen Wasserman, Stuart Goldstein
Florence and Perry Wasserman of West Orange, N.J., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Ellen Meri Wasserman, and Stuart Marc Goldstein, the son of Jeanette and Martin Goldstein of Westfield, N.J.
A November wedding is planned.
Ms.
Wasserman, 33, is a senior vice president and the media director of the direct marketing division of Saatchi &amp; Saatchi, the advertising agency in New York.
She graduated cum laude from Brandeis University.


Ownership In a Recession
To the Editor:
My husband and I are among the many victims of negative equity.
Unfortunately, we were also among those who have had buyers refused by co-op boards (two to be exact).


Woodstock Can't Be Sold
To the Editor:
"The Woodstock War" (Sept. 5)? How bogus!
The promoter, Michael Lang, says, "This time, we've got everything worked out in advance" for Woodstock 1994.
Spontaneity was part of the beauty of the original Woodstock celebration.
These promoters aren't interested at all in celebrating the spirit of the Woodstock celebration.
It seems to me it is just another attempt to manipulate teen-agers into spending money on a "manufactured" event.
Charging high prices for these phony events is exactly not what a celebration like Woodstock stood for.


Miami: Unorthodox, but Still a Winner
The University of Miami entered today's game against Virginia Tech with a 51-game Orange Bowl winning streak, a feat the Hurricanes treat with reverence while finding it quite understandable.
"When we play there, it's like a spark comes into you and you have more ability and more power and you won't get tired," said senior defensive end Kevin Patrick.
"It's unbelievable."


NATO to Discuss Troops for Bosnia
Plans to send a 50,000-member NATO peacekeeping force, including 25,000 American soldiers, to Bosnia and Herzegovina if the fighting stops there will be considered by the alliance's representatives in Brussels on Wednesday, diplomats and military officials said this week.
"There's no map yet, and the force's mission hasn't been precisely described, but contingency planning is moving forward," a NATO military spokesman at the alliance's southern command in Naples said.


Parks Passport
To the Editor: In 1989 we took a circle trip of the United States from New York to California and back in our R.V.
On the way we discovered the "Passport to Your National Parks" and entered the process at Point Reyes National Seashore in California, disappointed that it had not been in our possession earlier.


THE ANGUISHED POLITICS OF BREAST CANCER
For a second, I caught a glimpse of myself in the mirror, as I looked at your cover.
Except for one difference: I am a man.


Perot, One Rally and 2 Angry Parties
In the first grand demonstration of the mischief he has in store for the 1994 elections, Ross Perot was the headliner today at a rally for Senator Donald W. Riegle Jr. here, a spectacle that infuriated officials of both Mr.
Riegle's Democratic Party and their Republican opposition.
Mr.
Riegle, who faces a tough re-election campaign here next year, invited Mr.
Perot to join him on the steps of the State Capitol to attack the Clinton Administration's drive for Congressional approval of the North American Free Trade Agreement, which is staunchly opposed by the labor interests that make up a large share of the Senator's constituency.


Many Words Are for Rent, but 'To Be' is Still Free
REMEMBER Woodstock, the movie, and Woodstock, the record album, and Woodstock, the T-shirt?
Well, now comes Woodstock, the word.
It seems that legal rights to it are being claimed by Michael Lang, the promoter of Woodstock, the festival, who with his partners is planning a 25th anniversary commemorative bash next year.
A rival revival being planned at the site of the 1969 gathering will not be able to use the word in promoting or identifying itself.


Florio Forced to Retreat After a Hasty Charge
There are two fruit farmers in Burlington County, N.J., named William Haines, and because of that, the normally hard-charging campaign of Gov.
Jim Florio found itself in the unfamiliar role of retreating last week.
In Atlantic City on Thursday to accept the endorsement of the state A.F.L.-C.I.O., Mr.
Florio used the occasion to heave a barrage of criticisms at his Republican opponent, Christine Todd Whitman.
Among them was that Mrs.
Whitman's adviser on agricultural issues was facing fines over a string of violations on a farm he owns.


SON SAYS SLAYINGS WERE ONLY OPTION
His father controlled his every move, the defendant testified this week, from the girlfriends he dated to the college he attended.
But on Aug. 20, 1989, Lyle Menendez said, he took control for himself and, with his younger brother, shotgunned his parents to death.
After four days on the witness stand in the murder trial that has been under way here for two months, Mr.
Menendez finally told jurors why he felt he had no choice but to kill his parents.
His testimony, at times tearful and at times matter-of-fact, had been preceded by relatives, coaches and teachers who described the Menendez household as terrifying and abusive, run like a corporation by a tyrannical father.


As a B Movie, 'True Romance' Is Grade A
The body count is sprinkled like confetti through "True Romance," as cops shoot it out with mobsters, someone's head is bashed in, and a pimp pays for his crimes by being shot in the crotch.
Yet it would be wrongheaded to get worked up over the apparent amorality or violence in the hot genre picture of the moment.
This is a tale of young lovers -- played with piquant emotion by Christian Slater and Patricia Arquette -- who accidentally fall into murderous doings and still manage to remain sweet kids.
Look at the witty grace notes surrounding their suddenly violent honeymoon: a cop, realizing he is aiming his gun at a thug who speaks only Italian, growls, "Come outta from behinda the couch"; the man whose head is smashed is attacked in self-defense with the heavy lid of a toilet tank; one amateur killer actually drops a photo-ID at the scene of the crime.
These goofy elements suggest the skewed way in which the writer Quentin Tarantino redefines the B movie, sprucing it up for an age that worships pop culture and takes violence for granted.


Annoying Both Sides
Angering Republicans and Democrats, Ross Perot was the star attraction at an anti-trade-pact rally held by Senator Donald Riegle.
Page 26.


A Faith Reviving: Jews in Russia/A special report.; In a Less Arid Russia, Jewish Life Flowers Again
Ilya Drutz, an agile, round-cheeked boy of 12, was calmly describing his decision to become circumcised.
Last summer, he attended Moscow's first Jewish camp.
"Before I went to the camp I knew nothing about my religion, and I felt very uncomfortable," he said.
"My father is a writer and my mother a librarian, and religion wasn't talked about at home."


Victims and Enemies, Groping Toward Peace
Now that the Israelis and the Palestinians have finally given each other official recognition, they are free to search for human recognition, the more elusive acceptance that comes from destroying old myths and facing truths long denied.
This will be hard, for it means cutting through a thicket of stereotypes and acknowledging that each has been the other's victim.
The difficulty and the hope are symbolized by a little-known episode in the early military career of Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin.
In 1948, as commander of the Harel Brigade during Israel's war of independence, Mr.
Rabin expelled to the West Bank all 50,000 Palestinian Arabs from the towns of Lod and Ramle, near Tel Aviv.


THE TRIALS OF BOB PACKWOOD
Trip Gabriel hasn't a clue about what constitutes sexual harassment, if he's not certain it includes "dropping sudden surprise French kisses on women, usually after forcibly seizing them by their arms or waists." Senator Packwood seems to be guilty of at least 24 counts of criminal assault.


Extra Classroom Time Won't Improve Scores
To the Editor:
Before we go into an emotional decline over the late opening of New York City schools because of asbestos inspection, let's not forget that Flemish Belgium, with the shortest school year in the industrialized world, has the highest test scores.
It beats Japan, Israel and Hong Kong by a fairly wide margin.


Office Trash: Next Target For Recycling
The next battleground in the fight to reduce New York City's waste is the trash basket at work, be it in an office, a restaurant or a factory.
Starting on Sept. 30, the paper from office workers' desks, the aluminum-foil food containers used by restaurants and even the newspapers that hotel guests throw out will have to be separated for recycling.
New city regulations will require recycling of just over half of the garbage created by businesses in the five boroughs, although the amount actually recovered will be substantially less, especially at first.


Diana Devendorf, John C. Rice
Diana Metcalf Devendorf, the daughter of Alfred and Bonnie Devendorf of Locust Valley, L.I., was married yesterday to John Clayton Rice, the son of Anton and Carol Rice of Stamford, Conn.
The Rev.
Robert Capon performed the ceremony at St.
Luke's Episcopal Church in East Hampton, L.I.
Mrs.
Devendorf Rice, 27, was until recently a junior account executive at Vantage Consulting, a fund-raising concern in New York.
She graduated from Brown University.
Her father is of counsel to Pacifico, DiGregorio &amp; Pacifico, a law firm in Mineola, L.I.
Her mother is the manager, in Locust Valley, for Daniel Gale Associates, a real-estate concern.


Jacob: The Novel
THE SON OF LAUGHTER By Frederick Buechner.  274 pp.
San Francisco:  HarperSanFrancisco. $19.


'Read My Arm: H.I.V.'
A new ad from Benetton (above), which shows a man's arm tattooed with the words H.I.V.
Positive, has brought lawsuits from two Government-sponsored AIDS organizations in France and an attempt to ban the ad in Britain.
American reaction has been mixed.
"It can fuel hatred and disempowerment of people with H.I.V.," said David Eng, a spokesman for the Gay Men's Health Crisis in New York.
"People can certainly look at this ad and get the message that this is what we should be doing with people who are H.I.V. positive."


Checking Out New York Hotels
NEW YORK, arguably, looks, feels and even smells its best in autumn.
So it's small surprise that visitors pour in once the days cool down.
Where to stay?
With over 64,000 hotel rooms in Manhattan alone, the choices are dazzling, or dizzying, depending on your sentiments, with something at nearly any price. (Taxes are the problem: expect to pay 14 1/4 percent plus $2 a room for rooms under $100 and 19 1/4 percent for rooms over $100, plus $2 a room.) As ever, the old faithfuls are eager for your business.
But there's a new crop of hotels every season or so, from renovated oldies to start-from-scratch newcomers.
I recently spent the night at four hotels, all built or renovated in the last two years.
They ranged from a $95-a-night budget model to a $295-and-up luxury hotel.
And, not surprisingly, they were as different and distinctive as New Yorkers themselves.
The Four Seasons
It's easy to develop a Master of the Universe complex at the new Four Seasons Hotel, which rises 52 stories above East 57th Street.
Morning arrived, and from the king-size bed I pushed the electronic button to open the peach silk curtains.
Magically, Manhattan appeared, looking splendid -- the pink Sony building, the Park Avenue Building pyramid and the Chrysler Building's silvery spear, backed by a cloudless blue sky.
"This is why people come to New York," said my husband, gazing at the 24th-floor view.


Planting Bulbs? The More the Merrier
SPRING-FLOWERING bulbs require patience as well as trust.
Although the bulbs are planted anytime now, no results will be seen until spring.
So all good gardeners have ordered their bulbs, right?
Or, at least, they have thought about it.
Those who have gone through this bulb-ordering ritual know well that bulbs must be planted in quantity to make a statement.
A few bulbs here or a line or two planted there will never do.
Quantities are the answer.
Perhaps this is why bulb catalogues increasingly offer bulbs in quantities of 25, 50 or more.


Wendy H. Myers, Stephen Cambor
Wendy Hilliard Myers, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Wentworth F. Myers of Northport, L.I., was married yesterday to Stephen Paul Cambor, a son of Rosemary Frelke of Pittsburgh, and Dr.
Charles G. Cambor of Houston.
The Rev.
Charles Appel performed the Episcopal ceremony at the Lotos Club in New York.


Mower and Barbecue Storage for Winter
BY the end of summer, many veterans of the lawn wars would probably prefer to roll the power mowers into the garages or storage sheds, close the doors and think about other things until next year.
But abandoning motorized equipment like mowers, string trimmers and hedge clippers at season's end shortens their lives and invites start-up problems in spring.
Similar ill treatment can also sabotage a propane-fueled barbecue.
For electrical items like hedge clippers, the most important storage requirement is that they be kept dry.
If a device has to be stored outdoors or in a damp location, wrap it securely with plastic sheeting to protect it.
Electric equipment requires no storage maintenance other than surface cleaning and lubrication of mechanical parts like control cables.
Do not try to lubricate parts of an electric motor unless the owner's manual says to.
Many motors do not need lubrication and can be damaged if oiled.


Gustavo Paredes, Elizabeth Alexander
Elizabeth Alexander, the daughter of Clifford and Adele Alexander of Washington, was married yesterday to Gustavo Adolfo Paredes, a son of Providencia F. Paredes of Washington and Gustavo G. Paredes of Barranquilla, Colombia.
The Suffragan Bishop of Washington, Jane H. Dixon, officiated at the Episcopal ceremony at the vacation home of the bride's parents in Galesville, Md.
The bride, 31, will keep her name.
A graduate of Yale University, she received a master's degree in English from Boston University and a Ph.D. from the University of Pennsylvania.
She is a poet and an assistant professor of English at the University of Chicago.


MORMONS PENALIZE DISSIDENT MEMBERS
At least six Utah Mormons who have spoken out on church issues believe they are being stripped of certain church privileges this month in an effort by leaders to purge the faith of critics and dissidents.
One of them, Lavina Fielding Anderson faces a disciplinary council here on Thursday on charges of conduct unbecoming a member of the church for her writings on Mormon doctrine.
"I may take the sacrament for the last time Sunday," she said.


Conversations/Victor Hugo Cardenas; Bolivia's Vice President, First Indian In High Office, Waits for Change
THERE are many things that Victor Hugo Cardenas laments about his youth -- the poverty of his Aymara village on the windy banks of Lake Titicaca, his father's inability to get a state-approved teaching job because he was an Indian, being forbidden to speak his native language in school and that his name really should not be Cardenas.
"My father's name was Chokewanka," Mr.
Cardenas said.
"But he gave his two sons a Spanish name -- the name of my maternal grandmother -- so that we would not have to suffer the discrimination that he did."


THE TRIALS OF BOB PACKWOOD
This "man who is not comfortable in his own skin" sounds more human than his former wife does. (Who doesn't feel more charming after a drink?) Nobody deserves to have his deepest insecurities advertised by a bitter ex-spouse, in the way that Georgie Packwood exposes her former husband's private thoughts.
Ironically, nobody is interested in her private thoughts, except as they concern the Senator.
If he was so horrible, why did she stay married to him for 26 years?
I'll bet Packwood is asking himself the same question.
LYNN A. PUCINO Hoboken, N.J.


An Abundance of Dramatic First Looks
"NO way," answered Angelo Del Rossi, executive producer of the Paper Mill Playhouse, when he was asked whether the historic theater in Millburn was turning into a tryout house for Broadway.
Nor could Emily Mann, artistic director of the McCarter, all of a sudden envision the estimable theater in Princeton as a springboard to Off Broadway.


Revisiting Immigration and the Open-Door Policy
WITH the immigrant influx at its highest level since the early years of this century and the economy stumbling, American ambivalence about immigration is again painfully obvious.
The masses of tired and poor, whether Mexican, Chinese or Haitian, find themselves less and less welcome in this nation of immigrants, as the chorus of voices calling for further restrictions grows larger and louder.
"We can no longer allow compassion to overrule reason" was the way Gov.
Pete Wilson of California, which absorbed nearly half of the influx of the 1980's, phrased the issue in an open letter to President Clinton last month.
But the debate over the impact of the estimated 1.25 million immigrants who enter the country legally and illegally each year is anything but reasonable.


Sidewalk Cyclists, Beware: The 19th Precinct Is Watching
As anger swells against commercial bicyclists on the Upper East Side, the 19th Precinct has stepped up the campaign to keep cyclists off the sidewalks.
The precinct commander, Peter J. Buccino, has initiated a two-pronged education and enforcement effort called Operation Spoke, directed at restaurant delivery workers and messengers, as well as their employers.


Julie Domonkos, Daniel J. Leffell
Julie Ann Domonkos, a daughter of Joseph R. and Paula M. Domonkos of Earlysville, Va., and Daniel J. Leffell, a son of Rabbi A. Bernard and Freda Leffell of Montreal, are planning a November wedding.
Ms.
Domonkos graduated from Douglas College, where she was elected to Phi Bata Kappa, and received a law degree from New York University.
She is a project director of the Victim Services West Side Office Legal Project, a nonprofit agency that provides legal services to low-income crime victims, in New York.


Why The Long Faces?
21ST CENTURY CAPITALISM By Robert Heilbroner. 175 pp.
New York: W.W.
Norton &amp; Company. $17.95.


PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: September 19, 1993
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Fiction
1
2
DRAGON TEARS, by Dean Koontz. (Berkley, $6.99.) Two police detectives try to cope with a demonic serial killer in southern California.
2
4
THE STARS SHINE DOWN, by Sidney Sheldon. (Warner, $5.99.) A businesswoman's fortunes are imperiled by past and present secrets.
3
31
THE PELICAN BRIEF, by John Grisham. (Island/Dell, $6.99.) A law student probes the murder of two Supreme Court justices.
4
38
RISING SUN, by Michael Crichton. (Ballantine, $5.99.) The investigation of a woman's death involves the American-Japanese rivalry.
5
86
THE FIRM, by John Grisham. (Island/Dell, $6.99.) A young lawyer learns that his firm is engaged in secret, possibly illegal activities.
6
15
CONGO, by Michael Crichton. (Ballantine, $5.99.) Why did archeologists die among ruins?
7
75
A TIME TO KILL, by John Grisham. (Island/Dell, $6.99.) Racial tensions surface during the trial of a man charged with murder.
8
61
JURASSIC PARK, by Michael Crichton. (Ballantine, $6.99.) Dinosaur clones.
9
22
SPHERE, by Michael Crichton. (Ballantine, $5.99.) Four scientists explore an alien spaceship found on the ocean floor.
10
6
DECKED, by Carol Higgins Clark. (Dove/Warner, $4.99.) Her former roommate's death haunts a woman during a trans-Atlantic voyage.
11
1
DISAPPEARING ACTS, by Terry McMillan. (Pocket, $5.99.) A 1989 novel about the love affair between an educated black woman and an unschooled black man in Brooklyn.
12*
12
ALL THAT REMAINS, by Patricia D. Cornwell. (Avon, $5.99.) Searching for the truth behind the strange deaths of five young couples in Virginia.
13
11
COLONY, by Anne Rivers Siddons. (Harper Paperbacks, $6.50.) A 90-year-old woman recalls her summers at a Maine resort.
14
1
THE TALE OF THE BODY THIEF, by Anne Rice. (Ballantine, $6.99.) Lestat embarks on a dangerous enterprise; "The Vampire Chronicles," continued.
15*
17
WAITING TO EXHALE, by Terry McMillan. (Pocket, $5.99.) The friendships and romances of four black women in Phoenix.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
NonFiction
1
5
UH-OH, by Robert Fulghum. (Ivy, $5.99.) Reflections on life's commonplaces, from meat loaf to pet dogs to fireflies.
2
515
THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $10.95.) Psychological and spiritual inspiration by a psychiatrist.
3
1
THE WAY THINGS OUGHT TO BE, by Rush Limbaugh. (Pocket, $6.99.) Anecdotes and opinions offered by the talk-show host.
4
4
I CAN'T BELIEVE I SAID THAT! by Kathie Lee Gifford with Jim Jerome. (Pocket, $5.99.) The autobiography of the co-host of the television show "Live With Regis and Kathie Lee."
5
31
I KNOW WHY THE CAGED BIRD SINGS, by Maya Angelou. (Bantam, $4.99.) The poet's depiction of her childhood and adolescence.
6
21
THE SILENT PASSAGE, by Gail Sheehy. (Pocket, $5.50.) The psychological and social significance of menopause for today's women.
7
101
A YEAR IN PROVENCE, by Peter Mayle. (Vintage, $10.) A sojourn in the south of France, as described by a British writer.
8
30
WHEN RABBIT HOWLS, by the Troops for Truddi Chase. (Jove, $5.99.) A woman voices the 92 personalities that live within her.
9
3
PRINCESS, by Jean P. Sasson. (Avon, $5.50.) Life as lived by a member of the royal family and other women in Saudi Arabia.
10*
10
EVERY LIVING THING, by James Herriot. (St. Martin's, $6.99.) Continuing the memoirs of the Yorkshire veterinarian.
11
122
YOU JUST DON'T UNDERSTAND, by Deborah Tannen. (Ballantine, $10.) The different languages men and women speak.
12*
18
TRUMAN, by David McCullough. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $15.) A biography of the 33d President.
13*
8
A ROSE FOR HER GRAVE, by Ann Rule. (Pocket, $5.99.) Six true-crime stories.
14
1
SAVE YOUR JOB, SAVE OUR COUNTRY, by Ross Perot with Pat Choate. (Hyperion, $6.95.) Arguments against the ratification of the North American Free Trade Agreement.
15*
32
TOUJOURS PROVENCE, by Peter Mayle. (Vintage, $10.) A celebration of the charms of rustic France.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Advice, How-To and Miscellaneous
1
135
THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE, by Stephen R. Covey. (Fireside/S&amp;S, $9.95.) Principles to practice in the pursuit of success.
2
151
THE T-FACTOR FAT GRAM COUNTER, by Jamie Pope-Cordle and Martin Katahn. (Norton, $2.99.) How to reduce fat in one's diet.
3
110
LIFE'S LITTLE INSTRUCTION BOOK, by H. Jackson Brown Jr. (Rutledge Hill, $5.95.) A collection of some 500 tips for achieving a self-fulfilling life.
4
16
RAND MCNALLY ROAD ATLAS. (Rand McNally, $7.95.) The 1993 edition of a guide to the United States, Canada and Mexico.
Rankings reflect sales figures, for the week ending Sept. 4, at 3,050 bookstores plus wholesalers serving 38,000 other retailers, statistically weighted to represent sales in all such outlets nationwide.
An asterisk indicates that a book's sales are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.


DEMOCRATS WOO BLACK LAWMAKERS
A month after President Clinton angered many blacks in Congress by his concessions to conservatives on the Federal budget, the Democratic Party sought to demonstrate on Friday its openness to minorities by assembling the Administration's leading black officials on one stage.
The news conference at the Democratic Party headquarters here was timed to coincide with the legislative meeting of the Congressional Black Caucus.
The caucus rebuffed Mr.
Clinton's request in June for a White House meeting shortly after the President had withdrawn the nomination of Lani Guinier to head the civil rights division of the Justice Department.


Beyond Baroque


Hogh School Football Report
P.S.A.L.
PICKING UP WHERE HE LEFT OFF: All-city runner Frankie Sinclair rushed for 228 yards on 15 carries and scored 3 touchdowns as LINCOLN (1-0) pounded BAYSIDE (0-1), 42-0.
Sinclair had scoring runs of 58, 20 and 17 yards.
The Railsplitters' other stars were Uvi Lopez, who returned an interception 70 yards for a score, and quarterback Corey Valentine and Eric Dickerson, who combined for a 40-yard touchdown pass.
Ian Seidenberg converted 4 of 5 point-after attempts.
Jeff Miller (6 tackles, 1 sack), Ahmad Pierson (6 tackles, 1 sack) and Tasheen Stallings (6 tackles) were all keys in the shutout.


Lure of Olympic Flame Defrosts China, Unevenly
THE thunder out of China this summer has been one of the most energetic political campaigns in history, to bring the millenium Olympic Games to the last major capital of Communism.
With the International Olympic Committee expected to decide through secret ballot in Monte Carlo on Thursday whether the 2000 Games will go to Beijing, Berlin, Istanbul, Manchester or Sydney, China's leaders have portrayed the vote as an epic struggle of rich versus poor, big powers versus regional powers, Western "hegemonists" versus the virtuous and the nonaligned.


CURRENCY
Last
Prior
Year
Week
Week
Ago
Japanese Yen
104.45
106.10
124.60
per Dollar
German Mark
1.6140
1.5960
1.5025
per Dollar
Canadian Dollar
1.3133
1.3141
1.2173
per U.S. Dollar
British Pound
1.5310
1.5520
1.7345
U.S. Dollar per British Pound
Gold
$350.75
$350.00
$351.00
Republic National Bank
Currency: Friday NY Close


Animal Shelter's Race With Time
MIMI STONE, director of the Elmsford Animal Shelter, never turns away a stray, offering all orphaned pets that come here room and board for life if no one else will have them.
She is, her supporters say, a modern-day patron saint of pets.
At the moment, though, Mrs.
Stone is racing against time.
Under orders from the County Health Department, she must move 370 dogs and 270 cats to new quarters -- a $2 million, five-acre shelter with heated floors and spacious runs, which is under construction in another part of the village.
The animals have outgrown their current home, and the Health Department, citing health and safety concerns, is pressing the shelter's director either to move soon or cut back the population at the present location.


About Those Bond Issues
To the Editor:
"Bond Buyers Gain, Taxpayers' Loss" (Wall Street, Sept. 5) says that municipal bonds have higher interest costs than they might have had if they had been sold on a competitive, rather than negotiated, basis.
Supporting this are allegations from Ian A. MacKinnon of the Vanguard Group, an institutional buyer who is complaining about not getting all the bonds he wants.


YADDO
The Victorian mansion known as Yaddo, where Portnoy, Studs Lonigan and the oldest living Confederate widow were born, where Easy Rawlins faced a red death and brightness fell, is celebrating its 100th year.
For the last 67 of those years, since the mansion's mistress died, a sort of continuous artists-only house party without hosts -- but with plenty of rules -- has raged.
More than 2,500 artists to date have stayed -- about 35 each summer, a dozen in the seasons that require heating -- in this "loose, baggy monster" of a house (Henry James's term for "War and Peace," but it applies).


IN SHORT: FICTION
A SPANIARD IN MOROCCO  MIMOUN By Rafael Chirbes.
Serpent's Tail, paper, $12.99.
Ever since the Moorish invasions of Andalusia in the eighth century, North Africa has had a special significance for Spain; rightly or wrongly, it has come to symbolize one of the most exotic, least understood elements in the Spanish psyche.
"Mimoun," a slender first novel by the Valencian writer Rafael Chirbes, explores this otherness in the context of personal and social alienation.
Originally published in Spain in 1988 and deftly translated by Gerald Martin, the novel recounts the adventures of Manuel, a bisexual Madrileno who spends the winter in Mimoun, a small Moroccan town near Fez.
Mr.
Chirbes's spare, impressionistic prose leads us through Manuel's desultory love affairs, his friends' dismal suicides, his exquisite sadness.
The expatriate Europeans in this novel are at least as hard to fathom as Morocco itself, which in their troubled eyes is at once a mortal threat and a desolate refuge.


THE ANGUISHED POLITICS OF BREAST CANCER
How I hope that a few of the women in my gym, who are struck dumb at the sight of my mastectomy, will see your cover and stick around to hear me mutter, "Hell, it's only me."


Streetscapes/Wadleigh Secondary School; Renovating a 1902 Novelty
LIKE many principals, Bruce Moody is worried about asbestos.
But Mr.
Moody, principal of the newly rehabilitated 1902 Wadleigh Secondary School at 215 West 114th Street, is worried about asbestos in other schools: His has none, and he knows that when schools reopen all the shutout students are going to have to go somewhere.
Wadleigh was named for Lydia F. Wadleigh, a pioneer in higher education for girls.
In 1856 she established the 12th Street Advanced School for Girls in the face of "bitter opposition," according to The New York Times.
She died in 1888 and in 1897 the city established its first official girls' high school in the building she used and named it for her.
It still stands at 34 1/2 East 12th Street and is now occupied by the Police Athletic League.


SEPT. 12-18: After Tailhook; More Bad News for Navy: Academy Cheating Scandal
Just as the Navy is trying to recover from the disastrous Tailhook scandal, in which naval aviators assaulted dozens of women at a convention, another debacle is unfolding.
Navy investigators said last week that at least 125 midshipmen at the United States Naval Academyare suspected of obtaining advance knowledge about a tough electrical engineering final given last December.
Some obtained a copy of the actual test several days before it was given.


Expansion Takes On Different Look
The last time the National Football League expanded was in 1974, when the Seattle Seahawks and the Tampa Bay Buccaneers came up with the staggering sum of $16 million each for franchises.
Now the cost of an expansion franchise is $140 million up front and perhaps 50 percent more when everything is figured in, and five cities are fighting for the two spots available.
In December 1991, the five cities made presentations in New York to Commissioner Paul Tagliabue and his staff.
On Tuesday and Wednesday in Chicago, the same five will make their final pitches to the N.F.L.'s expansion and finance committees.
Then, on Oct. 26 and 27 in Chicago, the owners of the present 28 clubs will vote on which two newcomers will join them.


We Must Do More to Stop Haitian Terror
To the Editor:
Your Sept. 9 news article on Col.
Joseph Michel Francois, the Haitian police chief, describes accelerating repression in Haiti while noting plans to dispatch United States trainers to reform the murderous Haitian army and its equally brutal police division.
With prospects improving for the return to power of Jean-Bertrand Aristide, Haiti's ousted President, the Haitian military is viciously attacking his supporters, with the apparent aim of denying him organized backing to reform the security forces and subject the military to civilian rule.
The Clinton Administration's plans to "professionalize" this repressive force are most welcome.


POSTINGS: The Old Gulf and Western Building; After the Renovation, What?
General Electric, whose declared goal is to "bring good things to life," has been trying to bring some to the Paramount Communications Building at Columbus Circle, which could use a few.
Six months after taking over the building's deed in lieu of foreclosure, the General Electric Pension Trust is soon to complete a $2 million renovation program to help correct structural problems that have given the marble-, glass- and aluminum-sheathed skyscraper a reputation as the tallest and thinnest lemon in town.
The defects caused the building to twist slowly in the wind, made life difficult for its inhabitants and created hazardously misaligned facade panels that might have fallen in a windstorm.


Mary E. Kern, Scott Lee Miller
Mrs.
Joseph Kern of Garden City, L.I., has announced the engagement of her daughter, Mary Elizabeth Kern, and Scott Lee Miller, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert I. Miller of Glencoe, Ill.
A November wedding is planned.
Miss Kern is an account manager at Home Box Office in New York.
She graduated from Fairfield University.
Her father, the late Joseph Kern, was a vice president and the publisher of Popular Mechanics magazine.


Connecticut Q&amp;A: Dr. George A. Clark Jr.; Lessons to Be Learned From the Birds
DR.
GEORGE A. CLARK JR. was recently awarded the Mabel Osgood Wright Award by the Connecticut Ornithological Association for "outstanding contributions to the study of birds in Connecticut." He has been the state ornithologist since 1981 and is editing for publication an "Atlas of Breeding Birds of Connecticut."
A professor of ecology and evolutionary biology at the University of Connecticut since 1965, Dr.
Clark has studied birds throughout North and South America, Africa and Australia.
He earned his bachelor's degree from Amherst College in 1957 and his Ph.D. from Yale University in 1964.


No Chains
To the Sports Editor:
Well, we've finally had our first fight on the infield grass over the gold chains now being worn by so many of baseball's major league players (Texas vs. Minnesota, Sept. 5).
Will the next one be the dangling-earring debacle?
This one almost erupted into a brawl over "he ripped my chain off!"


At Coleman's, A Tradition Is Maintained
Nothing fancy about the food at Coleman's Delicatessen -- just run-of-the-mill sandwiches and fresh produce.
But for 41 years, the deli at 50 East End Avenue, near 82d Street has been something of a community center, where neighborhood children would rush in after school and adults would go to catch up and trade gossip with the proprietor, Bridget Coleman.


Testing a Commitment
With a settlement of the war in Bosnia apparently one step closer, President Clinton may be forced in coming weeks to confront the prospect of sending a large contingent of American troops to the Balkans as part of an international peacekeeping force.
Despite reports this week from Geneva that an agreement was near between the Muslim-led Bosnian Government and its Serbian foes, almost all the details remain to be worked out if talks resume on Tuesday in Sarajevo as planned.
Lord Owen, the European Community mediator, cautioned today that the date was not firm, but said an accord seemed "tantalizingly close."


Pamela Haering, Daniel Hagerman
Pamela Pennell Haering, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
James J. Haering of Bethlehem, Pa., was married there yesterday to Daniel Paul Hagerman, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
George E. Hagerman of Bridgewater, N.H.
The Very Rev.
Robert D. Schenkel performed the Episcopal ceremony at the Cathedral Church of the Nativity.
Mrs.
Hagerman, 28, graduated from Dartmouth College.
She is an account supervisor in Chicago with J. Walter Thompson, the advertising agency.
Her father is a vice president in Lehigh Valley, Pa., of Butcher &amp; Singer, a stock brokerage based in Philadelphia.


Sports of The Times; The Game That's Still Not Over
ON the Yankee Stadium scoreboard beyond left field, the electric bulbs glowed through the gloomy grayness like a lighthouse in the fog:
TOR 5


Brown-Bagging Versus Profit?
The public space at the Bel Canto building, on Broadway and West 68th Street, is scheduled to reopen after repairs next week.
But its manager's assault on brown-bagging may continue.
The manager, Lewis Futterman, who is the developer of the building, said he is concerned over the loss of business at his cafe, which is tucked into the back.
He wants to stop people from eating in the space, which is open from 8 A.M. to midnight, unless they have bought the food at the cafe.


Louganis Approaches the Edge of the Stage, and Leaps
Outside the subculture of competitive diving, where he was simply the best of all time, Greg Louganis has never received the attention his four Olympic gold medals, his discipline, his performing beauty seemed to deserve.
His face never smiled from a cereal box, he never spoke for a major corporation, and he never starred in a network comedy special, a movie, a sitcom.
He never even wrote a book.
Was it because of the whispers that he was gay?
"I can't look back anymore, it's destructive," said Louganis.
Then he laughed.
"I was supposed to be living with the head of a major Hollywood studio, a guy I actually met only twice in my life. Head of a studio. You can see how much good he did me."


Blame the Expansion For Homer Explosion
For the conspiracy theorists in and on baseball: Nothing in this season's home run statistics supports the suspicion that the 1993 baseball is livelier than its recent predecessors.
Despite appearances, nothing has developed this season in home runs -- or runs and batting average -- that didn't occur in 1977, the last year the majors expanded.
In fact, that season produced an even more dramatic increase in home runs than this season.


Bronx Highways Suffer In 'Disrepair and Filth'
To the Editor:
As leaders of Bronx institutions, we all share Borough President Fernando Ferrer's frustration about the intolerable condition of the roadways in the borough ("Ferrer Sues for Cleanup of the Bronx," Aug. 6).
The city has responded that it spends more resources cleaning up the Bronx than the other boroughs, and that the state doesn't provide the city with enough money to clean state-owned roadways.
That is no answer.


On the Wing
THE FLIGHT OF ANDY BURNS Stories.
By Alice Mattison. 235 pp.
New York:  William Morrow &amp; Company. $20.


Murder, They Mailed
THE REV.
CHARLES FITZ has spent two decades proving that stamp collecting is not a bloodless hobby.
"Philately and Murder," an exhibition of his collection, opens today at the Cardinal Spellman Philatelic Museum in Weston, Mass.; it will run until Dec. 7.
Mr.
Fitz, a courtly and vivacious Presbyterian minister, has assembled dozens of stamps and envelopes from around the world that bear on murders -- including assassinations, , crimes of passion, genocide and war (which he includes in his definition of murder).
All the items are mounted in viewing frames and described.


A Water Dance Choreographed for Scull


Beth Aretsky and Daniele Serra
Beth Michelle Aretsky, the daughter of Mrs.
Anthony Rabasca of Rome, N.Y., and Kenneth Aretsky of New York, was married yesterday to Daniele Tiziano Serra, a son of Gianfranco and Giorgina Serra of Villadossola, Italy.
The Rev.
Richard Leonard performed the ceremony at the Unitarian Church of All Souls in New York.


Warsaw Statue
To the Editor: It was nice to see "What's Doing in Warsaw" (July 25).
I visited Warsaw in 1989 and found the article by Jane Perlez accurate and inviting except for the remark "Chopin's statue was a 20th-century intrusion in the Lazienki Park."
I don't think you would find many Poles who would agree that a Chopin statue was an intrusion anywhere in Poland.


THE GUIDE
ELECTION LAWS DISPUTED
Laurance Rockefeller will speak on Wednesday about state laws that make running for office more complex than he thinks they should be.
Mr.
Rockefeller lost his bid for United States Senator on the Republican ticket to Alfonse M. D'Amato last year.
His talk, sponsored by the League of Women Voters of Briarcliff, Ossining, Croton and Cortlandt and by the Business and Professional Women's Club of Ossining, will be given at the Sleepy Hollow Country Club on Route 9 and Sleepy Hollow Road in Briarcliff at 7:30 P.M.


Sports of The Times; Same-Old, Same-Old For New York's Team
FOR nearly 10 months, the Columbia University football team was riding a winning streak of epic proportions.
Two games.
But yesterday the streak was in terrible jeopardy, what with the opening of the 1993 season.
Columbia was opening on the road.
And against Harvard, whom it had not beaten in 14 years, or since the presidency of James Earl Carter.
Still, the man-bites-dog journalistic possibility of watching Columbia win its third straight game was enough to make a native New Yorker shuttle up to Boston for the day.
Just in case.


Liza Schoenfein, Mark A. Jannot
Liza Schoenfein, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert Schoenfein of New York, was married last evening to Mark Allen Jannot, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Kenneth Jannot of Southfield, Mich.
Dr.
Margaret Gold, the leader of the Ethical Culture Society of Westchester County, officiated at the Metropolis Country Club in White Plains.
Ms.
Jannot, who is 27, is keeping her name.
She is a freelance editor and writer in Chicago.
She graduated from Vassar College and received a master's degree in journalism from Northwestern University.


Rabin and Mubarak to Meet in Alexandria
Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin of Israel will meet President Hosni Mubarak of Egypt in Alexandria on Sunday to discuss moves to set up a Palestinian entity in the Israeli-occupied Gaza Strip and West Bank town of Jericho, officials said today.
"They will go over the steps that have been taken," an Egyptian said, "and decide what else must be done."


Bargain Wish-Lists For the Collector
DOWN the hill and through the trees in front of my house on Long Island is a '69 Chevrolet Chevelle.
Its undented hardtop body wears gray primer, pine needles and mag wheels, and it hasn't moved in years.
Another neighbor has abandoned an International-Harvester Scout.
He chops firewood for exercise, and the logs have piled up around that long-extinct sport-utility vehicle until it is almost hidden.


Changing the Fortunes of the Medical Business
Remember that callous wisecrack about the people the Wall Street crash of 1987 put out of a job?
Question: "How do you call a stockbroker?" Answer: "Waiter!" In the 1990's, the unwitting targets of such gallows humor could well be surgeons, hospital workers, health-insurance brokers and pharmaceutical researchers.
Under President Clinton's health proposal, which would light a fire under a number of trends already happening, a lot of Americans in the medical business, many of them well paid, would be looking for new and often less lucrative lines of work, or at least seeing their incomes fall substantially.
Others, however, would adroitly seize new opportunities and come out far ahead.


Goal Unmet, Duke Reveals Perils In Effort to Increase Black Faculty
Five years ago, in an effort to diversify its faculty, Duke University approved a simple and direct policy.
By the fall of 1993, it said, each department must have hired an additional black faculty member.
Now, after its 56 departments have shown a net gain of only eight blacks, Duke is the focus of a very public fracas over hiring and promotion that has come to sum up the racial issues buffeting academia as well as many of the broader dilemmas involved in minority hiring initiatives nationwide.


Hurricane Advice By Telephone
Hurricane season is here, and travelers planning trips to possible storm areas can call a new "900" telephone number for the latest advisories from forecasters at the National Hurricane Center in Coral Gables, Fla.


In Texas, the Death Penalty Still Fails to Deter
To the Editor:
Texas has executed 14 people this year, far more than any other state (news article, Sept. 5).
Indeed, for more than a decade, Texas has executed more people than any other state.
The experience of Texas shows the failure of the death penalty as a deterrent.
Three major Texas cities have murder rates among the country's top 25 cities.
New York State, which does not have a death penalty, has no city among the homicide top 25.


A Retreat on Gay Soldiers
By the time Senator Sam Nunn and his wrecking crew got through with it, President Clinton's much-battered effort to allow homosexuals to serve openly in the military had been damaged even further.
The Senate was not content to accept the weak compromise already agreed to by the Clinton Administration and Joint Chiefs.
Rather, Mr.
Nunn has pushed through a bill designed to make certain that homosexuals are kept out of the military -- and that any further changes in policy head toward exclusion rather than inclusion.
This benighted retreat from principle is driven by prejudice and politics.
That became inescapably clear with the release of a previously suppressed study by the Rand Corporation, the Pentagon's favorite think tank.
Rand's analysis concludes that homosexuals can serve openly and effectively -- provided the policy gets strong leadership from above.
But leadership, alas, has been sadly missing in this whole rancorous debate.


THE TRIALS OF BOB PACKWOOD
I disagree with Georgie Packwood's assessment of Government that "it's a corrupting system." I think the power given a person in the political arena allows the best or, in Bob Packwood's case, the worst of a person to surface.
KATHLEEN PUCHEK San Antonio


An Asian Home Away From Home
Lawrence Lin knows that his business associates don't want anything exotic when they come to town.
So he puts them up in a hotel not far from restaurants that serve fish-head casseroles, from grocers who speak Mandarin and from newsstands that offer fresh bulletins from back home -- all in the heart of Flushing.
"I stake my reputation on this," said Mr.
Lin, a 34-year-old computer hardware distributor from New Hyde Park, L.I.
"Even though they are away from home it is like they are home."


In America; Fairness And Justice
Like Dehundra Caldwell, Sylvia Reed had no prior criminal record.
Their similarities ended right there.
Mr.
Caldwell is young, very poor and black.
Ms.
Reed is middle-aged, middle class and white.


Seeking Lost Culture at a Powwow
Michael Thomas stands at the arched entryway to the Hartford Civic Center arena, watching the parade of Indian dancers and clutching his cellular phone as the relentless ONE-two-ONE-two of the drums thunders out of the public address system.
Men who seem almost made of feathers shimmer past; women in Chippewa Jingle Dresses heel-and-toe to the beat, each step a symphony of tiny bells.
Next year, Mr.
Thomas vows, there will be a Mashantucket Pequot Indian out there.
Maybe, in fact, it will be he.
Then, his brief reverie over, he's back to business, barking orders into his phone, consulting with security guards, racing off on his own private dance as a coordinator for perhaps the largest traditional powwow ever held on the East Coast.


The Longest Campaign Has Started
THE camera moves in for a tight shot of Bob Dole, the Senate minority leader.
The Kansan is railing against the Clinton Administration, accusing the Democrats of taxation most foul.
The camera then pulls back and an identifying tag appears on the bottom of the television screen.
It says: "Road to the White House '96."


Dennis J. Clark, Foundation Chief And Expert on Irish, Is Dead at 66
Dennis J. Clark, who championed the underclass as a government worker, teacher, author, historian and foundation executive, died at his home in Philadelphia on Friday.
He was 66.
The cause was cancer, his family said.


Patricia McKeogh, W. E. Bandon 3d
Patricia Linden McKeogh, a daughter of W. Claire McKeogh of Williamsburg, Va., and the late Dr.
Robert P. McKeogh, was married yesterday to William Edward Bandon 3d, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Bandon of Somers, N.Y.
The Rev.
William Brenza performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at St.
Bridget's Church in Cornwall Bridge, Conn.
Ms.
McKeogh, who is keeping her name, is an associate at the New York law firm of Cadwalader, Wickersham &amp; Taft.
She graduated cum laude from Tufts University and received a law degree from Cornell University.
Her father, an obstetrician and gynecologist in Quincy, Mass., was Commissioner of Public Health for Quincy and later for the City of Williamsburg and James City County, Va.


Peres Looking to 'Digest' a Full Plate of Progress
"You know," said Shimon Peres, Foreign Minister of the Jewish state, "in recent years I became a Buddhist."
Come again?


A New London 'Bad Boy' Gains Respect in Retrospect
AFTER all these many years, Eugene O'Neill is finally getting some affection in New London, a city that had little use for him in his lifetime.
"The children love him," Sally Thomas Pavetti said.
"They climb all over him. Some talk to him. Some of the little girls kiss him."


Prolonging the Freshness of Summer
SUMMER is about over, but produce stands still offer an inviting harvest.
Ripe scarlet tomatoes and fragrant basil extend the taste of summer while sweet Italian prune plums herald fall.
Both can provide the foundation for a weekend lunch or weekday supper.
The advantage to using fresh ripe produce is that such ingredients require the barest cooking, so preparation time can often be trimmed to a minimum.
A food processor also speeds up the timing.


Susan Purcell, David J. Black
Susan Lisa Purcell, a daughter of James H. Purcell of Falls Church, Va., and Sharon L. Furman of Sana, Yemen, was married yesterday to David John Black, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Dwight G. Black of Apple Valley, Calif.
The Rev.
Jennings Hobson 3d performed the ceremony at Trinity Episcopal Church in Washington, Va.
Ms.
Purcell is keeping her name.
She is a program analyst for the United States General Accounting Office in Washington, as is her husband.
She graduated from Scripps College and received an M.B.A. from Wake Forest University.


Tie Leaves Orange Kicking (and Missing)
The Eyes of Texas had already begun to accept the worst.
Outmanned and outgained by a Syracuse team with aspirations of a national championship, the young, unranked Longhorns were facing defeat as Pat O'Neill lined up for the 33-yard field-goal attempt that would save the Orangemen.
But when O'Neill's kick sailed wide right with 8 seconds to play -- wide by at least a yard -- it became Syracuse's last special-teams mistake in an emotional 21-21 tie that had the feel of a surprising victory among the crowd of 65,897 at Memorial Stadium and the pain of a baffling defeat on the Orange sideline.


Planting Bulbs? The More the Merrier
SPRING-FLOWERING bulbs require patience as well as trust.
Although the bulbs are planted anytime now, no results will be seen until spring.
So all good gardeners have ordered their bulbs, right?
Or, at least, they have thought about it.
Those who have gone through this bulb-ordering ritual know well that bulbs must be planted in quantity to make a statement.
A few bulbs here or a line or two planted there will never do.
Quantities are the answer.
Perhaps this is why bulb catalogues increasingly offer bulbs in quantities of 25, 50 or more.


Prolonging the Freshness of Summer
SUMMER is about over, but produce stands still offer an inviting harvest.
Ripe scarlet tomatoes and fragrant basil extend the taste of summer while sweet Italian prune plums herald fall.
Both can provide the foundation for a weekend lunch or weekday supper.
The advantage to using fresh ripe produce is that such ingredients require the barest cooking, so preparation time can often be trimmed to a minimum.
A food processor also speeds up the timing.


No Headline
If you walk up political steps, you must have an economic hand rail or else you'll fall down.
You see, many countries that gained independence failed because they thought that the story of nations is the story of flags.
They didn't understand that it is really the story of people.
SHIMON PERES, Israeli Foreign Minister.  [ 12:6. ]


Chelsea Warning: No Red-Light District
When the police closed a fifth-floor massage parlor called the Honey Bee Oriental Club last week, it brought to 10 the number of unlicensed Chelsea massage parlors shut down this year for prostitution.
"We've moved against massage parlors in midtown before, but what's new is the large concentration of illegal activity in Chelsea, a largely residential neighborhood," said William H. Daly, director of the Mayor's Office of Midtown Enforcement.
The Honey Bee, at 25 West 26th Street, was closed under the city's Nuisance Abatement Law and after numerous violations of the building code and zoning regulations.


A World Tour In 96 Minutes. No Narration.
In September, Hollywood begins rolling out its highbrow fare.
In keeping with this tradition, the Samuel Goldwyn Company is releasing what could be the most challenging movie of the year.
"Baraka," which opens Friday, is a wordless paean to what its director, Ron Fricke, calls "humanity's relationship to the eternal."
More specifically, it is a 70-millimeter film that shows -- without benefit of titles -- such sights as the city landfill in Calcutta, Mount Tramserku in the Himalayas, the Helmsley Building on Park Avenue in Manhattan and a factory in Bang Pa-In, Thailand.
The movie's title comes from an ancient Sufi word meaning "blessing" or "breath of life"; the director describes the undertaking as "guided meditation."


BENEFITS
100 Years of Service
MONDAY -- A black-tie dinner honoring Tony Randall, the actor and director, will raise money for the scholarship and public-service award programs of the Hundred Year Association of New York.
The organization of century-old New York companies and institutions recognizes the public-service activities of New York City leaders.
The evening begins with a cocktail reception on the St.
Regis Roof.
Tickets, $500, from (212) 922-0791.


Ethan Allen, 89, Dies; Coached Bush at Yale
Ethan Allen, a major league outfielder who later coached Yale baseball teams whose players included former President George Bush, died Wednesday in Brookings, Ore., where his son, Toby, lives.
Mr.
Allen was 89 and until recently had lived in retirement in Chapel Hill, N.C.
Mr.
Allen entered the major leagues in 1926 with his hometown team, the Cincinnati Reds.
He later played for the New York Giants, the St.
Louis Cardinals, the Philadelphia Phillies, the Chicago Cubs and the St.
Louis Browns, compiling a lifetime batting average of .300 for 13 seasons.


Boksburg's Goofy White Smiles
IF YOU COLLECTED THE MOST outlandish caricatures of white South Africa and wrapped them in blue robes, the result, many South Africans would tell you, would be the Boksburg City Council.
It is hard to imagine a more typecast assembly of unrepentant racists and sanctimonious ultrapatriots than the right-wing majority elected in 1988 to run this suburb on the eastern edge of Johannesburg's urban sprawl, and still running it three years into the era of F. W. de Klerk's reforms.
There are moderates on the Council.
But they are barely audible in the company of such showmen as Beyers de Klerk, a real-estate agent and auctioneer who carries a pistol at his side and a Bible in his briefcase, copiously underlined to highlight the passages that prove God was against mixing the races. (He disavows any relationship to the other de Klerk, joking that the President's initials stand for "Farewell, white man.")


The Executive Computer; The Next Tidal Wave? Some Call It 'Social Computing'
PERHAPS without knowing exactly what it will all mean, everyone seems to be talking about the impending convergence of computer networks, groupware, telephone services, handheld electronic devices, cable television, the Internet and other on-line information services, mixed in with the entertainment industry, traditional news media and other communications technologies.
Such was the buzz last week in Boston at Forrester Research Inc.'s Technology Forum, where business executives gathered to exchange ideas about what they called social computing.
Social computing, a communications-rich brew, is expected to create new ways for businesses and their customers to communicate, over new types of wireless as well as wired pathways, using new types of computers called personal communicators.
The rise of social computing is expected to shift the emphasis of computing devices away from simple number crunching and data base management to wider-ranging forms of business communications.


On the Move


Save the Haiti Agreement
The Clinton Administration was proud to take credit for brokering a United Nations agreement in July intended to return President Jean-Bertrand Aristide to power in Haiti by Oct. 30.
Finally, the Clinton team seemed to have gotten the knack of mixing threat and compromise in the right proportions to achieve diplomatic success.
Now the Administration needs to get tough again with the military and police leaders who are out to wreck that agreement by letting thugs murder and intimidate Aristide supporters during the final weeks of the scheduled transition.


Parks Passport
To the Editor: I thoroughly enjoyed Robert Boyd's article ("Yellowstone on the Cancellation Plan," Aug. 1) about his obsession with his national parks passport.
As a national park aficionado I can relate to getting each cancellation mark perfectly lined up and smear-free.
I overcame the disappointment of purchasing my passport after I went to the Grand Canyon and most of the other park system sites in Arizona as well as many in Washington, D.C.
Knowing that my chances were slim of returning to get my new passport stamped, I have neatly written in my own "cancellation marks" commemorating my visits.
Regarding the nine regional stamps, I was disappointed to learn that starting this year they can be purchased only as sets, along with a larger stamp representing the national park system.
I always felt that I actually had to visit the region to "earn" one of the stamps.


THE ANGUISHED POLITICS OF BREAST CANCER
The two cases highlighted in your article are of women who received a diagnosis at age 37 or younger.
This may reinforce the misperception that breast cancer is primarily a disease of young women.
In fact, breast cancer strikes older women much more frequently.
For example. of the 159,000 women newly diagnosed in 1989, 62 percent were 60 years old or older.
LARRY KESSLER National Cancer Institute Bethesda, Md.


Janet Glover, Gary Kerkvliet
Janet Glover, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Nelson Glover of Stony Brook, L.I., was married yesterday to Dr.
Gary Joseph Kerkvliet, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Bernard Kerkvliet of Hutchinson, Minn.
The Rev.
Janice E. Gordon, an Episcopal priest, officiated at the Church of the Holy Comforter in Lutherville, Md.
The Rev.
Stephen R. Sutton, a Roman Catholic priest, took part in the ceremony.
Mrs.
Glover-Kerkvliet, 30, is a research-programs coordinator at the National Retinitis Pigmentosa Foundation in Baltimore, a foundation that supports research into inherited eye diseases.
She graduated from the State University at Stony Brook, L.I., and received a master's degree in biology from Smith College.


Beam Me Up, Luciano
To the Editor:
Having read Allan Kozinn's essay on the Metropolitan Opera's new supertitle system, "Apres Supertitles, le Deluge?"  [ Sept. 5 ] , I believe I shall go one step further: stay at home with my computer and access my seat at the Met via modem.
EVELYN RONELL  Secaucus, N. J.


Leslie A. Dougherty, George C. Biddle
Leslie Ann Dougherty, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
R.
L.
Dougherty of Atlanta, was married yesterday to George C. Biddle, the son of Nancy H. Biddle of New York and Nicholas D. Biddle of Palm Beach, Fla.
The Rev.
Roderick Stone, a Presbyterian minister, performed the ceremony at the Swan House, a historic mansion in Atlanta.
Ms.
Dougherty, 26, is keeping her name.
She is a trade and investment analyst at the United States Agency for International Development in Washington.
She graduated from Colby College and received a master's degree in international development from American University.
Her father is a partner in Fischbach &amp; Dougherty and Metro-Atlanta Properties, real estate concerns in Atlanta.


A la Carte; A Chance to Sample Diverse Wines With Lunch or Dinner
CONRAD'S BAR AND GRILL in Huntington continues to eliminate the mysticism, pretense and elitism associated with drinking wine.
The restaurant has a winekeeper system that enables diners to sample 24 wines by the glass, a cellar selection of the month, a new take-a-flight sampling program and a policy that allows diners to take little tastes of wines that they have never tried.
From its inception Conrad's has tried to make wine drinking a pleasure rather than a challenge or an embarrassment.


Small Indelicacy
To the Sports Editor:
Donna De Varona ("China's Bid Should Be Considered Only on Olympic Merits," The Times, Sept. 5) does not wish to discuss the merits of Congressional human rights concerns.
She thinks that the Olympics are not an appropriate forum for human rights.
The Olympics, and Olympic athletes, are above politics.


Higher Lead Levels Among Island Young Feared
THEY were very excited.
They had finally found their dream house in Old Westbury.
They were renovating their third house and they thought they were "old pros" at it.
They did not live there while the work was being done, and their two young children visited on rare occasions.
If the couple had to be at the house to confer with workers, the baby was always in his mother's arms.


Expos Die At Third Against The Phils
Maybe the Montreal Expos' belated drive to the top of the National League East conked out with Larry Walker 90 feet from home plate tonight.
Maybe they'll rev up their engine again Sunday and let the leading Philadelphia Phillies know they have to keep whizzing around the track for two more weeks if they to want to claim the checkered flag.
But in a disappointing finish to a game they weren't in for the first seven innings, the Expos fell to the Phillies, 5-4, and slipped five games back in the race Philadelphia had dominated until the past couple of weeks.


LIKE, UPTALK?
It seems to me that "uptalk" is tentative, makes no commitment and can easily be retracted: Is it O.K. that Captain McCormick is our pilot?
Is Denver an O.K. destination?
Is 30,000 feet an O.K. altitude?


Tough Guys


Fiorella Marchitelli, Frederic Massey
Fiorella Antonella Marchitelli, the daughter of Linda and Vittorio Marchitelli of New York, was married yesterday to Frederic Louis-Jean Massey, the son of Drs.
Jacques and Bernadette Massey of Pau, France.
Bishop Henry Mansell of the Roman Catholic Archdiocese of New York performed the ceremony at the Church of St.
Vincent Ferrer in New York.
Mrs.
Marchitelli Massey, 23, is a first-year law student at New York Law School.
She graduated from Bates College, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa, and received a master's degree in French and Romance philology from Columbia University.
Her father is a financial manager for the Archdiocese of New York.
Her mother is a ticket auditor at Olympic Airways in New York.


Deals &amp; Discounts
RUSSIA TOURS Six-night tours of Moscow and St.
Petersburg, Russia, this fall, with prices starting at $777, are offered by the Russian Travel Bureau, an American tour company.
The tours include round-trip flights on Finnair from New York with a connection in Helsinki; first-class hotels with private bath; full breakfast and dinner daily in Russia; sightseeing tours; an evening at the theater; a sleeper train trip between Moscow and St.
Petersburg, and local guides.
An overnight stay in Helsinki is also included.
The lowest rate is good for most tours from Nov. 3 to Feb. 23; holiday departures cost more.
The company also charges a visa and handling fee of $38 a person.
Call (212) 986-1500.


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
AUTO RACING  AMERICAN ZOOM  Stock Car Racing -- From the Dirt Tracks to Daytona.
By Peter Golenbock.
Macmillan, $23.


Computers in Air
To the Editor: I was glad to see the article by Philip Shenon about new safety rules on laptop computers and compact disk players, "Thai Airline Bans Use of Laptops" (Aug. 1).
This also noted that Singapore Airlines and Cathay Pacific ban their use during take-off and landing, and that mobile phones are barred at all times on all three major Asian airlines.
As the article noted, the new safety rules are intended to prevent electronic interference with navigational equipment.
Similar restrictions now apply on some United States carriers.


Flower District Is Staying, After All
Plans to transplant Manhattan's Flower District to the Bronx, with the city's help, have stalled.
Complaining of congestion and other problems in Manhattan, the four largest flower wholesalers announced at the beginning of the year that they would move to an abandoned rail yard in the South Bronx.
The city offered grants and tax credits for the move, and the rest of the $70 million flower industry was expected to be swept into the Bronx.


In the Rush, A Temple Abides
For 50 cents, this circa 1940 postcard of sun streaming into Grand Central Terminal reminds the harried commuter that beauty is not to be found only in the country on the weekend.


The Malling Of Wall Street Gains Speed
THE mall is where Americans shop. But do they want to own it?
Wall Street is persuaded they should, and the flood of shopping center deals is growing rapidly, notwithstanding rather tepid investor response.
Edward J. DeBartolo, the biggest developer of shopping centers, announced last week he wanted to raise as much as $690 million.
At least two more big deals are expected to be filed within a few weeks.


Dehere Loses Spotless Mark in Mud
As it must to all race horses, defeat came to the 2-year-old prodigy Dehere yesterday when he ran second by half a length to Holy Bull in the 104th running of the Futurity on a wet, but star-filled, afternoon of racing at Belmont Park.
No careers were devastated, but Dehere's winning streak ended at four and Holy Bull's winning streak grew to three.
Their rivalry probably won't be renewed in the Breeders' Cup at Santa Anita on Nov. 6 because Holy Bull wasn't nominated to run there.
But it seemed likely that they would continue to duel on the long road to the Kentucky Derby next May, the classic that Dehere had seemed destined to win as he streaked into the public's fancy this summer as the year's most exciting young colt and a throwback to his maternal grandsire, Secretariat.


Destroying Trees to Save Them
Some of the trees in Damrosch Park at Lincoln Center have been cut down.
But what some architects in the neighborhood believed was a deliberate effort to ruin the design of the park was in fact an effort to save the remaining trees from a fast-spreading disease.
Late last month, Lincoln Center cut down 12 of the London plane trees that had been growing in planters in the park.
Four had been cut down earlier in the summer, leaving 56 trees.


Country Cubes
In ancient Greece, how a temple occupied the land was often more important than the building itself -- its sacredness somehow intimately linked to the way it pointed at a distant mountain peak, or sat in a wide plain.
Centuries later, two little pavilions perched side by side on a mountain ridge in Columbia County, N.Y., reflect that same sort of reverence.
A low-budget getaway and artist's studio, the compound was designed by Andrew Bartle and Jonathan Kirschenfeld to take advantage of the view and to frame a sheltered space for outdoor living.
They envisioned the serene stretch of lawn dividing the two structures as a kind of private village green -- the ideal place to enjoy an outdoor lunch or set up an easel.
Still, no one would call these twin cubes casually composed.
Inspired by the neo-classical architecture of New England, they possess all the earmarks of the Greek Revival style -- columns, a peaked roof and porches -- but they're eminently modern.
In their taut white skins, mahogany grids and attenuated proportions, they show a compositional rigor that even students of Le Corbusier's best villas could admire.


Puerto Rico's Birthday Party
Puerto Rico is celebrating the 500th anniversary of its discovery by Columbus with arts and cultural festivals as well as international sports events.
Columbus landed on Nov. 19, 1493, so Nov. 19 is the island's official birthday.
The opening ceremony, however, will be on Nov. 8 at the Fine Arts Center in San Juan, and some events have already started.


Pigskin Revenue
To the Sports Editor:
Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo considers the Buffalo Bills as the only true New York State football team, yet the New York State Department of Motor Vehicles offers New York Giants and Jets special license plates.


In the Region/Westchester; Trading Development Rights for Goodwill
ARRANGEMENTS in which developers relinquish some development rights on a piece of property in exchange for the goodwill of a community that might otherwise be hostile to the project are becoming more common, especially in conservation-minded communities like Bedford.
One such arrangement involves a former sand and gravel excavation site on which the developer plans to build 59 luxury housing units surrounded by 85 acres of rolling countryside.
The 85 acres, which include seven manmade ponds, were offered to the Town of Bedford two years ago for hiking, cycling, fishing and similar uses.


NEW YORKERS &amp; CO.
Grand Central Location For Transit Museum Shop  Last Tuesday, the New York Transit Museum in Brooklyn opened a satellite gift shop in an appropriate locale: Grand Central Terminal.
The shop, on the main concourse, resembles a stainless-steel subway car, with display cases in place of the windows.
The store sells miniature trains, old-style subway tokens and items designed around tokens, like key chains.
The Transit Museum shop is to share its space in the terminal with a branch of the New York City Transit Authority Travel Information Center.
Times Square Getting More Than Takeout
Times Square should soon be booming with big, new out-of-town restaurants.
The Olive Garden, a chain of Italian restaurants, plans to open next summer at Broadway and 47th Street with a multi-level dining room that will seat almost 500 people.
Ruth's Chris Steakhouse, a New Orleans-based chain, plans to open this fall at 148 West 51st Street, and will seat 275.
And in November, Morton's of Chicago, a steakhouse chain, is to open a 150-seat restaurant on 45th Street between Madison and Fifth Avenues.
A.T.&amp; T. Riding High On Flushing Phone Parlor
Based on the success of its nine-month-old international calling center in Flushing, Queens, A.T.&amp; T. expects to open more such centers around New York City soon.
The Global Communications Center, at 39-02 Main Street in Flushing, has nine phone booths where people can place calls around the world.
It caters to clients who have limited phone service at home and don't want to pay the much higher rates at a pay phone.
And it has A.T.&amp; T. translators on hand to help place calls.
For Minority-Owned Businesses
Minority-owned companies in the Bronx can seek advice from a new business assistance office.
The United States Department of Commerce recently opened the Bronx Minority Business Development Center, which offers marketing, financial and management tips, and construction assistance.
Minority-owned businesses in Rockland and Westchester Counties can also use the center, at 1020 Grand Concourse in the Bronx.
Charges for management and technological assistance will be subsidized by the Department of Commerce.
Five More Stores For Nine West
Nine West, the manufacturer and retailer of women's shoes, recently opened two new stores in Manhattan: a flagship at Madison Avenue and 63d Street, and a store in the World Trade Center, and it plans three more in the next month.
The company, based in Stamford, Conn., previously had six outlets in New York City.
The coming stores will be at Broadway and 83d Street, Lexington Avenue and 59th Street, and Third Avenue and 47th Street.


High-Minded Pursuit of the Exotic
READING NATIONAL GEOGRAPHIC By Catherine A. Lutz and Jane L. Collins.
Illustrated. 309 pp.
Chicago:  University of Chicago Press.
Cloth, $59.95.
Paper, $19.95.


Dissenting View On 'U' and U2
To the Editor:
I enjoy reading the Styles of The Times section.
It is always a pleasure to discover that each and every article is as trivial and out of date as one suspects prior to reading it.
A kind of television for newspaper readers, if you will.


Police Station in Sicily Bombed; Mafia Suspected
A powerful car bomb ripped through a police station in Catania early this morning, wounding at least four policemen, one of them seriously.
The police said the bomb appeared to have been set by the Mafia.
It was the second attack in Sicily attributed to organized crime in the last 48 hours.
The first was the fatal shooting on Wednesday night of the Rev.
Giuseppe Puglisi, a staunchly anti-Mafia Roman Catholic priest, in Palermo.


CHILDREN'S BOOKS
BEHIND THE SECRET WINDOW A Memoir of a Hidden Childhood During World War Two.
By Nelly S. Toll.
Illustrated. 161 pp.
New York:  Dial Books. $17. (Ages 12 and up)


Brown Gets a Few Breaks and Brings a Slide to an End
One miscue after another by Yale in the second half enabled Brown to end a 10-game losing streak and beat the Eli, 12-3, today in the Ivy League opener for both teams.
After a field goal on its first possession, Yale didn't score again as Brown defeated the Bulldogs for the first time since 1988 before a small gathering of 7,967 in the Yale Bowl.


The Home-Buying Decision of a Lifetime
THE powerful force of a home sales market substantially below the price levels five or six years ago is asserting itself in the lives of thousands of families in the metropolitan area.
For many who bought starter houses in the middle 80's, the fall in prices has forced the postponement of purchase and relocation decisions that are essential to long-term family well-being.
Unable to recover all their equity if they sell, these families are unable to buy and "move up."


Rams Shy of Fans and Touchdown Passes
Not only are the Rams No. 2 in Los Angeles, but they also just hired a No. 2 talk show host.
Jay Leno presided over their coin flip here last Sunday, delivered a halftime monologue and was actually funnier than the team.


Mower and Barbecue Storage for Winter
BY the end of summer, many veterans of the lawn wars would probably prefer to roll the power mowers into the garages or storage sheds, close the doors and think about other things until next year.
But abandoning motorized equipment like mowers, string trimmers and hedge clippers at season's end shortens their lives and invites start-up problems in spring.
Similar ill treatment can also sabotage a propane-fueled barbecue.
For electrical items like hedge clippers, the most important storage requirement is that they be kept dry.
If a device has to be stored outdoors or in a damp location, wrap it securely with plastic sheeting to protect it.
Electric equipment requires no storage maintenance other than surface cleaning and lubrication of mechanical parts like control cables.
Do not try to lubricate parts of an electric motor unless the owner's manual says to.
Many motors do not need lubrication and can be damaged if oiled.


In Defense of Jack Welch
To the Editor:
I sympathize with Wayne Starratt, the multiskilled machinist at General Electric ("The Workplace After the Deluge," Sept. 5) who fears the shutdown of the Lynn, Mass., plant where he works.
He also feels people like Jack Welch, G.E.'s chief executive, can't be trusted.
"They have never put blood, sweat and tears into the product," he says.


Mary C. Ball, Stephen Sencer
Mary Conner Ball and Stephen D. Sencer, both lawyers, were married yesterday at St.
Luke's Episcopal Church in Atlanta.
The Rev.
Austin Ford performed the ceremony.
Ms.
Ball, who is keeping her name, is a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Turner I. Ball of Atlanta.
She graduated from Washington University in St.
Louis, and she and her husband, a graduate of Wesleyan University, received law degrees from the University of Michigan.
Her father is the chief of radiology at the Egleston Children's Hospital in Atlanta.


Meghan Mastellon, James Mahon
Meghan A. Mastellon, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
William J. Mastellon of Waldwick, N.J., was married yesterday to James R. Mahon, a son of James P. Mahon and Mary Jo Mahon, both of Armonk, N.Y.
The Rev.
Patrick Rice, a Roman Catholic priest, officiated at the Holy Family Chapel at the College of New Rochelle in New Rochelle, N.Y.
Mrs.
Mahon, 25, is an associate at McAleese, McGoldrick &amp; Susanin, a law firm in King of Prussia, Pa.
She graduated summa cum laude from the New Rochelle and received a law degree from Villanova University.


Angry? Pick Up the Phone
How many times has it happened?
You lie in bed listening to your unaccomplished saxophone-playing upstairs neighbor practice for the sixth night in a row.
Or you notice that the light at the end of your street is out again.
Or an airline lost your luggage in Des Moines.
These are the kinds of things that annoy you incredibly, then pass from your mind.
You should complain, you want to complain, but you really haven't a clue who to complain to.


A Town Weighs Whether It Is Too Big for Its Government
WHEN Marianna M. Kuhn took over as Town Supervisor in New Castle last February, she needed a quick education.
The town had not reached a wage agreement with the Civil Service Employee Association.
There was no management plan for the town's new $22 million water-treatment plant.
And a contract for plan to dispose of garbage had to be negotiated, with the possibility of only one bidder for the job.
Ms.
Kuhn, who stepped into the position after Mark S. Tulis, her predecessor, was tapped to fill a vacant seat on the County Board of Legislators, had already served on the Town Council for seven years and had worked with two different supervisors.
But despite her familiarity with local issues, she soon found herself putting in 40-hour weeks at what was meant to be a part-time job, spending her days doing everything from studying about water-pipe relining and pump pressure to listening to residents complain about snow removal or neighboring septic tanks.


Moore Enjoys Turbulent Landings
On Rob Moore's first acrobatic catch of the season -- a diving full-extension grab that went for 43 yards against Denver -- the receiver came down hard on his stomach, ruptured the bursa sac in his left elbow and knocked the wind out of himself.
On his second acrobatic catch of the season -- a twisting full-extension reception good for 51 yards in the victory over the Dolphins -- Moore came down hard on his back and knocked himself silly.


Concert Version Set For 'Lost in the Stars'
THE Philharmonia Virtuosi, which has already started its Baroque With a Twist concerts in Purchase and Peekskill and will offer Cushion Concerts for children in October and November in White Plains and Scarsdale, will begin its Mainstage Series in Theater A at the State University of New York at Purchase next Sunday at 3 P.M.
On the program will be a concert version of Kurt Weill and Maxwell Anderson's "Lost in the Stars," a stirring portrait of life in South Africa, which seems amazingly relevant 44 years after its original Broadway run.
Cast in the leading roles of this modern oratorio are three noted black singers, Thomas Young, Kevin Deas and Dian Dames.


Devils Outscore Islanders, But Both Displease Coaches
Certainly tonight's game had its ragged edges.
And it's true that both sides rested a few top players, including the first-string goalies.
Nevertheless, the exhibition between the Islanders and the Devils before 8,639 at the Coliseum had more entertainment value (and bad blood) than plenty of matches during the 84-game regular season.


A Busy Weekend At Trauma Center
AT 6:10 P.M. on Friday, Sept. 10, a message flashed on the pager clipped to Dr.
John H. Siegel's belt.
"Female struck by auto. Fractured tib, fib. Conscious. ETA: five minutes."


NIGERIA'S LEADER DEPLORES 'STIGMA'
Nigeria's new leader says the man believed to have won a presidential election annulled by the country's previous ruler should be allowed to run again.
The new leader, Ernest Shonekan, succeeded Gen.
Ibrahim Babangida, who annulled the June elections and effectively banned Moshood Abiola, apparently the winner, from holding public office.
General Babangida resigned in August and approved Mr.
Shonekan as his successor, but Mr.
Shonekan said the ban on Mr.
Abiola should be lifted.


Playing the Board, Or the Adversary?
SOME players conduct their games like psychological wrestling.
They try to direct the play into a channel that might expose the adversary's foibles.
Others are stern objectivists who try to discover the logic of each position and subordinate themselves to it.
Judit Polgar, the 17-year-old grandmaster from Budapest, said, "I play the opponent." In his prime, Bobby Fischer said, "I believe in good moves, not psychology."


Kristine Heffernan, Peter McCann
Kristine Anne Heffernan, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Daniel E. Heffernan Sr. of Laurel Hollow, L.I., was married yesterday to Peter Gerard McCann, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
David A. McCann of Lloyd Harbor, L.I.
Msgr.
Charles A. Ribaudo performed the ceremony at St.
Dominic's Chapel in Oyster Bay, L.I.
Mrs.
McCann, 26, graduated from Hamilton College.
She is an assistant treasurer of the global assets division of the Bankers Trust Company in New York.
Her father is the chairman of Heffernan &amp; Company, an investment bank, in New York.


Jordan's King Facing Tough Choices on Palestinians
As the Arab world begins its maneuvering to secure advantage -- or at least limit the damage -- from Israel's peace with the P.L.O., King Hussein of Jordan confronts the most acute of dilemmas, a future in harness with a new, Palestinian neighbor that will challenge the very nature and stature of the dynasty he leads.
At issue is the basic, enduring fear of Jordanians turned into a minority in their own land by successive waves of Palestinian refugees and now profoundly apprehensive that confederation with a new Palestine will swamp them forever.


Votes in Congress
Tally Last Week in Connecticut, New Jersey and New York
Senate
1.
Grazing Fees: Vote on an amendment to a spending bill for the Department of the Interior that would delay for a year the Administration's plan to raise the fee that ranchers pay to graze cattle on Federal land in the West.
Approved 59 to 40, Sept. 14.
2.
Arts: Vote on an amendment to a spending bill for the Department of the Interior that would eliminate funds for the National Endowment for the Arts.
Rejected 83 to 15, Sept. 14.
3.
Arts: Vote to kill an amendment to a spending bill for the Department of the Interior that would overhaul the way the N.E.A. disburses money to the states.
Approved 57 to 39, Sept. 15.
4.
Arts: Vote on an amendment to a spending bill for the Department of the Interior that would require the N.E.A. to give grants only to non-profit groups and not to individuals.
Approved 65 to 30, Sept. 15.
Connecticut
Dodd (D) . . .
Y
N
Y
Y
Lieberman (D) . . .
N
N
Y
Y
New Jersey
Bradley (D) . . .
N
N
Y
Y
New Jersey (cont'd)
Lautenberg (D) . . .
N
N
Y
Y
New York
D'Amato (R) . . .
Y
N
Y
Y
Moynihan (D) . . .
Y
N
Y
Y
House
1.
Savings and Loan: Vote to approve up to $26.3 billion in additional spending to protect depositors in failed savings and loans.
Approved 214 to 208, Sept. 14.
Connecticut
1. Kennelly (D) . . .
Y
2. Gejdenson (D) . . .
Y
3. DeLauro (D) . . .
N
4. Shays (R) . . .
Y
5. Franks (R) . . .
N
6. Johnson (R) . . .
Y
New Jersey
1. Andrews (D) . . .
N
2. Hughes (D) . . .
N
3. Saxton (R) . . .
N
4. Smith (R) . . .
N
5. Roukema (R) . . .
Y
6. Pallone (D) . . .
N
7. Franks (R) . . .
N
8. Klein (D) . . .
Y
9. Torricelli (D) . . .
N
10. Payne (D) . . .
Y
11. Gallo (R) . . .
N
12. Zimmer (R) . . .
N
13. Menendez (D) . . .
N
New York
1. Hochbrueckner (D) . . .
Y
2. Lazio (R) . . .
Y
3. King (R) . . .
Y
4. Levy (R) . . .
Y
5. Ackerman (D) . . .
Y
6. Flake (D) . . .
Y
7. Manton (D) . . .
Y
8. Nadler (D) . . .
N
9. Schumer (D) . . .
Y
10. Towns (D) . . .
A
11. Owens (D) . . .
N
12. Velazquez (D) . . .
Y
13. Molinari (R) . . .
N
14. Maloney (D) . . .
Y
15. Rangel (D) . . .
Y
16. Serrano (D) . . .
Y
17. Engel (D) . . .
N
18. Lowey (D) . . .
N
19. Fish (R) . . .
N
20. Gilman (R) . . .
N
21. McNulty (D) . . .
N
22. Solomon (R) . . .
N
23. Boehlert (R) . . .
Y
24. McHugh (R) . . .
N
25. Walsh (R) . . .
N
26. Hinchey (D) . . .
Y
27. Paxon (R) . . .
N
28. Slaughter (D) . . .
N
29. LaFalce (D) . . .
Y
30. Quinn (R) . . .
N
31. Houghton (R) . . .
Y
KEY: Y Yea; N Nay; (A) Absent or did not vote; (P) Present.


Bookshelf
ANNE FRANK: Beyond the Diary.
By Ruud van der Rol and Rian Verhoeven.
Viking. $17. (Ages 10 and up) After the German police entered the Secret Annex and the Frank family was led away in 1944, its photo albums, personal papers and Anne's diary were retrieved.
The diary was first published in 1947.
This rich and appealing selection of family pictures, augmented with helpful maps of Europe and diagrams of the house itself, is a powerful supplement.
BLACK ON WHITE.
Illustrated by Tana Hoban.
Greenwillow. $4.95. (Newborns and up) One of two sturdy board books -- the other is "White on Black" -- using simple images, like a fish or a leaf, that a baby can see in focus.


Not All Californians Flee Their State's Schools
To the Editor:
Your Sept. 1 front-page report that young Californians are shunning their state's beleaguered colleges indicates a sharp increase in the last three years in the number of California students seeking higher education elsewhere, especially in public universities in nearby Western states.
You survey the situation in the state as a whole, but it is important to note that enrollment trends at California's various colleges and universities differ markedly.


42d Street Plan: Be Bold or Begone!
Forty-Second Street now!, the long-awaited "interim" plan to revive New York's tarnished boulevard of dreams, is a smoothly choreographed step in exactly the right direction.
As the word interim suggests, the plan is no more than a step.
A decade hence, 42d Street could well be straddled by the kind of gigantic tombstone skyscrapers that were originally planned to rise here.
Though a faltering real estate market put that project on hold, it has not vanished from the horizon.
And even the interim plan faces some hurdles before it is officially adopted.
The private developers in this public-private venture have yet to approve the plan, and it will be the subject of public hearings this fall.
With luck, however, this wonderful plan will be accepted and the ideas percolating through it will influence whatever follows.
The plan is important not only because of the historical significance of the site but also because it breaks ground for a fertile exchange between corporate and popular culture.


Just Shooting the Breeze
ON Wednesday, at half past 1 in the morning, Lauren Bacall was standing alone on the steps of the Metropolitan Museum of Art.
The same car service that hadn't shown up earlier -- to take her from Bette Midler's "Experience the Divine" concert at Radio City Music Hall to the opening night party at the museum afterward -- had blown it again.
And so, while her date, Joe Layton, the production supervisor for Ms.
Midler's show who had hired the car service, was inside, spewing on the telephone, Ms.
Bacall waited.
With illumined fountains gushing and a silky light pouring out of the doors behind her, it seemed as appropriate a place as any for a legend to be waiting for a ride home.


Meanwhile, Back In 90210
NAME: Jason Priestley.
IDENTITY: Actor and teen idol, 24.
CURRENT TELEVISION SERIES: "Beverly Hills 90210," now in its fourth season.


The Risky Nature of Marital Infidelity
IT is engendered and nurtured in deepest secrecy and thrives in the same, a man-woman-made vortex of the torrid, the explosive and the forbidden.
Call it adultery, infidelity or strip it of its moralistic connotations and label it an affair, as do the authors of the recently published book, "Sexual Arrangements: Marriage and the Temptation of Infidelity," extramarital lust and love between consenting grown-ups are common phenomena.
More than 50 percent of all partners engage in affairs at some point in their marriage in an extremely risky attempt to solve the struggle with the intermittently unblissful union.
But however banal, affairs are really loaded guns and perceived as mad, bad and dangerous to all concerned.
If the deception blows open, the aftermath is usually uncommonly painful, deadly to the marriage and can tear families asunder.


Redshirted at Indiana?
Indiana forward ALAN HENDERSON, recovering from knee surgery, isn't ready to speculate about playing this season.
National Collegiate Athletic Association rules allow an athlete five years to complete four years of eligibility, so Henderson's becoming a medical redshirt is a possibility.
Henderson has been participating in unsupervised workouts with other Hoosiers players. (AP)


Lindsay Jenkins, Paul T. Matthews
Lindsay Virginia Jenkins, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Francis P. Jenkins Jr. of Chappaqua, N.Y., was married yesterday to Paul Taylor Matthews, a son of Mrs.
Edward J. Matthews Jr. of Mendham, N.J., and the late Mr.
Matthews.
The Rev.
William Harper, an Episcopal priest, and the Rev.
Giles Hayes, a Roman Catholic priest, officiated at the Watch Hill (R.I.) Chapel.
Mrs.
Matthews, a graduate of Sweet Briar College, is a Spanish teacher at King and Low-Heywood Thomas School in Stamford, Conn.
Her father retired as a senior executive officer of the First Boston Corporation in New York.


Core Support Called Crucial in Comptroller Runoff
Over the past two decades, City Comptroller Elizabeth Holtzman built a reputation as a maverick candidate whose longevity was built less on traditional political machines than on a loose-knit but loyal coalition of grass-roots organizations that rousted her vote.
In the same period, Assemblyman Alan G. Hevesi closely associated himself with the Queens County Democratic Organization and assiduously cultivated ties to major labor unions.


The Met Moves Things Around
THE GREEK PHILOSOPHER WHO said that nothing endures but change would feel right at home in the galleries of 19th-century European paintings and sculpture at the Metropolitan Museum of Art.
In 1980, the Met unveiled the "permanent" installation of its 19th-century collection in a open-plan space nearly the size of a football field, called the Andre Meyer Galleries.
Less than a dozen years later, Andre Meyer was gone and construction begun on a new permanent display, which opens Tuesday.
It is anyone's guess how long this one will last.
But it should last longer than did Meyer, whose modernism never meshed with the other paintings galleries at the Metropolitan and soon came to seem dated, not to say shabby.
The new galleries are, in a sense, already dated: they emulate the 19th-century Beaux-Arts style of the galleries originally conceived for the museum by its earliest architects, Richard Morris Hunt and the firm of McKim, Mead &amp; White.


Data Bank/September 19, 1993


Carter Here, There, Everywhere
Jimmy Carter last week saw the process that he set in motion with the Camp David accords reach its crowning moment.
He acted as intermediary between a hunted Somali warlord and the United Nations.
He took center stage in promoting the North American Free Trade Agreement, lambasting Ross Perot in a way few politicians have dared.
He even won praise from Rush Limbaugh.
It was quite a week for the former President, and he didn't even have to build a house.


When the Curtains Go Up
Here is a list of productions for the fall and winter season at four major New Jersey theaters:
Paper Mill Playhouse, Brookside Drive, Millburn. (201) 376-4343:


What Unions Are For
To the Editor:
In "The View From Hoffa's Shoulders" (Editorial Notebook, Sept. 6), Brent Staples professes ambivalence about not joining a writers' union.
He attributes his reluctance partly to an inappropriate image of unions, not even descriptive of the union family in which he grew up.
Also partly to the "seaminess that has fallen over unions in general," the result, he believes, of the ignoble behavior of Jimmy Hoffa, former teamster leader.


What New Gallery Members Are Doing
ARTISTS: they keep coming, buoyed, it seems, with hopes of fame and, if not fortune, at least making a living by their work.
Being virtually devoid of sex and politics, this year's crop of art by new members of the City Without Walls gallery here can hardly be taken as a summary of the scene, as outlined by the recent Whitney Biennial.
Yet it serves well enough as a cross section, and it comes with the usual freight of statements, including that from Stephen Sennott, who directs this nonprofit gallery in a storefront.
Mr.
Sennott points out that the new- member shows are not selected with a specific theme in mind, but he allows that it is "interesting to try and identify chance convergencies of style, subject, media or scale." The emphasis, he says, may be on assemblage one year, politics or Conceptualism the next; the same with figuration versus abstraction, or dark versus hopeful moods.


New Resorts In Mexico
Among the several recently opened resorts that visitors to Mexico can choose from this season are the Ritz-Carlton in Cancun and the Posada San Francisco in Tlaxcala, a region rich in ruins about 70 miles southeast of Mexico City.
The 370-room Ritz-Carlton, the first of that chain's hotels in either Mexico or the Caribbean, has two outdoor pools, three lighted tennis courts and a spa and fitness center.
Each room has either a patio or a balcony facing the ocean.
The Spanish decor includes tiled roofs, wrought-iron railings and fountains.
Guests have access to an 18-hole golf course and outlets offering snorkeling, scuba diving, fishing, sailing, parasailing and water skiing.
Excursions to Mayan ruins throughout the Yucatan are also available.


Jane Campion's Lunatic Women
THIS OCTOBER, A ROMANTIC EPIC titled "The Piano," written and directed by a New Zealander named Jane Campion, will be the grand finale of the New York Film Festival at Lincoln Center.
In November it will open all over the country.
"The Piano," which is set in 19th-century New Zealand, has already made Campion the first woman to win the Palme d'Or at the Cannes Film Festival, and the reviews so far -- but for a cavil about its being too consciously an "art" film -- have been ecstatic.
Vincent Canby of The New York Times, for instance, described "The Piano" as "a triumph . . . so good, so tough, so moving and, especially, so original." Yet when I asked a friend, like me a great admirer of Campion's work, what she wanted to learn from my interview with the film maker, she replied, "First, I want to know if she's sane."
I had expected curiosity about why Australia, where Campion went to film school and lives, has produced what seems to be an inordinate number of world-class directors: Bruce Beresford and Peter Weir and George Miller among them.
Or why, given the hen's tooth scarcity of prominent female directors anywhere in the world, three -- Campion, Gillian Armstrong and Jocelyn Moorhouse -- emerged from a country associated with a certain cheerful misogyny.
But why be curious about Campion's sanity?


Despite Protests, the Ship's Mast Comes Down
The Ship's Mast Pub in Williamsburg closed last Tuesday, victim of a four-year landlord-tenant dispute that involved spurned love and, some people say, a resistance to neighborhood change.
In its 13 years under the ownership of John Gallagher, the pub had become a popular hangout for the growing local artists' community, a place where people gathered for discourse, poetry readings on Thursdays and live music on weekends.


Turning The Tables At Tiffany
Cooper-Hewitt Museum and the jeweler sponsor a show, Sept. 14.


Still Subversive After All These Years
In the early 60's, when pop art first raised a Campbell soup can in a toast to Mickey Mouse, critics were generally appalled, denouncing the movement as everything from "profound cowardice" to a "pinheaded and contemptible style." Leading Abstract Expressionists like Robert Motherwell and Mark Rothko resigned from the Sidney Janis Gallery when Janis mounted a large Pop show in 1962.
Still, Pop caught on faster than any artistic movement ever had, and something unprecedented happened: those low-life bohemians called artists were elevated to stardom.
Take Roy Lichtenstein.
His first one-man show of Pop paintings at Leo Castelli in 1962 sold out before it opened. (So much for critics.) He had a mini-retrospective in Pasadena, Calif., five years later and a more comprehensive one in 1969 at the Guggenheim.
In fact, ever since 1962 Mr.
Lichtenstein, who will be 70 next month, has had work on view somewhere.
Castelli's list of his one-man and group shows comes to 41 pages.


'In the Shadow of Moloch'
To the Editor:
Although my father did not sacrifice me and I lived to read Wendy Doniger's review of his book, I was not reassured by her assertion that "his argument that real parents throughout history have had the impulse to seduce or abuse their children remains unsubstantiated."


Experiment in Parking Relief
Car owners in Bay Ridge, Dyker Heights and Fort Hamilton have won a measure of help in coping with alternate side of the street parking.
Instead of the tortuous three-hour wait to glide into coveted parking spaces after the streets have been cleaned, residents only have to wait for an hour-and-a-half under a pilot project that went into effect in August in Community Board 1, said Mary Sempepos, the District Manager.
The trial will run for about a year.


A Pocket-Size Place With Bistro Style
HOPE springs eternal was the less than original phrase that crossed our minds as the maitre d'hotel, a young man with a supercilious "you're lucky to be here" air, led us to our table at Le Bistro des Amis in Westport.
The name, decor, service and menu have all changed in the pocket-size restaurant, but the corner space is abundantly familiar, having seen a parade of restaurants -- vegetarian, Chinese, French, Continental and New American over the last dozen years.


The Lure of Pier 69: Good Fishing, Riv Vu
"Oh, yeah, this is the best place to fish in New York City," Don Gruber declared as he cast a line from his red spinning rod into the gentle, rippling waters of Upper New York Bay.
With views of the Manhattan skyline to the north, New Jersey across the harbor and the Verrazano-Narrows Bridge and Staten Island to the south, Pier 69 in Bay Ridge spans the length of about three football fields and shares the shore with the Owls Head Sewage Treatment Plant.


Chez Bistro
CHEZ JOSEPHINE **  (212) 594-1925; 414 West 42d Street; $$; AE, V, MC
You never know what's going to happen at Chez Josephine.
Sundry musicians take command of the piano, tap dancers clickety-clack, and Jean-Claude Baker, the owner, regales customers with stories.
Solid bistro cooking rules.
Among pleasing main courses: boudin noir, French blood sausage, pan-roasted Norwegian salmon, lobster cassoulet. (Revisited: 5/93; last reviewed: 6/22/90)  The Star System
The New York Times's star system rates restaurants on the following scale. ****
Extraordinary ***
Excellent **
Very Good *
Good None Poor to Satisfactory Price Range The price symbols are based on the cost of a three-course dinner with tax and a 15 percent tip (drinks not included).
Capsule summaries are culled from reviews, Diner's Journal and the $25 and Under column.


At This Taystee, Opportunity Rises
For many New Yorkers, the name Taystee conjures up the Flushing bakery vacated in July 1992.
But 14 years earlier, the bread company left its factory on West 126th Street, a complex now at the heart of a project to assist small businesses in Harlem.
Under an "incubator" plan for fledgling businesses sponsored by the Harlem Restoration Project, three buildings between Amsterdam and Morningside Avenues that were part of the Taystee factory will be remodeled to house 40 small manufacturing and service businesses, from clothing designers and building contractors to artisans and accountants.
The buildings are to offer low rents (about $800 a month) and meeting rooms, office machines and even clerical help.


Hypocrisy Is Everyone's Handicap in the Ryder Cup Matches
The American professional golfers playing for the United States in the Ryder Cup Match next week in Britain go on at great length about what it means to tee it up for their country.
In hushed tones with a hint of tears, they talk of representing the Stars and Stripes, and suggest that their knees weaken when their national anthem is played at the opening ceremony.
But after the comments some of them made recently about making the traditional visit to the White House, you wonder if they fully understand the symbolism that so moves them.


What Began as the Mets' Embarrassment Becomes the Braves'
It is hard to imagine the Giants having remained around the television in the clubhouse in Cincinnati.
Yes, they had won, and yes, the Braves were on the air.
But the schedule read: Greg Maddux (18-9) against Bobby Jones (2-3).
Why torture themselves more?
Anyway, the Giants might have missed a strange, exquisite little docudrama, one that might have provided their greatest entertainment in weeks.
It was as good as television gets.
It was as crazy as baseball gets.


Warranty On New Houses
PROSPECTIVE buyers of new houses and anyone who has bought a new house in the last few years should be aware that the 10-year private warranty programs touted by builders are coming under increasing criticism from some lawyers, policyholders and home inspectors.
The critics say warranty companies repeatedly reject the homeowner's right to compensation, particularly on a structural defect that could cost $20,000 or more to repair.


Mower and Barbecue Storage for Winter
BY the end of summer, many veterans of the lawn wars would probably prefer to roll the power mowers into the garages or storage sheds, close the doors and think about other things until next year.
But abandoning motorized equipment like mowers, string trimmers and hedge clippers at season's end shortens their lives and invites start-up problems in spring.
Similar ill treatment can also sabotage a propane-fueled barbecue.
For electrical items like hedge clippers, the most important storage requirement is that they be kept dry.
If a device has to be stored outdoors or in a damp location, wrap it securely with plastic sheeting to protect it.
Electric equipment requires no storage maintenance other than surface cleaning and lubrication of mechanical parts like control cables.
Do not try to lubricate parts of an electric motor unless the owner's manual says to.
Many motors do not need lubrication and can be damaged if oiled.


Nostalgia for Wooden Walls on a Broadway Survivor
One of the last remaining wood buildings in New York City is no longer covered with wood.
The Henry Grimm building, a three-story wood-frame at the corner of 100th Street and Broadway, was built in 1871 with a saloon at its base and a home for the Grimm family above.


Two Hundred Years Ago Yesterday


Carla Ann Catell, David Hamilton
Robert B. Catell of Garden City, L.I., and Marianne Catell of Lido Beach, L.I., have announced the engagement of their daughter Carla Ann Catell and David Charles Hamilton, the son of Mr.
Hamilton Sr. of Smithtown, L.I., and Judith K. Hamilton of Medford, L.I.
An October 1994 wedding is planned.
Miss Catell, 27, and Mr.
Hamilton, 26, work for the Long Island Lighting Company in Woodbury, L.I., she as a customer account representative and he as a project engineer.
She graduated from Hofstra University.
Her father is the president and chief executive of the Brooklyn Union Gas Company.


Barnaby Jackson, Eliza Vorenberg
Eliza Vorenberg, a daughter of James Vorenberg of Cambridge, Mass., and the late Dixie Greeley, was married yesterday to Barnaby Jackson, a son of Hanna Jackson of Los Angeles and the late Benjamin Jackson.
The bride's father, a justice of the peace, officiated at the St.
Botolph Club in Boston.
Ms.
Vorenberg is keeping her name.
She is a lawyer at the Harriet Buhai Center for Family Law, a nonprofit organization in Los Angeles.
She graduated from Bryn Mawr College and received a law degree from Columbia University.


SEPT. 12-18: 23 Years in Hiding; Running on Emptiness: Ex-Student Radical Gives Up
For more than two decades as a fugitive wanted for bank robbery and the slaying of a Boston policeman, Katherine Ann Power lived a shadow life.
She was Alice Metzinger, small-town Oregon restaurateur, wife, mother and taxpayer.
But the lie became unbearable, and after consulting a therapist for severe depression, Ms.
Power decided there was only one remedy: surrender.
And so, after more than a year of secret talks between her lawyers and prosecutors, she flew to Boston last week and gave herself up.
The onetime Brandeis antiwar radical pleaded guilty to manslaughter and armed robbery for her role driving the getaway car, closing a 23-year-old case.
The other four accomplices in the robbery, during which Officer Walter A. Schroeder was shot in the back of the head, were imprisoned years ago.


Mayor to Announce Plan for Putting Police Officers in All New York Schools
Mayor David N. Dinkins is to announce a plan today to put a uniformed police officer in each of the city's 1,069 schools.
The initiative is part of a comprehensive crime proposal that would also expand domestic violence programs and increase protection for the elderly.
The proposals are part of a major campaign speech on crime to be delivered this morning at the American Youth Hostel.
The Mayor has billed the speech "Safe Streets, Safe City II: No Surrender," following up on a program announced in February 1991 under which the city has hired 5,700 officers and put more on street beats.


Peacefully, 10,000 Protest Berlin Olympic Bid
More than 10,000 exuberant protesters marched through Berlin today demanding that the International Olympic Committee not select the city as the site for the Summer Olympics in the year 2000.
In contrast with earlier protests, the march was largely peaceful, and demonstrators said they believed that their campaign had convinced officials that Berlin would not be a good site for the Olympic Games.


At Work; Dissecting the 90's Workplace
THE American workplace may not yet be in a nasty and brutish Hobbesian state of nature, but employees know better than anyone else that it is in a disagreeable and unnerving state of turbulence.
As a result, says a far-reaching new survey, employees increasingly have doubts about the value of company loyalty and increasingly are putting their own needs and interests above their employers'.
Moreover, employees are more and more often willing to trade traditional compensation carrots like wages and benefits for flexibility and autonomy, job characteristics likely to allow them to balance their lives at work and at home.
The startling implication, especially for employers who have been depending on a workforce made tractable by fear: Companies that fail to factor in quality-of-employee-life issues when imposing total quality management or "re-engineering" or any other of the competiveness-enhancing, productivity-improving schemes now popular may gain little but a view of the receding backs of their best people leaving for friendlier premises.


Lowly Rams Remain A Mystery Opponent In Games With Giants
So many Giants were asked this week why they seem to have difficulty against the Los Angeles Rams.
Almost to the man, no one knew why.
"Well . . . ahhh . . . hmmmm" was a typical response.
"I'll get back to you on that," one player said jokingly.
The Eagles and Cowboys: now these guys the Giants can talk about for days.
The Rams?
Is there a therapist in the stadium?
"If I had the answers, I'd sure tell the coach," said linebacker Steve DeOssie.
"This has got to change."


With Leaders Leaving Office for Jail, Kentucky Works to Refurbish Image
As in many states, the spoils of office -- jobs, appointments, contracts -- are an integral part of politics in Kentucky, handed out and accepted with the wink of an eye and a knowing nod.
But over the last 18 months, two Federal investigations have suggested that Kentucky's spoils system, unlike those in many other states, is characterized more by major corruption than the usual petty excess.


Dartmouth Misses A Step Vs. Penn
Dartmouth's Jay Fiedler, the Ivy League's premier quarterback, couldn't make enough big plays today against a resolute Penn defense as the Quakers pulled off a mild upset by defeating the defending Ivy champion, 10-6, before a crowd of 13,488 at Franklin Field.
The victory put Penn in strong position in the league race after it had been projected in the preseason to finish third behind Dartmouth and Princeton.


Buffalo Youth Is Arrested In Slaying of 4 in Bronx
An 18-year-old Buffalo man was arrested at his home Friday night as a suspect in the execution-style shootings of seven people -- four of them slain and three critically wounded -- in a Bronx apartment on Thursday afternoon, the police said yesterday.
The arrest came as new details on the victims emerged, and as police investigators sought to identify a second suspect and pursued other leads in the shootings by two gunmen who invaded an apartment at 2070 Powell Avenue in the Castle Hill section and opened fire with 9-millimeter automatic weapons.


Sarah Inglis, Steven Winegar
Sarah Carolyn Inglis, a daughter of Jay and Judith Inglis of New York, was married yesterday to Steven David Winegar, the son of Juliet H. Granger and David L. Winegar, both of Bakersfield, Calif.
The Rev.
Richard D. Ringenwald performed the ceremony at the First Congregational Church in Manchester, Vt.


Russians to Seal Sunken Nuclear Torpedoes
Russian officials said last week that Moscow had decided to seal two corroding nuclear torpedoes aboard a sunken submarine next year to avoid the risk that plutonium might leak and poison fishing grounds in the North Atlantic.
The Russians' view of the threat is at odds with assessments by Western scientists who sailed last month on a joint East-West expedition to the Russian submarine, the Komsomolets.
They concluded that any radioactivity would lie on the sea floor near the vessel, rather than being swept toward fisheries, because currents around the hulk were found to be weaker than previously believed.


THE TRIALS OF BOB PACKWOOD
With regard to Senator Bob Packwood's treatment of female colleagues and assistants, the problem is not just one of sexual harassment, but is part of an ongoing examination of the quality of our leadership.
Critics of government are pressing for higher standards of conduct.


THE WORLD
When Israel and the P.L.O came to terms, they stirred new hope and new foreboding in Israel, the West Bank and Gaza.
In the holy places and in streets and alleys last week, politics and prayers evoked a bitter past and an uncertain future.


A Couple More Nudges for G.M.
To the Editor:
Regarding "Bringing a Slow-Moving Auto Giant Up to Speed" (Sept. 5), I agree with the 10 suggestions for reviving General Motors, particularly numbers 4 ("End class distinctions among the employees") and 5 ("Make pay more equitable").
However, as someone who has purchased 41 autos since I started driving in 1956, I would like to add two more suggestions:


In Vincent's Words, It's 'All Messed Up'
In some of his strongest remarks since being forced to resign as baseball commisioner, FAY VINCENT has rejected the idea that he was not strong enough on labor and has charged that the sport's central management is "all messed up."
"Being soft on labor doesn't go over," Vincent said on CBS's pre-game baseball studio show yesterday.
"It's like being soft on communism in the 1950's. I think I was right that there must be a partnership, a compromise with the players. If the Palestinians and the Israelis can get together in the Rose Garden, certainly you would think that these people can get together."


Samuel W. Hiser, Enid K. Haller
Enid K. Haller, a daughter of Dr.
Joseph L. Haller and Polly Jo Haller, both of Altoona, Pa., was married yesterday to Samuel West Hiser, a son of Harold and Marguerite Hiser of Short Hills, N.J.
The Rev.
Sue Bouder performed the ceremony at the Wyoming Presbyterian Church in Milburn, N.J.
Ms.
Haller, 33, is keeping her name.
She is a psychotherapist in New York.
She graduated from Emerson College and received a master's degree in social work from Fordham University.
Her father is an oral surgeon in Altoona and owns the Haller Management and Development Company, which owns and operates hotels and restaurants.


IT ALL COMES OUT IN THE WASH
Kathleen Norris's well-written love affair with laundry (Hers: "It All Comes Out in the Wash," Aug. 22) conjures up a single, clear message: this woman has entirely too much time on her hands.
MICHAEL POOCK Trenton


THE ANGUISHED POLITICS OF BREAST CANCER
I remember the first time I had to look at my body when I was changing the dressing.
I was more fearful of what I thought I would see than of what I actually saw.
You have made it easier for women to confront that moment, now they have some idea of what to expect.
SANDY BERGER New York, N.Y.


Cursor for Hire
HAVE Powerbook, will travel.
The explosion of interest in multimedia entertainment has created a huge demand for programmers versed in Director.
Mac-slinging cyberspace cowboys can name their fee if they know their Lingo.
Lingo is the software language from Macromedia thatlets users of Director combine different types of media in more sophisticated ways than with Director alone.
While Lingo is far easier to learn than programming languages like C or Pascal, true Lingo masters are still rare enough that most multimedia developers have a constant help-wanted sign out.
Lingo programmers are often hired as independent contractors for specific projects, but depending on experience, and previous publication, they can earn $35 to $75 an hour.


A New Order Rises At Bermuda Bowl
TWO lessons can be drawn from the NEC Bermuda Bowl competition, which ended Sept. 10 in Santiago, Chile.
One is that many small countries are now big in bridge: the Netherlands beat Norway in the final, and neither country has ever done so well in a world team championship.
One of the two American teams was eliminated in the quarterfinal, and the other in the semifinal.
Britain, France and Italy did not qualify for the event.
Also notable was the age factor.
The Norwegians had a 23-year-old player, and their average age was 34.
The Dutch averaged 32.
Their opponents were almost all older, suggesting that stamina is an important element in a 12-day marathon like the Bermuda Bowl.


Drawbacks for Couples
The President's health proposal might prove to be a mixed blessing for two-income families who now enjoy excellent health coverage at virtually no personal cost.
Page 32.


On Sunday; Staten Island Can't Secede From AIDS
THE Utopian urge is a good sign of life in any city and especially understandable on Staten Island, the leafy, hilly small-town fragment of New York that always seems to be threatening to depart by dint of ocean flotation, never mind political secession.
The island appears merely moored to the Verrazano-Narrows Bridge and freighted with salt-of-the-earth families of city cops, firefighters, sanitation workers, teachers and middling bureaucrats who like the watery commmuting to the municipal warrens of lower Manhattan.
Gently does Staten Island bob out there as a badly needed grain of humility in the larger city that is too often defined by Gotham braggadocio.


Fugitive's Surrender Ended a Year of Negotiations
When Katherine Ann Power turned herself in for a crime she committed long ago as a student radical, she ended a year of secret negotiations on pay phones, from hotels and at a rendezvous of her lawyers in San Francisco.
"It really was like something out of a John LeCarre book," said Ralph C. Martin 2d, the Suffolk County District Attorney, describing her surrender.


Right-to-Die Group Stages a Rally for Kevorkian
For most of her 33 years, Dawn Haselhuhn has battled a severe case of juvenile diabetes, a disease that her doctors say will kill her before she is 45.
She says she goes to church regularly and believes in God.
But if anything, she says she believes even more strongly in Dr.
Jack Kevorkian, the prophet of assisted suicide for the terminally ill.
She is the founder of a group called Friends of Dr.
Kevorkian, which she says has 420 members, and about 100 of them rallied today in front of the doctor's modest apartment building in this Detroit suburb.


THE DEVIL IN LONG ISLAND
I suppose that Ron Rosenbaum was trying to be humorous in his portrayal of the life styles of the not-so-rich and infamous of Long Island, but the anti-Italian comments were unnecessary. ("The Devil in Long Island," Aug. 22).
No other ethnic group is singled out for ridicule.
After telling us that Amy Fisher is a product of a "Matzoh-Pizza" marriage, Rosenbaum goes on to say: "Amy was fleeing her Jewish side (or at least in flight from her Jewish father) and seeking danger -- a walk on the wilder side of her Italian heritage -- with rough-talking, gangster-moll-manque Italian girlfriends and tough guy car culture." Excuse me?
Amy's mother looked rather quiet to me, hardly a woman to walk on the "wild side."


Jessica Chutter, Derek Berghuis
Jessica Caroline Chutter, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
S.
Donald C. Chutter of Ottawa, was married yesterday to Derek Pieter Warren Berghuis, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
William W. Berghuis of Toronto.
The Rev.
Frank Kirby performed the ceremony at the Christ Church Anglican Cathedral in Ottawa.
Ms.
Chutter, 33, is keeping her name.
She graduated from McGill University and received an M.B.A. from Harvard University.
She is a vice president in the health-care corporate finance group at Morgan Stanley &amp; Company in New York.


ALSO INSIDE
MAKING IT WORK 3 Sandra Bloodworth and Anne Marie Baranowski are the artists of the city's real underground.
And your subway stop will never be the same.
NEW YORKERS &amp; CO. 4 Can the pleating trade, an old Seventh Avenue staple, stand up to pants?
MOVIE CLOCK 12 What's showing at the local movie theaters, today through Thursday.
PLAYING IN THE NEIGHBORHOOD 14 Spend an evening in Manhattan with Flip Wilson, or stalk the wild snapping turtle in Prospect Park.
GOOD EATING Desk 14 The Theater District: where some restaurants have stars, too.
SOAPBOX 17 Why one product of the private schools went public.
Plus, are New York's Mexicans too late for Lady Liberty?


A Deal to Open Stuyvesant's Doors (and Pool)
A deal is a deal, a state judge has ruled in a victory for Battery Park City residents.
The residents were battling to use the pool and gym at the new Stuyvesant High School within the development.
But they may have to wait a bit to savor their triumph with a dip in pool.
For a year, school officials stalled the residents, despite a lease agreement with Battery Park City and a resolution by the old Board of Estimate guaranteeing them night and weekend access.


In Humble Greenpoint, a Monumental Edge
Not Brooklyn Heights, with its historic brownstones; not among the stately homes of Flatbush: the Brooklyn area with the greatest concentration of commemorative statues is humble Greenpoint.
"This is one of the most statue saturated parts of the city outside of the parks," said Peter Donohue, director of the Happy Tree Conservancy School of Monuments, a grass-roots organization charged with seating statues in the community.
"They're not all in one place where they fall over one another. They're strategically placed to bring an element of surprise and pride to residents."


NEWS SUMMARY
International 3-20  CLINTON MAY FACE BOSNIA DECISION


A Renewed Museum Looks to the Future
THE tower of the old Bruce Museum is still on its hill, notifying eastbound motorists on Interstate 95 that they have just passed the main Greenwich exit.
Otherwise, the mid-19th-century pile is a sliver of its former self, the filling in a vertical sandwich made by the new-and-improved Bruce Museum.
This $4.5 million stucco villa, which was designed by Allan Shope and Bernard Wharton to all but envelop the old building, stands on a platform of granite blocks.
With its clean lines, molding of baked white enamel, occasional classical portico and pergola entrance a la japanois, it is handsome in all respects save that of its color, which is best described as landlord yellow.
On view inside are inaugural shows that simultaneously evoke the museum's past and point to its future.
The 60 paintings in "The Enlightened Eye" indicate that while the Bruce is the home of the Connecticut Biennial, it is not about to let go of Impressionism.
"Make Way for Predators" draws attention to the natural history collection now sadly diminished by the removal of the dioramas painted by Paul Griswold Howes during his 47-year term as curator.


Donna L. Doherty, Thomas Garesche
Donna Lee Doherty, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Joseph M. Doherty of Braintree, Mass., was married yesterday to Thomas McCartan Garesche, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Thomas K. Garesche of Chappaqua, N.Y.
The Rev.
John Hopkins performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at the St.
Anselm Abbey on the campus of St.
Anselm College in Manchester, N.H.
Mrs.
Garesche is a training and development specialist at Shaw's Inc. in East Bridgewater, Mass., the owner of the Shaw's supermarkets.
She graduated from St.
Anselm, as did her husband, and received a master's degree in counseling and educational psychology from Boston College.
Her father is the president of the Joseph Doherty Insurance and Investment Company in Braintree.


Martha Can Keep Her Vineyard
To the Editor:
Jill Nelson's reflection on her experiences on Martha's Vineyard ("At Home on an Island," Styles, Aug. 22) was very descriptive.
Unfortunately, when she writes about her need for affirmation and her desire for "roots," she slides into black middle-class self-indulgence and snobbery.


Lauren Brenner, Richard Maybaum
November wedding plans have been announced by Dr. and Mrs.
Stephen M. Brenner of Scarsdale, N.Y., for their daughter Lauren Kimberly Brenner and Richard E. Maybaum, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Stephen Maybaum of Short Hills, N.J.
Ms.
Brenner, 28, is a nurse at Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center in New York.
She graduated from the University of Rhode Island.
Her father is an attending gastroenterologist at Montefiore Medical Center in the Bronx.


A Couple More Nudges for G.M.
To the Editor:
Underlying all of the major points in your article is a corporate malaise that can be described charitably as myopia and less charitably as deception.
The issue is best illuminated by G.M.'s assumptions relating to its targeted return on its pension fund.
Unless G.M. addresses its underfunded pension obligations (which are presently more than double its net worth) and then applies a reasonable target for its net return (rather than the present pie-in-the-sky 10 percent), it will face a crisis of finance and confidence that in retrospect will make its present "challenges" seem like huge opportunities.
May they get up to speed soon.
SAMUEL J. SALKIN Anchorage, Sept. 9


A Real Draw
Last weekend, crowds surged across Madison Avenue to see the new Barneys New York, at nine floors the largest specialty store to be built in the city for decades.
They provided a spectacular fashion parade, ranging from subdued styles to the extremes of coordinated couture and strategically disheveled grunge.
Upper Madison Avenue, with its many designer boutiques, now threatens to rival Fifth Avenue as the city's luxury retailing thoroughfare.


Kay Beyer, Hilary Childs
Katherine Lesley Jones Beyer, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John H. Beyer of Califon, N.J., was married yesterday to Hilary Thomas Childs, a son of Margaret B. Childs of Fairfield, Conn., and Daniel R. Childs of East Norwalk, Conn.
The Rev.
Michael Crimmins, a Roman Catholic priest and a cousin of the bridegroom, performed the ceremony at the Church of St.
Thomas More in Darien, Conn.
Mrs.
Childs, 27, is known as Kay.
A graduate of St.
Lawrence University, she is a cataloguer in the American paintings department of Sotheby's in New York, the auction house.
Her father is a founding partner in the New York architectural firm of Beyer Blinder Belle.


When It Comes to Bullies, Skin Color Doesn't Matter
To the Editor:
In regard to your article "A Stolen Bicycle, an Innocence Lost" (Sept. 12), by Rosemary L. Bray, I have two comments.


Crime
Nature is out of joint and acting weird in THE CURIOUS EAT THEMSELVES (Soho, $19.95), another strong and sobering adventure in John Straley's Alaskan mystery series.
Unseasonable heat waves and cold snaps, fish spawning before their time -- such anomalies lend credence to the local theory that after the 1989 Exxon Valdez disaster, "something was broken in the north that could never be put back together."
It occurs to Cecil Younger, the private eye in this rugged series, that the upheavals in nature might even have something to do with the rape and murder of a young woman who worked as a cook at a gold mine.
In a terribly ironic way he's right, because the victim was an environmental watchdog, secretly gathering evidence on a toxic chemical leak being hushed up by the mining company.


When the Broker Works for the Buyer
TIME was, if you went looking for a house, you went to a broker, who consulted listings and showed you what he or she thought you'd be most likely to buy.
You probably didn't know, and almost certainly would never be told, that that broker didn't represent you in any way -- that he or she was legally and contractually obligated to represent solely the interest of the seller in any transaction that might occur.
Times change.
These days, more and more home seekers are also seeking representation of their own, brokers or agents who will represent the buyer in the deal, either someone whose agency exclusively represents the purchaser, or an agency that will work both sides of the street, depending on the circumstances.


F.Y.I.
Q.
Why are people always placing classified ads on the back page of The Village Voice that say "Thank you St. Jude." A.  St.
Jude is the patron saint of hopeless cases, and prayers are made to him in the event of a huge loss or problem.
Once a prayer is answered, one is obligated to make a public prayer of thanks, such as in a newspaper, both to let others know that they too can pray to St.
Jude, and to insure that they can be helped again sometime.


Game Time


Bertrando Romps By 13 1/2 in Woodward
After flying 3,000 miles to do it, Bertrando injected some California intrigue into the contest for Horse of the Year yesterday when he led all the way to win the $500,000 Woodward Stakes at Belmont Park by a resounding 13 1/2 lengths over the hometown hero, Devil His Due.
It was four weeks after Bertrando had won the Pacific Classic and come into his own as perhaps the most formidable speedhorse on the West Coast, and maybe in the country.
And he did nothing to diminish his stature yesterday as Gary Stevens rode him to the victory that marked him as one of the leading candidates for year-end honors and championships.


No Sleeping Beauties Here
They were wide awake for the party for the author Susanna Moore, Sept. 13.


Raids on Miners Follow Killings in Amazon
A month after the first reports that Brazilian gold miners had massacred Yanomami Indians, the police are raiding illegal Brazilian mining camps across a 750-mile belt that runs through Amazon forest regions of Colombia, Venezuela and Brazil.
Stung by the news that the 16 Indians killed were in its territory, Venezuela started Wednesday to expel the hundreds of Brazilian miners who illegally pan for gold in national park areas of Amazonas state.


Another Opening


Adm. Miklos Horthy's Navy Had a Truly International Spirit
To the Editor:
"Reburial Is Both a Ceremony and a Test for Today's Hungary" (Sept. 5) incorrectly states that Adm.
Miklos Horthy "became an admiral in a country without a navy."
Capt.
Miklos Horthy de Nagybanya was promoted rear admiral and fleet commander on March 1, 1918, near the close of World War I in an empire that was about to disappear.
But the Imperial and Royal Austro-Hungarian Navy was, in that age of the dreadnought battleship, the fifth largest in Europe after the British, French, Imperial German and Imperial Russian fleets.


Washington
Fall is an excellent time of the year to tour Washington.
The cherry blossoms may be gone, but so too are spring's legions of visiting schoolchildren and the vacationing families of summer, so the lines are short.
With one new museum and another recently reopened, a rarely performed opera and a Pulitzer Prize-winning drama, there's plenty to see and do.
Fall does have its compensations.
And while a good deal was made of Queen Elizabeth II's recent decision to open Buckingham Palace to tourists for about $12 a person, the White House has been open for years and has never charged admission.
The Smithsonian Institution, one of the world's largest museum complexes, and the National Gallery of Art are also free.
In fact, the city's principal attractions -- from the Washington Monument to the Vietnam Veterans Memorial -- are free, though some will point out that we have paid for them many times over with taxes.
Sightseeing
A tour of the White House includes only the public rooms, not the President's private living quarters, so visitors aren't likely to see the Clintons and Socks.
It does include the East Room, with Gilbert Stuart's large portrait of George Washington that was rescued by Dolley Madison when the British burned down the White House in 1814.
Another Stuart portrait of Washington -- the one featured on the dollar bill -- hangs in the Diplomatic Reception Room.


English House Frozen in the 30's
The National Trust has opened its first 20th-century house in Worksop, Nottinghamshire, about 150 miles north of London.
The three-story house, an Edwardian semi-detached structure built in 1905, was owned by two brothers, William and Walter Straw, whose father had been a grocer and seed merchant in Worksop's market place.
After the death of their parents in the 1930's the brothers, both of whom have died, continued to live in the house, creating a time capsule that was in effect a shrine to their parents.
Visitors to No. 7 Blyth Grove will find virtually no traces of the last 60 years.
The calendar on the wall is from 1932, Mr.
Straw Sr.'s coats and hats still hang in the hall, his pipes hang by the fireplace with his tobacco on the mantlepiece and the store cupboards are stocked with vintage cans and bottles.
There are no concessions to contemporary life such as telephone, TV or modern appliances.
Wallpapers and fabrics are Edwardian but the furniture is primarily Victorian.


Ms. Meltzer, Mr. Ganopolsky
Deanne Blair Meltzer, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Murray Meltzer of Tenafly, N.J., was married last evening to Alexander Ganopolsky, the son of Yuly Ganopolsky and Rita Rozenberg of Brooklyn.
Rabbi Jack Bemporad officiated at the Troutbeck Inn in Amenia, N.Y.
Mrs.
Ganopolsky, who attended Wesleyan University, is a sales associate at Re/Max Properties Unlimited in Tenafly, a real estate brokerage owned by her mother, Adrienne Meltzer.
The bride's father is a clinical professor of ophthalmology at the Mount Sinai School of Medicine and an ophthalmologist at the Mount Sinai Medical Center, both in New York.


Lights, Camera, Write 'Em!
It seems hard to find a New York journalist who isn't lusting after a role in Ron Howard's movie "The Paper," which has been shooting in New York for the last two months.
The film, which stars Glenn Close, Michael Keaton, Marisa Tomei, Robert Duvall and Randy Quaid, is set inside a fictional tabloid.
So far, Pete Hamill, Jeannie Williams of USA Today, Kurt Loder of MTV, Bob Costas of NBC and Graydon Carter (right, bottom), the editor in chief of Vanity Fair, have all shot cameos.
Mr.
Carter's wife, Cynthia, got one, too.


Miss Weinberger, Mr. Williamson
Natalie Ann Weinberger, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Joseph Weinberger of South Yarmouth, Mass., was married yesterday to Robert Froman Williamson 3d, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Williamson Jr. of Miami Shores, Fla.
The Rev.
Dr.
James Todd officiated at the Pilgrim Congregational Church in Harwich Port, Mass.
The Rev.
Edward Healey, a Roman Catholic priest, took part in the ceremony.


RESULTS PLUS
GOLF  Frost's 64 Earns 2-Shot Lead  David Frost, the defending champion, shot a six-under 64 and leads D.A.
Weibring by two shots going into today's final round of the Hardee's Golf Classic in Coal Valley, Ill.
Frost, who won the Canadian Open last week, bogeyed early, hit into the rough, the sand and missed short putts.
But he still managed to emerge from a three-way tie with Weibring and Dave Barr to take sole lead at the soggy and chilly Oakwood Country Club.
Weibring shot a four-under-par 66.
He and Frost started the day 9-under and they exchanged the lead several times in what turned into a two-man competition.
Kenny Perry had seven birdies in a 64 that put him third at 199. (AP)


As a Street Goes, So Goes Style
SALVAGING 42d Street, with all its mottled charm, is the sort of task that artists, fashion designers and the owners of vintage boutiques have taken to heart of late.
In 1990, 42d Street Development Project Inc., a subsidiary of the New York State Urban Development Corporation, began reclaiming the block between Broadway and Eighth Avenue, storefront by storefront.


For Those Nights At the Theater
BECCO **  (212) 397-7597; 355 West 46th Street; $$; all major credit cards
This is the casual offspring of Felidia, the opulent Italian restaurant on East 58th Street.
The front room has a long pewter-and-wood bar, easy lighting and a low noise level.
The back room, with its peaked skylight and rough-textured walls, is more cramped, and loud.
The most sedate dining rooms are on the second floor.


Q and A
Italian Cooking Schools
Q.
I would like to go to Italy to learn about Italian cuisine.
Can you give me any names and addresses? -- P. Corrado, Chicago


Ellen K. Zanetti, Thomas E. Knox
Ellen K. Zanetti, a psychotherapist in Armonk, N.Y., and Dr.
Thomas E. Knox, a psychiatrist in Ridgefield, Conn., were married yesterday at the Century Country Club in Purchase, N.Y.
The Rev.
Mitchell Zeman, a Congregational minister, officiated.
Mrs.
Knox, 46, is a daughter of Elizabeth S. Kaufmann of Armonk, and the late Irving G. Kaufmann.
The bride is a summa cum laude graduate of Hunter College and received a master's degree in clinical social work from New York University.
Her previous marriage ended in divorce.


Wall Street; M.&amp;A. Redux, With a Difference
The mergers and acquisitions business is booming again, with a flurry of recent deals whose size recalls the heady days of the 1980's.
More than $142 billion worth of deals has been announced thus far this year, and while that is far short of the record $264 billion of 1988, the pace is picking up.
In the last week alone, at least eight deals of more than $100 million were announced -- in addition to a proposed whopping $8.2 billion merger of Viacom and Paramount.


On the Treatment Of Sex Offenders
The article "Storm Clouds Are Building at Prison for Sex Offenders" (July 25), about the prison for the treatment and incarceration of male sexual offenders, the Adult Diagnostic and Treatment Center in Avenel, gave the perspectives of several current inmates, the superintendent, a former staff psychiatrist and an attorney, but not any of the 17 psychologists on staff.
This was surprising since questions were raised about the status of the program and its effectiveness.
I am writing to add psychological perspective, most of it mine, to the discussion.
I am a psychologist who has worked there for seven years.


Ethnic Look at Love in Three One-Acters
OF all the theaters on Long Island, the only one that consistently presents new, previously unknown works is the Arena Players Repertory Theater in East Farmingdale.
Its current production is "Love Italian Style," three one-act plays by the late Robert Bernstein, who for years was producer of the Long Island Concert Hall.
"Love Italian Style" consists of two fluffy comedies, "Arrivederci!" and "The Importance of Being Rocky," and one very sad vignette, "The Burden." What binds the disparate pieces together is mother love, in the best sense of that term.


LIKE, UPTALK?
James Gorman's On Language column "Like, Uptalk?" (Aug. 15) recalls the style of a science teacher in junior high school, circa 1944.
Her rhetorical "whats" linger in my memory: "The jellyfish lacks a what? Backbone. Water molecules are a union of hydrogen and what? Oxygen. She used her singsong style to wrap up what she wanted us to remember. Her medium lingers, harmlessly? R. S. G. EARNEST Bronx


This Time, Race Is A Murkier Issue
NEARLY four years ago, David N. Dinkins took office as the first black man to lead New York City, winning by just two percentage points but pledging to be "the Mayor of all the people." Today, it is increasingly clear that not nearly all the people want him to remain in power.
In 1989, Mr.
Dinkins was a triumphant challenger who brought New York's politics in line with its demographics: It was the last of the country's 10 largest cities to elect a black, Hispanic or female mayor.
Now he is a wounded incumbent, struggling to keep from being the first black mayor of a major American city to lose his first re-election bid.


SURFACING
FASHION -- Babies as accessories: Held -- even breast-fed -- by models in fashion advertisements and layouts (as in the October issue of Glamour magazine), and even on runways (as at the Sunday by the Bay AIDS benefit at Bellport, L.I., this summer).
LANGUAGE -- "Ted": Not a proper name, but a mildly derogatory noun used by college students as a synonym for "geek" (as in, "You Ted, you.").
Doubtless, there's some connection to Ted Baxter, the patron saint of geekdom, of "The Mary Tyler Moore Show." FILM -- Repressed societies: Two recent Hollywood movies -- "The Age of Innocence" and "Remains of the Day" -- focus on the insular worlds of New York in the 1870's and Britain between the wars and how an emphasis on manners exacts a heavy toll on the spirit.


Education Is More Than Facts Alone
To the Editor:
In "Teach Knowledge, Not 'Mental Skills' " (Op-Ed, Sept. 4), E. D. Hirsch offers an interesting example of what he means.
Instead of school guidelines such as "map skills," his Core Knowledge Foundation would specify "that first graders will identify the seven continents."


Maurice Sendak Sheds Moonlight on a Dark Tale
By now, it might seem that Maurice Sendak would be used to the furor that often greets his children's books: the complaints that "Where the Wild Things Are" was subversive, its monsters too nightmarish; the criticism that "Outside Over There" dealt too sharply with the darkness of sibling jealousy; the outrage over the inclusion of a little boy's penis in "In the Night Kitchen."
But Mr.
Sendak isn't used to it at all, or at least he says he isn't.
And with the publication of his first original illustrated book in more than a decade, "We Are All in the Dumps With Jack and Guy," the 65-year-old author and artist is somewhat reluctantly bracing himself for another round of conflict over meaning, subtext, context and, as always, whether his work is even appropriate for children.


DEMJANJUK IS FREE TO RETURN TO U.S.
The long legal trail of John Demjanjuk in Israel came to an end today when a Supreme Court justice cleared the way for his immediate departure by rejecting appeals for a new war-crimes trial rooted in the "Ivan the Terrible" case.
Mr.
Demjanjuk, 73, is now free to leave, and barring unforeseen developments, all that stands between him and a flight out of Israel are travel details.
His lawyer said it might be a few days before family members in Cleveland flew here so they could take him back to the United States.


8 Are on Ballot Tomorrow in Scramble to Be Boston's Next Mayor
This was not supposed to be an election year, but the departure of Mayor Raymond L. Flynn to become Ambassador to the Vatican has left the race to succeed him wide open.
Eight candidates, including a former nun, a sheriff and a talk-show host, are on the ballot for the nonpartisan preliminary election on Tuesday.
The top two finalists will face each other in November for a four-year term.


The Art of the Outdoors: The French Celebrate A Garden Renaissance
On deftly sculptured grounds overlooking the Chateau de Chaumont and the Loire Valley, 27 landscape architects from around the world have created modest-sized gardens that reveal the variety and imagination -- and outright artistry -- of garden design today.
Open to the public until Oct. 15, the second annual International Garden Festival here is more than a feast for flower-lovers, as one might gather from the film makers, ceramists, architects and painters among its designers.
It is a bold statement about the transformation of landscape architects from humble craftsmen into artists, creators of a new kind of installation art who in some cases enjoy cult followings.
It is the latest manifestation of a public enthusiasm for gardening that has spread from Paris to this region in central France and will in November give birth to an ambitious new gardening conservatory on the grounds of the chateau farm.


Treasury Plans to Auction Bills and Notes
The Treasury's schedule of financing this week includes today's regular weekly auction of new three- and six-month bills, tomorrow's auction of new two-year notes and the auction of five-year notes on Wednesday.
According to traders, at the close of the New York cash market on Friday the rate on the outstanding three-month bill was 2.94 percent, and the rate on the six-month issue was 3.06 percent.
In when-issued trading ahead of the auctions, the two-year note was being offered at a price to yield 3.90 percent, and the five-year issue at a price to yield 4.77 percent.


INSIDE
'Political Civility' in Mexico
Electoral reform, though welcome, won't quell all criticism, especially about the North American Free Trade Agreement.
Page A10.
Emmy Winners Chosen
"Seinfeld" was chosen best comedy series, "Picket Fences' best drama and "Mystery!" best mini-series at the 45th Emmy Awards. Page C18.


The Comptroller Candidates Take Race to Pews and Streets
Vying for crucial swing votes at black churches in Brooklyn and Queens and then stepping out to street fairs on a brilliant fall day tailor-made for campaigning, City Comptroller Elizabeth Holtzman and Assemblyman Alan G. Hevesi yesterday plied voters with reasons to go back to the polls for a rare runoff election in the Comptroller's race Sept. 28.
Ms.
Holtzman, who had her first full day of campaigning since the release of a report criticizing her handling of a 1992 campaign loan, picked up a theme for the day at the Lenox Road Baptist Church in Flatbush, Brooklyn.


Rodney Redux: Hampton Again Rushes 134 Yards to Pace Giants
Giants Guard Bob Kratch knows that over the next few days, at the grocery store or the gas station, he'll probably be asked the same question a dozen times.
"I know people will come up to me and say, 'Hey, you guys going to win the Super Bowl this year?' " he said.
"I'll just tell people to keep it all in perspective."
The Giants are 3-0 for the first time since 1990, the year they won their second Super Bowl.
They are 3-0 because they have beaten some truly awful teams, but also because they have been playing some of their best football in years.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Television; Pick-and-choose cable pricing lets viewers say yes to VH-1, or no to MTV. But channels don't like it.
THINK of it as the nouvelle cuisine approach to cable TV.
Over the last few weeks, millions of cable-television subscribers have received mailings offering cable channels on what is being called an "a la carte" basis.
Instead of buying a package of channels including everything from AMC to VH-1, these subscribers can now put together their own menu of channels, paying, say, 10 cents a month to get the Home Shopping Network, or $1 a month for ESPN.
The viewers can reject any channels they don't want, and the monthly bills will presumably be lower -- for now.


RESULTS PLUS
GOLF  Two in Row for Frost David Frost shot a six-under-par 64 yesterday to win the Hardee's Golf Classic in Coal Valley, Ill., for the second straight year and win on the PGA Tour for the second straight week.
The South African won by seven strokes with a record 21-under 259 for 72 holes.
D.
A.
Weibring and Payne Stewart shared second. (AP)


Amish at Heart of 'Puppy Mill' Debate
Amos K. Stoltzfus is one of the bearded, straw-hatted Amish farmers whose 19th-century life style has been romanticized nearly as often as the Amish's horse-drawn buggies have been pictured on postcards and photographed by tourists here in Lancaster County.
But animal-rights advocates, a bit nervous about challenging this popular image, have accused Amish farmers like Mr.
Stoltzfus of breeding dogs in a cruel way and flooding the market with puppies that are sometimes maladjusted and sick.


Boy on Field 'Having Fun'
The way Jeanne Lemcke sees it, boys will be boys.
"It was a stupid thing to do," said Lemcke, whose 15-year-old son, Aaron, ran onto the field Saturday at Yankee Stadium and nullified what would have been the final out of a 3-1 Boston victory.
"But I really don't like some of the news media calling my son a jerk," she continued in a phone call.
"He was just having fun. You know how boys are. He never realized what would happen."


Columnist Remains In Critical Condition
Mike McAlary, the newspaper columnist, who underwent surgery after a car accident early Saturday, remained in critical but stable condition yesterday, said a spokesman at Bellevue Hospital Center.


3 Big Parties Suffer in Volatile Hamburg Election
In a striking demonstration of political discontent, voters in Hamburg today turned their backs on all three of Germany's mainstream parties and cast tens of thousands of ballots for parties that offer radical or untraditional programs.
The results suggested that Germans are in a volatile mood as they approach 1994, a year in which a new Chancellor and Parliament, as well as seven new state governments, are to be chosen.


Official Leaving Maryland Shop
Earle Palmer Brown, the Bethesda, Md., agency with clients that include Roy Rogers, Weight Watchers, USAir and Ciba-Geigy, announced on Friday that its president, Mark Goldstein, would leave at the end of this month.
The announcement was made in a memo to the staff from the chairman, Jeb Brown, who said Mr.
Goldstein had made big contributions to the growth and success of the agency during his 18 years there.


Economic Calendar
Listed below are the scheduled release dates for major economic indicators this week.
Monday  None  Tuesday  Housing Starts and Permits . . .
August  Wednesday None  Thursday Weekly Jobless Claims  Friday  Durable-Goods Orders . . .
August


Editorial Notebook: Beyond Tokenism in the Newsroom; Some Notes On 'Muted Voices'
I'd assumed that newspapers were making real progress toward integration until I covered the New Hampshire primary last year.
New Hampshire at primary time has more reporters per square foot than any other place on the planet.
Yet in nearly a week of crisscrossing the state, I encountered only three black reporters, all of them writing for The Times.
To be sure, other papers sent blacks to the campaign, but the numbers were underwhelming.
This bodes ill for diversity in journalism.
Political reporting is still the proving ground for the columnists, foreign correspondents, Washington bureau chiefs and managing editors of the future.
Cut off from high-profile assignments, minority reporters will find themselves less likely to advance.
The best will bolt the business.
Fewer of them in the pipeline insures whiteness at the top for a long time to come.


Market Place; A proposed Brooke Group dividend lifts some eyebrows.
RARE is the public investor who lost money overestimating Bennett S. LeBow's ability to raid his shareholders' pockets.
Now, Mr.
LeBow and his colleagues at Brooke Group Ltd. have struck a deal that would enrich themselves at the expense of investors who trusted the onetime takeover specialist.
On its face, the deal announced Friday should raise eyebrows.
Investors in Brooke, which is on the edge of bankruptcy, would receive shares in Skybox International, Brooke's trading-card subsidiary that has stacked up millions in losses since 1990.
After it goes public through this spinoff, Skybox will lose its financing and a hefty chunk of its business.
And Skybox does not meet the listing standards of any national exchange.


Essay; Clinton on Carrots and Sticks
One style of leadership says "Follow me." Another style, sensitivity-trained and consciousness-raised, says "Let's see how we can work this out together."
Bill Clinton, especially after his initial leftward lurch came a-cropper on the budget, is of the second sort: coalition-building is his way.


Girl, 7, Is Critically Hurt in Restaurant Shooting
A 7-year-old girl was critically wounded Saturday night when a gunman fired into a Chinese restaurant in Brooklyn and one of the intended targets pushed the little girl into the line of fire as he hid behind her 16-year-old baby sitter, the police said yesterday.
The girl, Chrisandre Curry of East New York, was shot once in the head and was in critical condition yesterday on a life-support system in the pediatric intensive-care unit of Brookdale Hospital Medical Center, said a hospital spokesman, Malcolm Kafka.


Gail Mautner, Robert Goldman
Dr.
Gail Holly Mautner, a resident in dermatology at Columbia Presbyterian Medical Center, was married yesterday to Dr.
Robert Todd Goldman, a chief resident in orthopedic surgery at the Hospital for Joint Diseases Orthopedic Institute.
Both work in New York.
Rabbi Brook Susman officiated at Temple Israel in Lawrence, L.I.
The bride, 28, graduated magna cum laude from Haverford College, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa, and received her medical degree from New York University.
She is the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Irwin Mautner of Brooklyn.
Her father is a dentist in Brooklyn and Manhattan.


Cuba Gives U.S. 2 Drug Suspects
Two Americans suspected of trying to smuggle cocaine were handed over by Cuba to the United States Drug Enforcement Administration this weekend and flown to Miami for prosecution.
United States law enforcement officials said the case marked the first time that the Cuban authorities had handed over suspected drug traffickers to their American counterparts.


Amy Lippman, Jeffrey Mitnick
Amy J. Lippman, a daughter of Lillian and Kenneth Lippman of Hewlett, L.I., was married yesterday to Jeffrey L. Mitnick, a son of Susan and Stanley Mitnick of Livingston, N.J.
Cantor Renee Coleson performed the ceremony at the Loeb Boathouse in Central Park.
Ms.
Lippman, 31, is keeping her name.
She is an associate at the New York law firm of Gold, Farrell &amp; Marks.
She graduated from Cornell University and received a law degree from Fordham University.


School Officials Strive to Prevent Opening-Day Chaos
With hours to go before the dawn of a new school year, officials of the country's largest school system struggled yesterday to get a final count of how many of New York City's schools would have to close or alter their schedules because of asbestos problems, and to determine how and where to teach the city's one million students.
Parents called special telephone numbers and combed news reports, sorting through confusing and sometimes contradictory information to determine just how chaotic the first day of school would be.


Collins Deflects A Rival's Comments
It was the third quarter against the Rams, and Giants cornerback Mark Collins was having another great game.
Few cornerbacks in the league have been having the kind of season he has.
But now, while trying to tackle 215-pound running back Tim Lester, Collins was flattened.
Normally, no big deal.
Just embarrassing.
But the play happened near the Rams' sideline and Rams defensive back Todd Lyght, among others, decided to talk a little trash to Collins.
Why he did so, only Lyght knows.
The Rams were down by 20-7 but he still decided to talk trash.


Patents
AN illustration included in a patent assigned recently to the Raytheon Company of Lexington, Mass., looks very much like the Patriot missile system, which became well known during the Persian Gulf war.
"It sure looks like the Patriot, doesn't it?" said Richard L. Sherman, a media relations manager with Raytheon, which built the Patriot, when he was first asked about the patent.


Continued Volatility Seen in Bonds
The bond market is perverse in many ways.
It thrives on bad news, like a sluggish economy and declines in jobs.
It even turns reassuring cliches upside down.
For example: No news is bad news in the bond market for the next several weeks.
With prices and yields apparently locked in a trading range after the sell-off last Tuesday caused by a higher-than-expected jump in inflation in August, new economic data are needed to provide a sense of direction for the market.


Giuliani Zeroing In on Crime Issue; New Commercials Are Focusing on Fears of New Yorkers
As the race for mayor moves into the decisive final weeks, Rudolph W. Giuliani has gone on the airwaves with a new set of radio and television commercials that feature the frustrated testimonials of crime-weary New Yorkers -- and also speak volumes about the campaign strategy of the Republican-Liberal challenger.
In one commercial, a restaurant worker, with a voice with the nasal essence of Brooklyn, stares straight into a video camera and punctuates wistful reminiscences by slamming his hands down in emphasis on a metal sink.
"I remember when I was a kid," he says.
"Avenue N used to be lined with people sitting out in front of their houses or in front of their apartments at night to cool off, and you don't see that in New York because everybody's afraid to come out at night."


Arabs Say Prompt Aid Is Crucial for Self-Rule
In a sight that seemed unthinkable only a month ago, once-forbidden Palestinian flags are flying these days from nearly every building in the West Bank and the Gaza Strip as well as from cars, bicycles, donkey carts, tractors and even the minarets of mosques in East Jerusalem.
But while Palestinians in the occupied territories have greeted the Israeli-P.L.O. peace accord with jubilation, there is a growing sense of the difficulty in creating some form of government and an economy virtually from scratch, in a complex relationship with a powerful, dominant neighbor.


Danes Have Not Yet Created Paradise; They Defied Hitler
To the Editor:
"The Tidy Secret of Danish Freedom" (Op-Ed, Sept. 5), Garrison Keillor's gentle putdown of Denmark and the Danes' tradition of good manners, sensible behavior, and love of good food and conversation, misses an elemental aspect of Danish character.


Polish Ex-Communists Resurgent; Voters Show Anger on Economy
Poland's former Communists took a strong lead in parliamentary elections, according to early results today.
The returns signaled widespread discontent with the market reforms that have stimulated economic growth but also increased unemployment in the four years since the collapse of Communism.
It appeared likely that power would fall into the hands of left-wing parties that intend to slow the pace of privatization and economic reform.
But leaders of the Democratic Left Alliance, headed by a member of Poland's last Communist Government, said that the election results would not give the party a mandate and that it would be unable to form a government by itself.
Ex-Communists Over 20%
Polish television reported early this morning that incomplete results indicated that the Left Alliance had won 20.5 percent of the vote counted; the Polish Peasants Party, which is allied with the former Communists, 15.2 percent; and the Democratic Union, the centrist party of Prime Minister Hanna Suchocka, 10.8 percent.


World Economies


A Miss America Tradition


People
*
Robert Reitzfeld, the chairman and chief creative officer of Altschiller Reitzfeld, New York, announced on Friday that he would leave the company at the end of this year when his contract with its parent, the Omnicom Group, expires.
A successor has not been named. *
Erik Dochtermann, the media director at Katz Marketing &amp; Media Inc., New York, was promoted to president, succeeding Hal Katz, who continues as chief executive.


Adrianne Allen, 86, A British Specialist In Light Comedies
Adrianne Allen, a winsome British actress who appeared on Broadway in the 1930's, 40's and 50's, and also acted in films, died on Tuesday in Montreux, Switzerland.
She was 86 years and lived outside Montreux.
The British newspaper The Independent said she had suffered from cancer and other illnesses.


Lesson in Politics: Role of Credibility
"THERE are two things that are important in politics," Senator Mark A. Hanna of Ohio once said.
"The first is money, and I can't remember what the second one is."
Nor, perhaps, could New York City Comptroller Elizabeth Holtzman when, to pay for a frantic television attack on an opponent a year ago, her campaign borrowed $450,000 from a bank whose sister securities company was aggressively lobbying to get more business from the Comptroller's office.


Politics Aside or Not Aside, the I.O.C. Must Make a Choice of Site
For all the Olympic movement's efforts to sell itself as an idealistic antidote to the grimy world of politics, the campaign that will end on Thursday with the selection of the site of the Summer Olympics in the year 2000 has been fiercely political.
Much of the battle has focused on Beijing's bid to be host to the Games, with China freeing three political prisoners last week to bolster its image, and the United States Congress and the European Parliament among those demanding that the Chinese capital be rejected on human rights grounds.


Judge Throws Out Convictions Of Two Men in Burglary Case
A Federal judge has thrown out the attempted-murder and burglary convictions of two men accused of belonging to a burglary ring in the metropolitan area after prosecutors reported that a law-enforcement official had coached a witness to identify one of the men and then misled the court about it.
The prosecutors did not identify the official, but a defense lawyer in the case said he was a Nassau County police detective who belonged to a task force -- with New York City police investigators and F.B.I. agents -- that had cracked the burglary ring.


Ellen Zimmerli, Gary Schatsky
Ellen J. Zimmerli, a daughter of David and Marie Zimmerli of Port Jefferson, L.I., was married last evening to Gary H. Schatsky, a son of Samuel and Phyllis Schatsky of New York.
Rabbi Rolando Matalon performed the ceremony at Tappan Hill in Tarrytown, N.Y.
Ms.
Zimmerli, 27, is keeping her name.
She is a research scientist at the New York State Institute of Basic Research in Willowbrook, S.I.
She graduated cum laude from Drew University and received a Ph.D. in psychology from the City University of New York Graduate Center.


Moynihan Calls Cuts a 'Fantasy'
Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan, the head of the Finance Committee, today questioned the Administration's promise to limit Medicare and Medicaid spending to help pay for its health care plan.
"It's fantasy, but accurate fantasy," the New York Democrat said on the NBC News program "Meet the Press." "These numbers all come out of their computer in that way. They won't last; they mustn't last."


Ahead of Schedule, Expos Move Closer to the Top
Unlike the people in and out of baseball who picked the Montreal Expos to win a division championship this season, Felipe Alou was not fooled last spring.
"We knew that was baloney," Alou, Montreal's manager, said candidly of the preseason forecasts.
"We just wanted to become a good ball club. Did the people who picked us to win know Jeff Fassero was going to win 11 games? Did they know Kirk Rueter was going to come up and be 8-0? If anybody tells me they anticipated this, I don't believe it. I think this team got hot ahead of time. I believe this club is way ahead of schedule.


Vernon Munroe Jr. Retired Lawyer, 84
Vernon Munroe Jr., a corporate lawyer who had been a senior partner in the Manhattan law firm of White &amp; Case, died on Friday at his home on the Upper East Side of Manhattan.
He was 84.
He had Parkinson's disease, his family said.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
The Federal Government is about to clear the airwaves for an expansion of wireless communications more sophisticated than anything available today.
The Federal Communications Commission will adopt rules on Thursday creating three to six new wireless networks in every city and town.
Bringing stiff new competition and probably a steep plunge in prices, these services are expected to reach millions of new customers and could eventually replace phones anchored by copper wires.  [ Page A1. ]
Top Administration economists have stoutly rejected suggestions by Fed officials that the central bank not consider cutting short-term interest rates because of fear that this could fuel an unwanted speculative bubble in stocks and bonds.
The economists said near-record stock and bond levels in no way constituted a bubble, but were rather a justified response to lower interest rates and President Clinton's deficit-reduction efforts.  [ D1. ]


Books of The Times; An Old-Fashioned Tale Knows It Is
Body and Soul  By Frank Conroy  450 pages. Houghton Mifflin/Seymour Lawrence. $24.95.
Oscar Wilde once observed that "the public is wonderfully tolerant; it forgives everything but genius." Yet the plot of Frank Conroy's irresistible new book suggests quite the opposite.
A rich novel of development with the somewhat familiar title "Body and Soul," it shows that the world can be wonderfully forgiving of genius, so forgiving as to prove a handicap.
From earliest childhood, Claude Rawlings's gift for music is recognized and rewarded.
Though he spends most of his days dreamily roaming his Upper East Side neighborhood while his unmarried mother drives a taxi, his budding interest in the piano attracts the patronage of a local music-store owner, Aaron Weisfeld.
Weisfeld steers Claude to the right teachers, who help him develop skills that lead to a job as an accompanist to the child of a Park Avenue family.


Letterman Is Keeping a Ratings Lead
Three weeks into the intensified competition among late-night talk shows, CBS is already smelling victory -- and profits.
David Letterman's new "Late Show" has stormed to a consistent lead over NBC's "Tonight" show, which has been the most successful program in the history of television.


Summer Heat
With the arrival of Fall on Wednesday, the summer of 1993 will pass into history as one of the hottest on record.
Ine indicator is the number of days 90 degrees or hotter, wich tied the all-time high of 39 set only two years ago.
July alone had 20 such days, a record for the month.
And this June, July and august tied the second highest average temperature for the period, 76.9 degrees.
Although every summer might seem hotter than the last, the average number of 90 degree-plus days has been relatively steady since the 1940's.
The real warming trend of the century occurred between 1910 and the 1940's.
A small part of this may be attributed to the increasing of heat generated and retained in the growing city, known as a "heat island" effect.


America Unplugged: Entering a Wireless Era -- A special report; F.C.C. Clearing Airwaves For Phones of the Future
America is about to start coming unwired.
A decade after cellular telephones first captured the hearts of the hurried and the well-to-do by letting them stay plugged in without being pinned down, the Federal Government is about to clear the airwaves for an expansion of wireless offerings more sophisticated than anything available today.


In Parking Violations Uproar, Good Intentions Weren't Enough
To the Editor:
"Danger for Mayor Dinkins" (editorial, Aug. 22) raised significant questions about decisions I made during our effort to evaluate privatization of New York City's parking revenue collection.


Dance in Review
'Grass and Fire and Spit'  Michelle Spencer  Bessie Schonberg Theater  219 West 19th Street  Chelsea


Whose Flesh Is It?
To the Editor:
Excuse me, but your color is showing.
"Ribbon Control," that silly article by Jamie Malanowski (Op-Ed, Sept. 4) about how every inane cause will soon sport its own colored ribbon, contains a racist blind spot you seem to have missed.
A "flesh"-colored ribbon?
And what color might that be exactly?
Would that be a pallid pink and peach, an ebony black or perhaps a nutmeg reddish-brown?
Whose "flesh" is this anyway?


Madison Avenue Goes Muslim for a Day.


Leveling Mexico's Electoral Field
Whatever expectations for democracy were awakened by the changes that President Carlos Salinas de Gortari has put Mexico through in recent years, his promise of political reform last year was modest.
And for the most part, the new laws delivered to him this weekend fulfilled it.
Mr.
Salinas had called for regulations on political-party financing, limits on campaign spending, more independent election authorities and more access for opposition parties to the media.
The laws approved by a special session of Congress on Friday include at least some measures along those lines.


Mubarak Reports Syria Wants Peace With Israel
President Hosni Mubarak of Egypt said today that Syria's leader had told him that Syria wants to make peace with Israel.
The Israeli Prime Minister, Yitzhak Rabin, after a meeting here with Mr.
Mubarak, said Israel expected Arab countries to change their attitude toward Israel because of its agreement with the Palestine Liberation Organization.


For Yanks, This Imitation Isn't the Highest Form of Flattery
The Yankees played like the Mets.
They made three errors in the first three innings.
They made three other defensive miscues that will be hidden in the box score.
They produced the stunning sum of five hits and they looked like refugees from Flushing.
The Yankees even had Frank Tanana pitching for them to complete the unenviable comparsion.
Tanana pitched admirably, but must have thought he had never been traded from the Mets.
There was right fielder Paul O'Neill making an error in the second inning.
Or was it Jeromy Burnitz?
There was third baseman Wade Boggs misplaying one grounder and bobbling another?
Or was it Chico Walker?
There was shortstop Randy Velarde flubbing a grounder in the third?
Or was it Jeff McKnight?


A New Roster for a Publishing Giant
Time Inc. is undergoing what Reginald K. Brack Jr., chairman and chief executive, describes as the biggest reorganization since the founding of Time magazine in 1923.
In case anyone missed it, the point was made to employees Friday in a booklet called "The Reinventing of Time Inc."
The reshuffling of top executives is a key component of the plan, which takes effect today.


Memory-Filled Tanks; Queens Loses 2 Roadside Landmarks
Sunset's rays have splayed through Peter Alvarez's third-floor windows in Elmhurst, Queens, day after day for the last five months; a celestial array that lifts his spirits.
The Elmhurst tanks -- those 200-foot monoliths that stood sentinel to the changing landscape of Queens and as harbingers of hair-tearing delay on the highway to Manhattan -- are down, deflated forever, their skeletal remains waiting to be dismantled.


Novell Seen To Open Unix
Novell Inc. is expected to announce this week that it will make the Unix computer operating system available free to X/Open Inc., an industry consortium that specifies open systems standards, according to a report Friday in Unigram.X, an industry newsletter.
An operating system is the set of basic internal commands that lets a computer function.
Having a standard is analogous to having one for sockets that lets a user screw in bulbs made in different wattages and by different manufacturers.


Mary R. Lee, Martin O'Hara
Dr.
Mary R. Lee, a resident in psychiatry at George Washington University Hospital in Washington, was married yesterday to Dr.
Martin James O'Hara, a cardiologist in Falls Church, Va.
The Rev.
John Zec performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at the Church of the Nativity in Fair Haven, N.J.
The bride graduated from Bryn Mawr College and received a medical degree from Columbia University.
She is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Norman Lee of Red Bank, N.J.
Her father, now retired, was an engineer at the Signal Corps Engineering Laboratories at Fort Monmouth, N.J.


He Was the Law and Order Amid Tooth and Claw
His graying hair is shoulder-length, he sports a bolo tie, cowboy boots and jeans and owns a 128-pound Rottweiler named Bailiff who accompanies him to court.
His appearance, explained Donald W. Pitts, a United States Magistrate in Yosemite National Park, is intended to relax the defendants who find themselves in a Federal court wearing shorts.


Cornelia Sherman, Robert Carrigan
Cornelia Elizabeth Sherman, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Julius H. Sherman of Great Neck, L.I., was married yesterday to Robert P. Carrigan, a son of Robert Carrigan of Haddonfield, N.J., and Elaine Geonnotti of Philadelphia.
Rabbi Sidney Zion performed the ceremony at the Pierre in New York.
The bride and her husband, both 27, graduated from Boston University.
She received a law degree from Brooklyn Law School.
Her father, now retired, was a partner in the New York law firm of Stroock &amp; Stroock &amp; Lavan.


Memorial to a Slain Son: A Law Tough On Guns
When Susan Kenney's 12-year-old son David was accidentally killed by an 11-year-old neighbor as the boys played with a loaded gun, she vowed that his death would not be in vain.
For the last four years, Ms. Kenney has worked toward that end.


Health Care Relief for Consumers
President Clinton's health care proposal, leaked to the press 10 days ago, remains confusing and worrisome.
Consumers aren't sure how they will buy insurance or choose their doctors.
Mr.
Clinton will begin to provide answers when he addresses Congress on Wednesday night.
His answers won't please everyone.
Nor will they be the last word.
Congress intends to make lots of changes.
Some political controversies have already surfaced.


The Homeless and Mayoral Politics
Rudolph Giuliani is now proposing changes in the way New York City deals with the homeless, just as Mayor Dinkins has begun to institute changes of his own.
But judging by the rhetoric from both candidates, the present debate is unlikely to yield workable solutions to this immensely frustrating social problem.
A more probable outcome is that the Mayor, worried about appearing inhumane, will continue to approach change too tentatively; and that Mr.
Giuliani, in his appeal to the middle class, will focus his energies on setting a tough tone rather than on finding credible solutions.


Danes Have Not Yet Created Paradise
To the Editor:
Garrison Keillor's experience with Danes ("The Tidy Secret of Danish Freedom," Op-Ed, Sept. 5) is different from my own.
From 1972 to 1986, I was married to a Danish woman employed by the European Community in Brussels.
During this time, I visited Denmark regularly, mainly Copenhagen and environs.
I had begun visiting Denmark in 1968, attracted by Danish design and curious about the homeland of Soren Kierkegaard.


Dance in Review
'Sotoba Komachi' Yasuko Nagamine Equitable Auditorium


Honda Set To Increase U.S. Output
The Honda Motor Company plans to make all Accords and Civics for sale in the United States at its plants in Ohio, eliminating exports from Japan of those models, a spokesman said this weekend.
The shift of production to the United States is part of a long-range revamping that has been accelerated by the rise of the Japanese yen, which has made it much more difficult for automobiles produced in Japan to sell profitably in the United States.


I.M.F. Delays $1.5 Billion Loan to Russia Because Reform Is Stalled
The International Monetary Fund has decided to delay a $1.5 billion loan to Russia because of Moscow's failure to cut its inflation rate and carry out other promised reforms.
But United States and fund officials said they were encouraged that the Russian Government has shown what they see as a stepped-up commitment to reform during the last few days, for instance in the appointment of former Prime Minister Yegor T. Gaidar as a First Deputy Prime Minister.


Rewrite at Time Inc.: Shuffling the Management
In a significant re-engineering of its corporate functions and a shuffle of its magazine publishers, Time Inc. said yesterday that it would decentralize the company, streamline management and reorganize its advertising structure.
Company officials said they hoped the plans would end the persistent rumors that its parent, Time Warner Inc., might sell the magazines.


New York Trend: Young Urban Volunteers
This is Glamour Girl Day on the fifth floor of the Frances Schervier Home and Hospital in the Bronx.
That means that Nikia Bispham, 18, wheels in a cart full of nail polishes and emery boards, tunes her big radio to a rhythm and blues station and settles down for two hours of chitchat and makeovers with an eager queue of white-haired ladies.
Ann Finning, who wants her nails painted Cameo Pink, is fretting because she needs a good shampoo and set.
The woman next to her is nodding off, but Mrs.
Finning keeps up a stream of words: what happened at happy hour yesterday, a recent fall she had, what a lovely job Ms.
Bispham is doing.


The Times Magazine Getting New Look
A complete redesign of The New York Times Magazine, which will double the amount of editorial matter in the main section of the magazine and introduce new features and columns, was announced yesterday by Arthur Sulzberger Jr., publisher of The New York Times.
The first issue will appear on Sunday, Oct. 31.
"We are reinvesting in The New York Times Magazine, building on The Times's reputation for quality journalism and exciting display," Mr.
Sulzberger said.
"The magazine is unique in that it comes to readers on Sunday, when people especially enjoy reading. The magazine will maximize this opportunity by giving something new and special to readers, while offering advertisers a spectacular all-color environment."


SEPARATISTS FIRING ON A GEORGIAN CITY
As shells fell almost constantly, the Georgian leader, Eduard A. Shevardnadze, made a desperate appeal today for immediate international help to stop an offensive by Abkhazian separatists on this encircled city in western Georgia.
Mr.
Shevardnadze, who spent the day here trying to organize Sukhumi's defense, said: "I am appealing to you from Sukhumi, not knowing if my words will ever reach you.


Once Guilty, Now Innocent but Still Dead
Tom Horn, infamous in Wyoming as the cattle ranchers' enforcer who killed a 14-year-old boy, may have been innocent after all.
But the finding of not guilty by jurors in a mock retrial of Horn's case here last week is too late to do Horn any good.
He was hanged for the crime 90 years ago.
In 1902, Horn was found guilty of the shooting death of Willie Nickell, whose family raised sheep northwest of here.
Horn, one of the best-known figures in the state's history, was a range detective and possibly an assassin, for big cattle interests.


No Headline
When Mrs.
Clinton tells me it's Easter, I start dying eggs.
JAMES CARVILLE, on the First Lady.  [ B6:6. ]


What Cities Offer For the Elderly
To the Editor:
For old and young alike, the great pleasure of city life is not in what you seek out, but in what you happen on as you go about your daily routine.
Research my colleagues and I did at the University of Chicago more than a decade ago supports this observation.


Four Stars All Form A Losing Pattern
The campaign for championships in horse racing grew murkier on both sides of the border yesterday.
At Belmont Park, the star filly Turnback the Alarm ran third in the Ruffian Handicap and the champion mare Paseana ran fifth and last.
At the Woodbine track in Toronto, Sea Hero, the Kentucky Derby winner, finished third in the Molson Million and Colonial Affair, the Belmont Stakes winner, ran sixth and last.


In Mideast, Tourism Heats Up
Luz A. Beltran, a Roman Catholic from Indianapolis, has made pilgrimages to shrines at Fatima, Portugal; Lourdes, France, and Our Lady of Guadalupe in Mexico City, but her fondest wish has long been to visit the Holy Land.
"I was afraid to go, though," she said, "because there always seemed to be trouble in the Middle East."
But about a week ago, as a peace treaty between Israel and the Palestinians seemed imminent, Mrs.
Beltran set aside plans to visit Greece and signed up for an eight-day tour next month of religious sites in Israel.
Rolling Out the Welcome Mat
Tour operators, hoteliers, airlines, cruise lines and governments in the region are racing to roll out the welcome mat, certain that millions of tourists from throughout the world will feel the same way.


Laurie S. Weltz, George Ennenga
Laurie Susan Weltz, a daughter of Audrey Rosenman of New York and S. Robert Weltz Jr. of Santa Barbara, Calif., was married yesterday to George R. vB.
Ennenga, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Thomas Ennenga of Freeport, Ill.
Jean Kotkin, the leader of the New York Society for Ethical Culture, performed the ceremony at the Loeb Boathouse in Central Park.
Ms.
Weltz, who is keeping her name, is an independent film maker in New York.
She graduated from Trinity College in Hartford and received a master's degree in film from New York University.


Sports of The Times; How Many Hits Can Hampton Take?
AS soon as Rodney Hampton arrived in the Giants' locker room after yesterday's 20-10 victory over the Los Angeles Rams, the 24-year-old running back learned that he had carried the ball 41 times.
"I jumped in an ice bucket," he was saying now.


CHRONICLE
Starring in the film "Bopha!," which opens on Friday, has particular resonance for DANNY GLOVER , and so does the cause, the Fund for Democratic Elections in South Africa, which is to benefit from a screening and party on Thursday.
"There have been a number of fine films about South Africa, but this is the first time that a major studio is releasing a film about what the situation is for Africans from their point of view," Mr.
Glover said the other day.
The film is about a black police officer, played by Mr.
Glover, whose son becomes involved with the student movement that opposes the system Mr.
Glover's character is sworn to uphold.
"It looks at the disintegration and triumph of one family from their point of view," he said.


The 1993 Emmy Winners
Here are the winners of major awards at the 45th annual Emmy Awards ceremony last night in Pasadena, Calif.:
Comedy series: "Seinfeld," NBC


The Unfairness Doctrine
Legislation pending in Congress would revive the so-called fairness doctrine, which the Federal Communications Commission repealed in 1987.
The bill would require every radio and television station to "afford reasonable opportunity for the discussion of conflicting views on issues of public importance." A laudable journalistic standard?
Without question.
An appropriate subject for Federal regulation?
No.
The Founding Fathers knew that freedom of expression is the bedrock of liberty.
They wrote: "Congress shall make no law . . . abridging the freedom of speech or of the press."


Accounts
*
Murray Ohio Manufacturing Inc., Nashville, to Sive/Young &amp; Rubicam, Cincinnati, to handle advertising, promotions and public relations for the bicycle manufacturer, previously handled by Ericson Marketing Communications, Nashville.
Billings were estimated at $2 million to $2.5 million.


One More Chapter on Way for Florida State and Miami
The orbits of Florida State and Miami, possibly, if not probably, college football's best teams, draw ever closer.
Their game at Tallahassee on Oct. 9 once more will leave one survivor to contend with Alabama, Notre Dame, Nebraska or Florida in the subsequent polls and bowls that anoint a national champion.
There is little in the way of either to distort a clash of unbeaten teams Oct. 9.
The Seminoles (4-0) need play only Georgia Tech (1-1) at home, Oct. 2.
The Hurricanes (2-0) play next in Boulder against Colorado (2-1), a cruel loser to Stanford (2-1) on Saturday night, and then are at home against Georgia Southern, a I-AA team that lost to Marshall, the I-AA defending national champion, 13-3, on Saturday.


These Yankees Are Running Out of Games, and Into Reality
Perhaps you could argue that poetic justice simply will not allow the Yankees to build momentum off of ersatz victories.
The Yankees dearly wanted that to happen yesterday in the wake of a Saturday night reprieve won after a fan-on-the-field-induced timeout opened the way for a winning ninth- inning rally against Boston.


A Declaration of Independence by Staten Island


Colombia Reports Rise in Attacks By Rebels as Politicians Campaign
In what intelligence officials and local news organizations in Colombia are calling "a black September," guerrilla groups have stepped up armed attacks in scattered areas of the country.
Violence has been especially common in the northern Santander region, where leftist rebels abducted and killed a conservative politician, Faisal Mustafa, this month.


Penelope Gilliatt Memorial
A memorial gathering to honor Penelope Gilliatt is to be held on Thursday at 5:30 P.M. at the Church of St.
Matthew and St.
Timothy, 26 West 84th Street, Manhattan.
Ms.
Gilliatt, the novelist, essayist, critic and film writer, died in London on May 9.


Torkel Opsahl, Human Rights Expert, 62
Torkel Opsahl, a Norwegian human rights expert who was directing a United Nations commission on war crimes in the former Yugoslavia, died Thursday in his office in Geneva.
He was 62 and had his permanent home in Oslo.
He died of a heart attack, Reuters reported, quoting United Nations officials in Geneva.


Corrections
An article on Friday about the New York City runoff primaries referred incorrectly to the field of Democratic candidates in the 1969 mayoral election.
Abraham D. Beame was not a mayoral candidate, but did run successfully for Comptroller.


Teen-Age Car-Theft Suspect Fatally Shot by Police
A teen-ager was shot and killed by police officers in East Orange, N.J., late Saturday night after a brief car chase and attempts by the police to arrest the youth for driving a stolen vehicle, Essex County officials said last night.
At least four shots were fired at Alquan Brown, 15, of Irvington, N.J., who was apparently unarmed, as officers wrestled with him for control of the vehicle, according to a statement released by the Essex County Prosecutor's office and the Orange and East Orange Police Departments.


An Industry Group Honors 6 Executives
The American Advertising Federation has selected six executives under 40 years old from the advertising and communications industries to be inducted into its new Hall of Achievement.
The new honor is intended to complement the group's Hall of Fame, which pays tribute to older executives.


Review/Rock; The Grateful Dead, In Stripped-Down Mode
The Grateful Dead sneaked into Madison Square Garden on Thursday night to open a six-night, sold-out stand, and did something odd: the band played a tight, concise show.
The masters of long wind produced song after song, not waiting too long between pieces, and performed two medleys; the second, consisting of "Estimated Prophet" and "Eyes of the World," and didn't really feature much of the elasticity the group's segues usually boast.
The band spent a good portion of the show performing material it will be recording soon, new songs that include "Eternity," a collaboration between the band and Willie Dixon, and sung by Bob Weir; and a series of songs by Jerry Garcia and the lyricist Robert Hunter, including "Lazy River Road" and "Between Days." The audience, having heard the material in concert after concert, sang along with the words.


Clinics for Poor Expect to Continue Being Needed
With President Clinton trying to give all Americans health insurance, places like the Washington Free Clinic might be expected to be getting ready to go out of business.
But the clinic volunteers who work out of a transformed church choir loft are not planning to pack up anytime soon.
Their patients are the ones who often fall through the cracks of the existing health care system: the working poor who lack insurance, illegal immigrants and the poor who cannot find a doctor who accepts Medicaid.
And many of these people, even strong supporters of the Clinton health plan admit, will still be out in the cold after the plan.


Bridge
Dogmatic assertions that tempt the fates are seldom punished, but one was last month at the World Junior Team Championships in Arhus, Denmark.
When the chief commentator, Ron Andersen, announced the scores in the semifinal playoffs, he included some half-imps that were based on the results of the qualifying stage.
A Danish commentator, Peter Lund, gave him some advice: "You'd better stop calling out these halves -- they never come into it, anyway."
But at the end of 64 deals the Danish team lost to the German team by half an imp, the smallest margin in the history of international play.
And the German foursome of Klaus Reps, Marcus Joest, Roland Rohowsky and Guido Hopfenheit, went on to win the world title, beating Norway in the final.
For Rohowsky it was a second world title in three years: He was a member of the German team that won the world open team title in Geneva in 1990, and is the only player ever to have won at both levels.


Brazil Gains Shutout And World Cup Entry
Using short, crisp and impeccably choreographed passes, Brazil danced around Uruguay, scoring a 2-0 triumph that moved the team into the World Cup next year.
An estimated 100,000 fans packed Maracana Stadium as Brazil kept alive its string of qualifying for every World Cup.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-11  DEMJANJUK FREE TO LEAVE ISRAEL
An Israeli Supreme Court justice cleared the way for John Demjanjuk's departure by rejecting appeals for a new war-crimes trial rooted in the "Ivan the Terrible" case.
His lawyer said it might be a few days before his family could take him back to the United States.
A1


Rules Easing for Urban Toxic Cleanups
In 1990, when the Chrysler Corporation proposed building a $1 billion Jeep plant in Detroit, the site it chose was in a neighborhood of old houses, industrial plants and abandoned lots.
But as in much of Detroit, the soil was contaminated with traces of gasoline and some heavy metals, environmental studies found.
The state was adamant that Chrysler clean up the 283 acres to pristine condition before building.
But Chrysler officials said the cost of that would have rivaled the value of the new plant.


Waiting For Peace, and a New Economy


Less Cost vs. Less Care
As President Clinton prepares for Wednesday's prime-time presentation of his plan for overhauling health care, his proposed ceiling on medical spending has emerged as one of the plan's most hotly debated aspects, prompting warnings of a degradation in the quality of care or even rationing.
Braking medical spending as sharply as the President proposes -- cutting annual growth by more than half of what it has been in recent years -- could force strapped medical groups to shortchange patients, denying them useful tests and treatments, some doctors and insurance executives maintain.
While these critics also fear for their own incomes and profits under the Clinton plan, their warnings are echoed by many economists.
Safely Squeezable
Nonsense, Administration officials say.
They and many medical experts portray an American system so replete with inefficiency, duplication, overcharging and overuse of procedures that huge sums can safely be squeezed out for many years to come.


Abroad at Home; Cause for Justice
Janet Reno has attracted remarkable public support as Attorney General because she is straight.
She calls them as she sees them, not hesitating to challenge such shibboleths as mandatory sentences and drug law enforcement methods.
Ms.
Reno's attention could be usefully directed now at a six-year-old case that I think shows the prosecutorial mind at its obsessive worst.
The Immigration and Naturalization Service is trying to push a terrorism clause in the law beyond its words -- and perhaps beyond the Constitution -- in order to deport two Palestinians who have not engaged in terrorism.


Mirer Hurt, Bledsoe Beaten In the Battle of the Rookies
There was $29.7 million worth of rookie quarterback talent on the field today, a promise of glamour in the often martial world of pro football, as Drew Bledsoe of the Patriots and Rick Mirer of the Seahawks barked out signals.
But even with the Nos. 1 and 2 players taken in the draft starting for last season's worst two teams, with a near-capacity crowd anticipating an old-fashioned aerial battle, it evolved into a sloppy game won by the Seahawks, 17-14.


CHRONICLE
GEORGE E. RUPP , the new president of Columbia University, came from Rice University, where he was president, and before that from Harvard, where he was dean of the School of Divinity.
Both are laudable institutions, "but they have no journalism schools, so we thought it would be a good idea to show him what an important role a journalism school can play especially in New York, where the media is the culture," said JOAN KONNER , dean of Columbia's Graduate School of Journalism, the other day.


Gant Has Become Braves' Time Bomb
He is always on the run, usually late, often half-dressed as he makes his way out of the clubhouse.
He might have a cellular phone in his hand or a reporter trailing behind him straining for a quick quote.
He is capable of missing the club photograph as well as his swings in the cage before a game.
Ron Gant's problems with timing, though, end when the game begins.
He has, in a season of unmatched run production in the National League, seemingly always been at the plate when it has mattered.
And there, the left fielder for the Braves has had no problems synchronizing his swing, the bat making all the right calibrations through the strike zone, perfectly meeting the baseball and usually doing something terrible to it.


METRO DIGEST
FROM FLAT ON THE MAT TO A TOP CONTENDER Six weeks before an election that as recently as a year ago few gave Gov.
Jim Florio a chance of winning, polls show the Democratic incumbent in a very close race with Christine Todd Whitman.
Both Democrats and Republicans on a national level have staked considerable political currency on the outcome of the race in New Jersey, the only state other than Virginia to elect a governor this year.
A1.
NEW YORK CITY  SCHOOL OFFICIALS BATTLE CHAOS With only hours to go before the dawn of a new school year, officials of the country's largest school system struggled to get a final count of how many of New York City's schools would have to close or alter their schedules because of asbestos problems, and to determine how and where to teach the city's one million students.
A1.


Joan Levinstein, Peter McGuinness
Joan Laura Levinstein, a researcher at NBC News, was married yesterday to Peter Owen McGuinness, a musician and composer.
Both work in New York.
Rabbi Charles D. Lippman performed the ceremony at Moran's Restaurant in New York.
Ms.
Levinstein is keeping her name.
She graduated from New York University and received a master's degree in library science from Columbia University.
She is a daughter of Reva Levinstein of Baltimore and the late Morton Levinstein.


Selling a Health Proposal: Catchwords and Humility
The Clinton Administration's toughest problem in selling a health care overhaul to the American people will be boiling down into a single evocative slogan a highly complex plan that will have very different impacts on businesses, individuals and families.
White House officials said today that if they had to distill their message to a bumper sticker, it would be one word in capital letters: SECURITY.
The point, they argue, is that the Clinton plan, above all else, offers people the security of knowing that if they change jobs, if they lose their jobs, if they suffer a catastrophic illness, if hospital costs skyrocket, they will always have the security of their health care.


Karen Akers, Kevin Power
Karen Akers, the singer and actress, was married yesterday to Kevin Patrick Power, a vice president of the Orion Network Systems, a satellite communications company in Rockville, Md.
The Rev.
Alcuin Coyle performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at St.
Paul's Chapel at Columbia University in New York.
Miss Akers, 47, frequently performs in cabarets and most recently on Broadway in "Grand Hotel." She graduated from Hunter College.


Let's Look at This Illiteracy Study
To the Editor:
Every few years, some "study" shows that Americans can't read, write, think, add or subtract.
A front-page article Sept. 9 on the latest instance reports another abysmal performance by the American public.
From a 50-minute standardized test administered to some 26,000 people, we learn that 80 million (!) Americans are so deficient in basic skills that Madeleine M. Kunin, Deputy Secretary of Education, considers it "a national problem."


Mayor Offers Details of Plan Against Crime
In a major speech in which he sought to counter his opponent's contention that he is not aggressive enough as a crime fighter, Mayor David N. Dinkins yesterday provided details of his plan to combine the city's three police forces, give officers more advanced equipment and improve security in public schools.
"I believe that by creating a climate of civility and decency and order in our neighborhoods, we'll let the pushers and the criminals know that this city is ours to enjoy -- not theirs to destroy," Mr.
Dinkins said in a speech punctuated by repeated references to his vow of "no surrender."


White House Aides Reject a Fed Rate View
Top Administration economists have stoutly rejected suggestions by Federal Reserve officials that the central bank not consider cutting short-term interest rates because of fear that this could fuel an unwanted speculative bubble in stocks and bonds.
The economists said near-record stock and bond levels in no way constituted a bubble, but were rather a justified response to lower interest rates, which they said were fostered by lower inflation and President Clinton's deficit-reduction efforts.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; With help from Dolly Parton, Revlon will try direct TV marketing.
THE Revlon Consumer Products Corporation is aiming to be the first big cosmetics company to sell lipsticks and mascara over the airwaves.
In January, the company plans to introduce a line of cosmetics named after and sold by Dolly Parton, who will star in 30-minute infomercials to sell the products.
Packaged in kits of lipstick, mascara and other products to be sold for $80 to $100, Dolly Cosmetics will be Revlon's first foray into the world of television shopping.


Bosnia Muslims and Croats Clash, Ignoring a Cease-Fire Agreement
Forces of the Muslim-led Government Army advanced against Croatian militiamen in central Bosnia and near Mostar today in intense fighting despite a cease-fire that was supposed to have taken effect on Saturday, local news reports said.
The renewed clashes dimmed hopes that a comprehensive peace plan brokered by the United Nations might win approval at a meeting of Bosnian Serbs, Croats and Muslims tentatively scheduled for Tuesday at the airport here in Sarajevo.


Dance in Review
Schonberg Dancycle 1993 Dia Center for the Arts


Survey Finds Retrenching In Law Firms
Almost half of the nation's 250 largest law firms cut their number of lawyers this year, according to a survey published today in The National Law Journal.
The firms that shrank from 1992 lost an average of three lawyers, the weekly trade magazine reported.


U.N. Leader Backs Takeover Of Force in Bosnia by NATO
Secretary General Boutros Boutros-Ghali said today that he would welcome NATO's taking full control of any new peacekeeping operation in Bosnia and that he would pass the message on to the American Secretary of State on Monday.
But the Secretary General made clear in an interview today that the cost of any such venture must be borne by NATO.
"The United Nations flag must not become a flag of convenience," Mr.
Boutros-Ghali said.


Dance in Review
Connor Dance Merce Cunningham Studio


Using His Right, Florio Rises To Become Top Contender
"The last three and a half years have not been an easy time for me," Gov.
Jim Florio said tonight as he prepared to wrap up a now well-rehearsed stump speech that ends with an appeal that he -- one of the most unpopular politicians in recent New Jersey history -- be re-elected.
At the back of the room, Paul Mucha listened intently to Mr. Florio's entreaties.


Philadelphia Orchestra Ratifies 3-Year Contract
The musicians of the Philadelphia Orchestra voted last night to ratify a new contract, spokesmen for both the musicians and the orchestra association said.
The musicians voted 73 to 32 to accept a three-year contract, averting a strike that would have meant the cancellation of the orchestra's first subscription concerts with Wolfgang Sawallisch, its new music director, and the opening of Carnegie Hall's season on Thursday.
The concerts are to take place as scheduled.


Arafat Calls P.L.O. Pact With Israel a 'First Step' to a Full Pullout
The P.L.O. chairman, Yasir Arafat, promised Arab foreign ministers today that the peace accord with Israel was only the "first step" in an effort to regain lands controlled by Israel, including East Jerusalem.
Mr.
Arafat pledged to the Arab League ministers, whose countries shelter some three million Palestinian refugees, that Palestinians who fled after 1967 would eventually be allowed to return home.
Israel occupied the West Bank, Gaza Strip and Arab East Jerusalem in the 1967 war, and later annexed East Jerusalem.


Dividend Meetings


Cunningham Beats Clock, and Redskins
When Randall Cunningham plays at his best, there is no more exciting player in pro football.
Today, he was at his best as he passed and ran the Eagles to a touchdown with 4 seconds left to beat the Washington Redskins, 34-31.
Cunningham, the best scrambling quarterback in the sport, is also playing smarter.
He displayed that wisdom on the winning drive, which covered 10 plays and ate up 83 yards in 1 minute 50 seconds, and especially on the 10-yard winning pass to Calvin Williams.
It was the third Cunningham-to-Williams touchdown pass of the game, the first two having covered 80 yards and 9 yards.


Susan K. Johnson, Media Executive, 46
Susan K. Johnson, the senior vice president for account management at Mediamark Research Inc., a Manhattan-based media and market research company, died on Friday at the New York Hospital Medical Center of Queens.
She was 46 and lived in Brooklyn Heights.
The cause was meningitis, said her husband, Leonard Gelstein.


Critic's Notebook; Changing a Pageant and a Series
Things change.
Especially on television, which can head in a new direction at the drop of a ratings point or marketing ploy.
Current prominent examples include the "Miss America Pageant" -- its much ballyhooed "whole new look" revealed on Saturday in an "NBC Entertainment Spectacular" that ran from 10 P.M. to well past midnight -- and tonight's return of "Love and War," on CBS at 9:30.
Annie Potts takes over the lead vacated by Susan Dey, whose character has fled to Paris.
Why?
Someone speculates that "maybe she had mileage that was about to expire." No problema.
Thanks largely to feminist campaigns, the "Miss America Pageant," formerly "The Miss America Beauty Pageant," has spent the last several years trying to shuck its unfortunate, and not entirely deserved, bimbo image.
Traditional jiggle has decidedly given way to a pronounced emphasis on scholarship and achievement.
Recent NBC news programs, shamelessly hawking the broadcast, have been prattling on endlessly about the contest's being brought into the 90's, not a bad idea inasmuch as we are now well on our way to the decade's midpoint.


Turner and QVC in Talks On Joint Offer for Paramount
The likelihood that there will be a competing offer to Viacom International's $8.2 billion bid for Paramount Communications rose during the weekend, as Barry Diller, chairman of the QVC Network, and Ted Turner, chairman of the Turner Broadcasting System, met to discuss the possibility of a combined proposal, people close to the talks said yesterday.
Both men were staying at the Waldorf Astoria Hotel in New York.


Equity Issues This Week
The following equity and convertible debt offerings are expected this week:
A Pea in the Pod Inc., Irving, Tex., an initial public offering of 1.56 million shares.
Robertson Stephens.


Critic's Notebook; How an Opera, Guaranteed to Fail, Can Be Seen as a Moral Triumph
The New York City Opera's production of Michael Tippett's "Midsummer Marriage" was not a success, but its very existence is a moral triumph of sorts.
In the midst of a 50th-anniversary season more apprehensive than celebratory, Christopher Keene, the company's general director, has made room for the new, the neglected, the unusual and the troublesome.
Mr.
Keene has only occasionally had the resources, concrete and human, to do these operas well.
He also knows they are bad for business.
So in one way or another, the failure of "The Midsummer Marriage" was built in from the start: either failure in terms of operatic quality or failure in terms of audience response, and in this case both.
Admirable goals and self-defeat have been frequent partners during the City Opera's history.
To use the old expression, the company can't win for losing, and to reverse the thought, losses like this one can be made to seem like victories.


Broadway Strike Prospects Diminish
Significant progress was reported yesterday in contract talks between Broadway producers and Local 802 of the American Federation of Musicians, diminishing the likelihood of a strike that could close 9 Broadway musicals and keep 11 more from arriving this season.
Several participants in the negotiations, who spoke on condition of anonymity, said that multiple areas of agreement, developed in Friday's sessions, were expanded in yesterday's talks, which began at 1 P.M. and lasted more than six hours.


Havana Journal; Moneybees in Castro's Hive, Independently Busy
From a cluttered living room that doubles as his workshop, Eduardo, an electrical engineer, offered a radical prescription for Cuba's wrecked economy.
"Free the people to work for themselves and get the state off our backs, and Cuba will be all right," he told a foreign visitor as he demonstrated the satellite dishes that are the fruits of his entrepreneurial vision and his livelihood.


Corrections
A picture caption in Weekend on Friday with the "On Stage, and Off" column misidentified the play in which the actor Tom Bosley last appeared on Broadway.
His last Broadway appearance was in 1965 in "Catch Me if You Can," his fourth Broadway show after he won a Tony Award in 1959 for the title role in "Fiorello!"


So Who Will Give Umpires Safe Call?
When a 15-year-old boy spurted onto the field at Yankee Stadium in the ninth inning Saturday and disrupted what would have been the final out of the game between the Red Sox and the Yankees, Umpire Drew Coble had the fearful feeling he always has in those surprise situations at this fabled park.
It is a feeling that caused Coble to wonder if the overzealous fan had a weapon.
It is a feeling that has caused Coble to ask Yankee Manager Buck Showalter to emerge from the dugout and argue only if it is absolutely necessary, so fans do not get incited.
It is a feeling that has caused Coble, who is a crew chief, to wonder if he and his fellow umpires are at risk.


Lillian de la Torre Is Dead at 91; Wrote Mysteries Based on History
Lillian de la Torre Bueno McCue, an author who specialized in historical mysteries both fictional and nonfictional, died Monday at a nursing home in Colorado Springs, where she lived.
She was 91.
Her pen name was Lillian de la Torre, a part of her maiden name.


TRANSACTIONS
WEEKEND Baseball American League  TEXAS RANGERS -- Designated Rick Reed, pitcher, for assignment.
National League


What's the Call?


Interpublic Unit Buys Stake in Crane
EC Television, a European barter syndication unit of the Interpublic Group of Companies that produces and distributes European versions of television shows like "Jeopardy!" and "Wheel of Fortune," has bought a minority interest in Crane Media Sales Inc., a national cable television advertising sales representative company in New York.


USAir Adds Vacation Tour Service
USAir announced yesterday that it had created packaged tours to vacation destinations, something other major airlines have had for years.
It did so in a big way, creating 2-to-21-day packages to 27 destinations, including Paris, London, Frankfurt and Mexico City.
"We're perceived as a business airline," said Susan Young, a USAir spokeswoman, "but we're the leading carrier from the Northeast to Florida, and we have the most intra-Florida flights of any airline."


Move Gains to Liberalize U.S. High-Tech Exports
Four years after the fall of the Berlin wall, Western nations are still tightly restricting the sale of sophisticated telephone and computer equipment to Russia, China and Eastern Europe, even though much of this equipment has little or no military use.
The restrictions are enabling countries like Israel and Taiwan to gain competitive advantage over the United States.
Congress and the Clinton Administration now want to revise Western trade rules to allow the increased sale of such high-technology equipment.
The stakes are enormous.
In telecommunications alone, for example, China is planning to spend some $30 billion and Russia is planning to spend as much as $15 billion to build national networks that deliver basic telephone service.


Landfill Operators Charged in Dumping Scheme
The operators and users of two landfills, in New York and Pennsylvania, were charged yesterday with illegally dumping toxic waste and diverting profits from the scheme to top Mafia figures.
According to a 60-count Federal indictment, the 14 defendants, including five people affiliated with the Lucchese crime family, paid more than $500,000 in 1989 and 1990 to the Lucchese boss, Vittorio Amuso, and the underboss, Anthony S. (Gas Pipe) Casso, who were fugitives at the time.


F.T.C. Adds Safeguards For Shoppers
The Federal Trade Commission yesterday extended the same safeguards to consumers who shop by telephone, fax and even computers that it has offered for nearly two decades to those who order by mail.
The action provides requirements that merchandise ordered by telephone be shipped within 30 days or the time specified in an advertisement.
The rules also give consumers, who lose an estimated $253 million annually to unscrupulous telephone marketers, the option of canceling orders and receiving refunds for products that cannot be promptly shipped.


Turner Says Put Politics Where It Belongs
"I don't like to see international sporting events turned into political football," TED TURNER, chairman of Turner Broadcasting said yesterday at Rockefeller Center, where he in town promoting his own 1994 Goodwill Games.
"I don't like boycotts. That's what the political arena is for."
Turner was responding to the prospect that China might consider boycotting the 1996 Atlanta Games if it does not win its bid to be host to the 2000 Games.


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt *
Arizona Public Service Co., a subsidiary of Pinnacle West Capital Corp., is offering $100 million of 5 3/4 percent first mortgage bonds due in 2000 at 99.884 to yield 5.77 percent through Salomon Brothers.
The noncallable bonds are rated Baa-2 by Moody's Investors Service, BBB by Standard &amp; Poor's and BBB+ by Duff &amp; Phelps. *
Kentucky Higher Education Student Loan Corp. is tentatively offering $140.4 million of tax-exempt insured student loan revenue bonds through underwriters led by Paine Webber.
Serial bonds in series A and C are priced to yield from 3.60 percent in 1994 to 5.05 percent in 2002.
Series B nonds, which for some investors may be subject to the Federal alternative minimum tax, are priced to yield from 4.90 percent in 2001 to 5.30 percent in 2005.
All the bonds are rated A-1 by Moody's and AA- by S.&amp; P.


Pact's Fate in Hands of Israeli Rabbi
For the next few days, Israeli eyes will be focused on the thumbs of a long-bearded rabbi born in Iraq 73 years ago and given to wearing long robes and dark sunglasses.
He is Rabbi Ovadiah Yosef, a former Sephardic Chief Rabbi of Israel who is spiritual guide to the small but highly influential religious party known as Shas, a Hebrew acronym for Sephardic Guardians of the Torah.


ASBESTOS IN THE SCHOOLS: Staten Island; Tottenville High: A 25-Minute Day
For John Raschella, a 16-year-old junior at Tottenville High School on Staten Island, the first day of school began at 10 A.M. and lasted all of 25 minutes.
"They said they were going to tell us about the S.A.T.'s," said Mr.
Raschella, who was waiting for a ride back home.
"So they basically just said, 'They'll be in October.' Then the principal got up, said a few words and that was it. We all just looked at each other and sort of walked out."


China Doesn't Deserve the Olympics
The International Olympic Committee meets in Monte Carlo this week to pick the site for the Summer Games in the year 2000.
Of the five cities seeking the prize, Beijing has the weakest claim.
The Chinese have been anything but subtle.
Their chief lobbyist has threatened a boycott by China's athletes of the 1996 Atlanta Games if Beijing isn't picked.
But if Beijing gets the nod, the Chinese Government says, it will put the names of I.O.C. members on a monument at the Great Wall.


Throwing Over the Chessboard
During the cold war, chess title matches became surrogate struggles between East and West, as between Bobby Fischer and the Soviet champion, Boris Spassky, in Iceland.
Or between loyalists and dissidents within the Soviet Union, as in the bitter contest between the titleholder, Anatoly Karpov, and his rebel challenger, Gary Kasparov.
Now ideological fever has abated and all is confusion as grandmasters rebel against the chess establishment itself.
Two world title matches are under way.
In the Dutch town of Zwolle Mr.
Karpov, now a former champion, is pitted against the Dutch grandmaster Jan Timman for the official title (purse: $1.4 million).
They are being upstaged by Mr.
Kasparov, the reigning champion, at London's Savoy Theater; his opponent is Nigel Short, a 28-year-old British prodigy (purse: $2.6 million).
But Mr.
Kasparov's other opponent is FIDE, the International Chess Federation, founded in 1924.


Robert E. Healy, 89, Ex-Executive At Major Advertising Group, Dies
Robert E. Healy, a former chief executive of the Interpublic Group of Companies, an advertising holding company, died on Saturday at his home in Palm Beach Gardens, Fla.
He was 89.
He had been in failing health for some months, said his son Edward W.


Georgian Regional Capital Under Aerial Attack
Two SU-25 fighter bombers flying from bases north of this beleaguered western Georgian city buzzed the Black Sea coast today, then bombed Georgian positions.
And Abkhazian heavy artillery continued to bombing the city center, raising the number of dead and wounded into the middle hundreds.
Because the separatist Abkhazian forces are not known to have planes, the jets are suspected of having flown out of Russian-controlled bases in northern Abkhazia or air bases in southern Russia.
The Georgian leader, Eduard A. Shevardnadze, has accused Russia of complicity in the Abkhazian attacks.


The Tale of a Running Shoe Gone Bad
Nike took the blame yesterday for QUINCY WATTS's shoe falling apart during the 400-meter finals of last month's world championships.
"We really don't have any excuses for that," TOM CLARKE, general manager for the shoe company, told shareholders at their annual meeting.
He made the comment in response to a question from a shareholder.


Oakley and Knicks To Trade Some Punches
The state of Charles Oakley's mind will be on the agenda tomorrow when the Knicks' power forward sits down to meet with the team's president, Dave Checketts.
Oakley, who concluded last season by saying he was unhappy about his role with the Knicks, said Saturday night in Detroit that Checketts had suggested that he come in when it was convenient.
Oakley has a personal appeareance scheduled for Friday at Macy's in Manhattan.


Syrian Leader Plays a Waiting Game
In the 23 years since he came to power in Syria, President Hafez al-Assad has built one of the most stable and autocratic governments in the Middle East, a fortress of secularism and socialism in the middle of an increasingly turbulent Islamic sea.
But for all his success in insuring domestic order, the 65-year-old Mr.
Assad is finding the regional political terrain a bit slippery these days, now that the Palestine Liberation Organization has suddenly and unexpectedly made peace with the Israeli enemy.


First Lady Rebuts Health Plan Critic
Hillary Rodham Clinton told more than 200 lawmakers today that the Clinton health care plan did make budgetary sense even though it was challenged Sunday as a "fantasy" by the chairman of the Senate Finance Committee.
A participant at the closed-door meeting with legislators of both parties said Mrs.
Clinton told the group that major savings could practically be made in Medicare and Medicaid -- not by cutting spending but by slowing the rate of growth of both programs.


CHRONICLE
Lieut.
PAULA COUGHLIN of the United States Navy said she had no regrets about coming forward with accusations that she and dozens of other women in the Navy and the Marine Corps had been sexually assaulted and verbally abused by fellow officers at the 1991 Tailhook Association convention of naval aviators in Las Vegas, Nev.
"Life for Paula Coughlin after going public is no picnic," she said on Saturday in Richmond, where she was being honored by the Virginia Press Women as Newsmaker of the Year.


World Series Time North of the Border?
With the Mets already eliminated from contention for the National League East championship and the Yankees at the end of their overachieving run for the American League East title, it is safe to conclude that there will be no Subway Series this season.
Prospects for an all-Canadian World Series, on the other hand, have leaped into reality.
They wouldn't even have to bother playing "The Star-Spangled Banner" before the October games in Toronto and Montreal.


2 Teams See Signs of What May Be Dark Matter
TWO scientific teams reported yesterday that they had independently observed what could be the first evidence that some of the invisible, or dark, matter making up much of the mass of the universe exists in the form of stillborn or extremely dim stars at the edges of galaxies.
Such objects, known as Massive Compact Halo Objects, or MACHO's, have been hypothesized for years as likely candidates for dark matter.
The acronym was chosen to contrast with theories invoking exotic subatomic particles as yet undiscovered bearing the name WIMP's, for Weakly Interacting Massive Particles.


Sacca Could Be Saying His Goodbyes
Unbeaten and ninth-ranked Penn State may have a quarterback problem on its hands: JOHN SACCA is hinting he may transfer.
Sacca, a junior with one year of eligibility left after this season, hinted after being benched during Penn State's 31-0 victory over Iowa that there was a "very strong possibility" he wouldn't play against Rutgers on Saturday.


The Yanks' Call: Two Strikes on the Bronx
A lawyer for the New York Yankees urged Bronx leaders yesterday to advance a "credible and competitive" plan to retain the team at Yankee Stadium after 2002, but said the borough "faces an uphill battle" because of failures by New York City to live up to its current 30-year lease with the team.
"Based on the past 20 years, the Yankees' management and fans would be naive to believe that the city and state of New York will quickly or easily formulate a realistic proposal," Melvyn Leventhal, the lawyer, told a public hearing at the Stadium convened by State Sen.
Pedro Espada, Democrat of the Bronx.


Review/Rock; Almost on Broadway, Meat Loaf Puts On a Show
Of all the rock musicians who have performed at legitimate theaters, Meat Loaf most belongs there.
His songs, written by Jim Steinman, are rock as conceived from a musical-theater perspective: bombastic, sentimental, outlandish, but still orderly.
At the Hudson Theater on Friday night, when Meat Loaf played his first of four shows, earplugs were handed out at the door.
On the 1978 album "Bat Out of Hell" (Epic), Mr.
Steinman borrowed chord progressions and keyboard pomp from Bruce Springsteen (even hiring Roy Bittan, the E Street Band's keyboardist) and added a little Elton John bounce, coming up with extended songs, every one a would-be show stopper, that treated teen-age horniness as an earth-shaking urge.
The album sold more than five million copies, and stayed on the charts for years.
If it was a campy exaggeration of heterosexual ardor, no one seemed to mind.


Congress Is Urged to Pass Gun Control Bill


CHRONICLE
When the photographer BRUCE DAVIDSON agreed to take pictures for a brochure for the Parsons School of Design last spring, he could not have guessed where the assignment would lead: to the chairmanship of the school's photography department.
"I always thought that art schools were sort of frivolous, but when I did the catalogue and looked at the faces of the students -- they were so open and worked so hard -- I changed my mind," he said yesterday.
"Parsons asked me if I would be interested in teaching. I said I had taught from time to time, and they said, 'Well, would you be interested in becoming chairman?"


Browns 3-0; Faithful Are Perfect, Too
At 8:30 A.M. yesterday, when the Cleveland Browns' ticket office opened, the telephones were ringing.
Three hours later, 700 more tickets had been sold for the Nov. 7 game against the Denver Broncos, leaving 8,300 available in a stadium that seats 78,512.
If you'd like to see the unbeaten Browns play at home before that, forget it.
The games against the Dolphins and the Steelers are sold out.
Cleveland has renewed its love affair with the Browns.
It was exciting enough a week ago when the Browns upended the San Francisco 49ers, 23-13.
Then, on Sunday against the Raiders in Los Angeles, the Browns outdid themselves.
With the Raiders smothering the immobile Bernie Kosar, Vinny Testaverde relieved with 12 minutes 52 seconds left in the game and steered the Browns to two touchdowns in the last five minutes.


Bruce Ferden, 44, the Conductor Of 2 Philip Glass Opera Premieres
Bruce Ferden, a conductor who made his Metropolitan Opera debut last October with the world premiere of Philip Glass's opera "The Voyage," died on Sunday at New York University Medical Center in Manhattan.
He was 44 and lived in Manhattan.
The cause was AIDS, said his companion, Frank Ream.


Long-Lost Field Notes Help Decode Treasure
FROM the outbreak of World War II until the end of the cold war, several thousand artifacts of ancient Egypt lay in Chicago and Cairo museums, a treasure haunting and intriguing yet beyond scholarly interpretation.
The pieces were like cryptic messages from the past whose code books had been lost to archeologists.
The statues, jewelry, objects of erotica and various religious symbols were excavated in the 1920's and 1930's by American and German archeologists working at Medinet Habu, a major site of temple ruins on the west bank of the Nile River at ancient Thebes, known today as Luxor.
As is the usual practice, the archeologists kept meticulous notes of exactly where each relic was found -- in which buildings, at what depths in the sediments and next to what other artifacts.
Without such records, archeology is little more than a treasure hunt, and the materials cannot be reliably dated or their function and meaning reasonably surmised.


Radical New View of Role of Menstruation
THE menstruating woman has been variously vilified, feared, pitied or banished from the village to spend her bloody days in solitude.
Even the standard medical explanation connotes loss.
A woman bleeds each month as a way of discarding her unfertilized eggs and the uterine lining that had been optimistically fattening up in anticipation of a baby that never arrived.
Now an evolutionary biologist proposes a radical new way of viewing menstruation, one that gives the ordinary business of having a period an active and salutary spin.
The scientist, Margie Profet of the University of California at Berkeley, suggests that menstruation evolved as a mechanism for protecting a female's uterus and Fallopian tubes against harmful microbes delivered by incoming sperm.


What's Wrong With Laser Surgery for Snoring
To the Editor:
Much publicity has surrounded a newly promoted procedure for treating the common complaint of snoring.
Laser surgery for snoring (laser-assisted uvulopalatopharyngoplasty) has been promoted as an effective, low-risk procedure.
There has been little mention, if any, of the potential risks or ineffectiveness of laser surgery for patients who have serious disorders associated with snoring, such as sleep apnea, the temporary stopping of breathing during sleep.


Kasparaitis Hopes to Do His Pounding With Fewer Pounds
Last weekend, after the Islanders opened their exhibition season with two games in two nights, most of the players were given the next day off.
"Not me," said Darius Kasparaitis, their second-year defenseman.
"I had to ride the bike. Lose weight. I'm O.K. I'm going down."


In China, Journalism Becomes a Scandal
To the Editor:
In "A Giant's Evolution" (front page, Sept. 6 and 7), Nicholas D. Kristof sums up comprehensively and incisively nearly five years in China as Beijing bureau chief.
He touches only lightly on the corruption in China's journalistic profession ("and journalists demand payoffs for attending corporate news conferences").


Two A.T.M. Networks Announce Merger Plans
Two of the largest cash machine networks in the Northeast said yesterday that they had agreed to merge.
The New York Switch Corporation, which runs the NYCE network, and the Yankee 24 Network will combine to form a network of 13,000 automated teller machines from New Jersey to Maine.
The move is part of a rapid consolidation among banking networks, which are becoming more aggressive in seeking profits from electronic payments.
When they were formed about a decade ago, cash machine networks were simply associations of banks that each agreed to share their A.T.M.'s with each other.


Classical Music in Review
Schrade Family  Alice Tully Hall
Schrades of every age and description swarmed around the two pianos onstage at Sunday afternoon's recital.
Robert, Rolande, Randolph, Rorianne and Robelyn (don't ask me to keep them straight) joined their in-law David James and the youngest of this pianistic family, Lynelle James, in a program that made its way from one end of the duo repertory to the other.


Woman Is Slain in Bronx
A woman was shot and killed in her apartment in the Bronx yesterday, leaving her 2-year-old son crying but unhurt in another room, the police said.
The woman, Sophie Blair, 22, was shot once in the head, said Officer Andrew McInnis, a police spokesman.
Her child, whose name was not released, was found unharmed by officers who responded after neighbors heard the shooting on Creston Avenue in University Heights around 4 P.M.
The police declined to release other details.


Six Accused In a Scheme For Phones
The Bronx District Attorney announced yesterday the arrests of six men he said were high-tech thieves who cruised city streets scanning the airwaves for legitimate cellular phone numbers that they then programmed into unauthorized phones responsible for millions of dollars of fraudulent calls.
The unauthorized phones, known as "clones," were sold for $250 apiece and used for a month or two to run up thousands of dollars worth of calls.
Then they could be replaced with another clone.
Industry executives said the arrests represented the breakup of one of the largest such frauds in the city, which sees about $30 million in stolen cellular phone service each year.


INSIDE
Curbing Chemicals in Food
In a fundamental environmental policy shift, regulators will propose sharply reducing the use of the agricultural chemicals that find their way into Americans' food.
Page A19.
First Tailhook Case Dropped
The Navy dropped charges against the first officer scheduled to go on trial in the Tailhook sexual harassment case.
Page A14.
C.
L.
Sulzberger Dead at 80
C.
L.
Sulzberger, a prize-winning foreign correspondent for The New York Times for nearly 40 years, was the author of two dozen books.
Page B9.
Empire May Not Get Increase
New York's Insurance Commissioner said Empire would probably not get a rate increase next year.
Page B1.


Plan Offered By Giuliani On Hospitals
Citing efforts to scale back government in cities and states across the country, Rudolph W. Giuliani, the Republican-Liberal candidate for mayor, proposed yesterday that the city shift control of as many as four municipal hospitals to nonprofit groups.
In a breakfast speech to a forum of business groups, he also said Kennedy International Airport should be turned over to private concerns.


W. McNeil Lowry Service
A memorial service for W. McNeil Lowry is to be held at 5 P.M. on Monday on the promenade of the New York State Theater at Lincoln Center.
Mr.
Lowry, a nationally influential arts consultant, started major foundation support for American ballet and regional theater when he was a vice president at the Ford Foundation in New York.
The State Theater is the home of the New York City Ballet, where Mr.
Lowry was a board member before serving, from 1988 to 1991, as president of the San Francisco Ballet.
He died on June 6.


COMPANY BRIEFS
ALBERTO-CULVER CO., Melrose Park, Ill., has acquired Beauty Biz Inc., a unit of Helen of Troy Corp., El Paso.
The terms of the deal were not disclosed.
ARDEN GROUP INC., Compton, Calif., said its wholly owned subsidiary, Telautograph Corp., had completed the sale of its communications equipment business to Danka Industries for $36.5 million in cash.
CURAFLEX HEALTH SERVICES INC., Rancho Cucamonga, Calif., said it had signed an agreement to acquire Medical Management Services of Omaha Inc.
The terms were not disclosed.


Ya Gotta Believe, 1993: Can Yanks Win 11 of 11?
Don Mattingly was being hopeful and truthful when he said Sunday that the Yankees needed an 11-game winning streak.
The Yankees have 11 games left in a season in which their longest winning streak has been six games.
But Mattingly boldly talked about them galloping into October without losing again.
He was being very hopeful.
Can it happen?
It is very, very unlikely.
With a suspect rotation, ragged relievers, a hole in the middle of their lineup and an annoying slump at the most inopportune time, the Yankees might not win half their remaining games.
The Bronx has unexpectedly been one of the stages for this wacky American League East race, but New York's splendid chase has stalled and the division title is about to become Toronto's again.


U.S. TO CONTRIBUTE $250 MILLION IN AID FOR PALESTINIANS
Secretary of State Warren Christopher announced yesterday that the United States would provide $250 million over two years to help carry out the Israeli-Palestinian accord and called for an early international conference to more than match the American pledge.
The $250 million is only a preliminary estimate based on hasty conversations with Congress over the weekend, other senior Administration officials said.
The United States is expected to present a more comprehensive five-year aid package at the conference, which is tentatively scheduled for Oct. 1 in Washington, they added.


Disorder on Day 1 in New York Schools
Most of New York City's public schools reopened smoothly yesterday amid a general sense of relief that the asbestos delay was over, but for thousands of students still locked out of class and for their beleaguered parents, the day brought deep confusion, disappointment and frustration.
More than 100 school buildings remained closed, representing 10 percent of the system, more than double what officials had expected.
Ninety others were on reduced or rearranged schedules because so many rooms had to be sealed until asbestos inspections or cleanups could be completed.
Telephone Service Affected
Two school districts -- District 12, in the East Tremont section of the Bronx, and District 19, in the East New York section of Brooklyn -- decided not to open any of their schools despite entreaties from central headquarters.
But District 12 announced last evening that only 3 of its 28 schools would remain closed today.
District 19 said that 2 of its 27 schools would not open.


A Board Facing Special Pressures
It's a new era for Paramount Communications' board, a diverse 15-member body that will ultimately decide the company's fate.
Corporate boards were once the hand-picked choices of corporate managers and often helped top executives hold on to their jobs, but the Paramount board will be weighing competing bids for the company at a time when shareholder advocacy and new proxy rules have given boards a forceful new visibility.


First-Quarter Nike Income Declined 7%
For all their help hawking shoes and athletic gear for Nike Inc., Michael Jordan, Andre Agassi and other celebrities were powerless against unfavorable currency exchange rates, sluggish European economies and changes in United States tax laws.
Because of those factors, the athletic apparel company said yesterday, earnings for the first quarter fell 7 percent, to $114.1 million, or $1.49 a share, compared with the corresponding period last year.


Joint Venture In Computers
Sun Microsystems Inc. and the Amdahl Corporation said today that they had reached a joint development agreement to allow customers to integrate Amdahl mainframe computers with Sun work stations and servers.
The agreement includes product development, sales and service.
Under the agreement, Amdahl and Sun will jointly develop and produce extensions of Sun's Solaris software, which is a version of the Unix operating system, aimed at the high end of the commercial computing market.


Magic Could Get 'Dream Team' in Canada
The National Basketball Association is heading across the Canadian border, with an expansion franchise all but certain to be awarded to Toronto, and possibly to Vancouver.
And when Toronto gets a franchise, none other than MAGIC JOHNSON may be among the owners.
Johnson was in New York yesterday to help represent his group -- Cohl-Ballard group -- in its bid to land the Toronto franchise.
In all, three Toronto groups are competing for an N.B.A. expansion team, and all made their pitches yesterday to the league's expansion committee, which is headed by JERRY COLANGELO, the president of the Phoenix Suns.


The Vital Video Adapter Links Brain and Display
IN our last episode, the intrepid computer shopper hacked through the dense thickets of computer jargon and determined that the best choice for a general-purpose PC monitor was (take a deep breath) a 15-inch or larger non-interlaced Super VGA monitor with a dot pitch of .28 millimeter or less and a refresh rate of at least 70 Hertz.
For extra measure, the ideal choice would have a "flat" screen with antiglare coating, an easily adjustable tilt-and-swivel base and all the controls on the front of the monitor.


Classical Music in Review
Markus Klinko  Harpist The Swiss Institute
Like its cousin the guitar, the harp becomes a flexible solo instrument only by virtue of fierce determination.
The guitar is restricted (although empowered as well) by its intimate sound.
Its design and physical nature, moreover, yield intricate melodic patterns grudgingly, and require great virtuosity.
The solo harp is equally troublesome for the fingers.
Indeed, even an accomplished young player like Markus Klinko could not conceal every technical struggle confronting his brief recital on Friday.


The 1993 Emmy Winners
Here are the winners of major awards at the 45th annual Emmy Awards ceremony on Sunday night in Pasadena, Calif.:
Comedy series: "Seinfeld," NBC
Drama series: "Picket Fences," CBS
Mini-series: "Mystery: Prime Suspect 2," PBS
Made-for-television movie (tie): "Barbarians at the Gate," HBO, and "Stalin," HBO
Variety, music or comedy series: "Saturday Night Live," NBC
Leading actor, drama series: Tom Skerritt, "Picket Fences," CBS
Leading actress, drama series: Kathy Baker, "Picket Fences," CBS
Leading actor, comedy series: Ted Danson, "Cheers," NBC
Leading actress, comedy series: Roseanne Arnold, "Roseanne," ABC
Leading actor, mini-series or special: Robert Morse, "Tru," PBS
Leading actress, mini-series or special: Holly Hunter, "The Positively True Adventures of the Alleged Texas Cheerleader-Murdering Mom," HBO
Supporting actor, drama series: Chad Lowe, "Life Goes On," ABC
Supporting actress, drama series: Mary Alice, "I'll Fly Away," NBC
Supporting actor, comedy series: Michael Richards, "Seinfeld," NBC
Supporting actress, comedy series: Laurie Metcalf, "Roseanne," ABC
Supporting actor, mini-series or special: Beau Bridges, "The Positively True Adventures of the Alleged Texas Cheerleader-Murdering Mom," HBO
Supporting actress, mini-series or special: Mary Tyler Moore, "Stolen Babies," Lifetime
Direction, comedy series: Betty Thomas, "Dream On," HBO
Direction, drama series: Barry Levinson, "Homicide: Life on the Street," NBC
Direction, variety or music show:
Walter C. Miller, "The 1992 Tony Awards," CBS
Direction, mini-series or special: James Sadwith, "Sinatra," CBS
Individual performance, variety or music show: Dana Carvey, "Saturday Night Live's Presidential Bash," NBC
Variety, music or comedy special: "Bob Hope: The First 90 Years," NBC
Writing, drama series:Tom Fontana, "Homicide," NBC
Writing, comedy series: Larry David, "Seinfeld," NBC
Writing, variety or music show: "The Ben Stiller Show," Fox
Writing, mini-series or special: Jane Anderson, "The Positively True Adventures of the Alleged Texas Cheerleader-Murdering Mom," HBO


Stocks Plunge on Bond Market Weakness
The stock market took a deep dive yesterday amid weakness in the bond market and apprehension about the economy.
The Dow Jones industrial average posted its sharpest daily decline since early April.
"We had a very bad bond market in the afternoon," David Shulman, chief equity strategist at Salomon Brothers, said.
"On the stock market side, we have earnings worries. What I've been telling people is that a slow-growth economy is not an earnings-friendly economy." Drop in the Afternoon
After a morning spent basically flat, the Dow Jones industrials dropped steeply all afternoon to close at 3,575.80, down 37.45 points, or 1.04 percent.
The Dow Jones transportations were down 4.70 points to close at 1,616.38, and the Standard &amp; Poor's 500 index dropped 3.78 points, to 455.05.
The American Stock Exchange composite index slipped 1.76 points, to 451.05, and the Nasdaq composite edged up slightly, by one-tenth of a point, to 740.21.


Tears, Rumor and Anger Where Doors Are Closed
Vivian Lowe's eyes filled with tears yesterday morning as she learned that her 6-year-old son's elementary school, Public School 158 in East New York, Brooklyn, would not open.
Mrs.
Lowe had already lost two paychecks because she had had to stay home with her son Donovan.
Her thoughts flew to the family budget as the school's principal, Anita D. Harrison, sought to calm the crowd of angry and confused parents.
"I don't blame the principal, but I blame the politicians," Mrs.
Lowe said as Mrs.
Harrison told parents and students that the school would be closed indefinitely.
The local school board decided late Sunday to shut down all of District 19's schools, including Donovan's, after rejecting officials' assurances on asbestos.
"We have just given too much power to the politicians and they have made the world a mess," Mrs.
Lowe said.


Doctors Pin Hopes on Vaccine for Lyme
ON a recent Monday night the library of the Block Island, R.I., school was standing room only, filled by anxious residents who had come to hear four scientists offer them a new experimental vaccine against Lyme disease.
Beginning early next year, volunteers will be given the vaccine as part of a clinical trial, and people here are weighing the risk of side effects from an unknown vaccine against the chance that they will contract Lyme on this island where exposures are common.
Scientists are optimistic that this vaccine will help reclaim the wilderness for human use in the many parts of the country where fear of Lyme has kept residents indoors during tick season.


Strawberry Won't Be Facing Charges
No criminal charges will be filed against Los Angeles Dodgers outfielder DARRYL STRAWBERRY, who was arrested Sept. 4 for allegedly striking the 26-year-old woman he lived with, prosecutors said yesterday.
"A determination has been made that the filing of criminal charges is not warranted," said LYDIA BODIN, a deputy in charge of the District Attorney's Domestic Violence Unit.


Making Explosives Safe Is Aim of Testing Center
IN a desolate, rattlesnake-infested valley some 40 miles from the place where the world's first atomic bomb was tested, scientists are reenacting the bombing of Pan Am Flight 103, seeking to protect airliners against future terrorist blasts.
Engineers of the Energetic Materials Research and Testing Center here have built a replica of the Boeing 747 fuselage destroyed over Lockerbie, Scotland, in 1988 by a terrorist bomb, a catastrophe that cost 270 lives.
The object of their explosive tests is to identify the weaknesses of cargo containers used in modern airliners and make them less vulnerable to bombs.
One approach, the scientists say, may be to make cargo containers somewhat leaky, so that gas from a bomb burst can escape rapidly without building up enough pressure to blow the container apart and damage the airplane.


2 Top New Jersey Crime Figures Admit Juror Bribery in U.S. Trials
The acting head of the Lucchese crime family in New Jersey and one of his top associates admitted today in Federal Court here that they bribed or tried to bribe jurors in two other Federal organized-crime cases in the last five years.
The admission came unheralded in a series of pleas that resolved a multimillion-dollar racketeering case involving a plan to plunder the budget of the Newark Division of Sanitation through false invoices and kickbacks to mob-controlled businesses.
Along the way, the defendants acknowledged widespread extortion and more than a dozen murder conspiracies going back two decades.


People
*
Charles B. Yulish was named to the new position of executive vice president and managing director of the Washington operations of E. Bruce Harrison Co., Washington.
He was previously the executive vice president and general manager of Washington public affairs at Earle Palmer Brown, Bethesda, Md.


Ellen Joyce Alter; Detroit Lawyer, 44
Ellen Joyce Alter, a Detroit civic leader and bankruptcy lawyer, died on Saturday at St.
Joseph Mercy Hospital in Pontiac, Mich.
She was 44.
Her family said the cause was a cerebral aneurysm.


Cambodia Assembly Approves a Charter Creating Monarchy
By a vote of 113 to 5 with 2 abstentions, Cambodia's National Assembly adopted a new Constitution that will make Prince Norodom Sihanouk the King, a Government spokesman told reporters.
Prince Sihanouk, who is now in Beijing undergoing medical treatment, is expected to return to the Cambodian capital later this week to sign the document.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.13
2.99
3.10
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
2.93
2.94
2.90
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.06
3.06
2.92
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
4.98
4.93
5.95
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
6.09
6.04
7.34
TELEPHONE BONDS
7.10
7.03
8.38
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
5.47
5.46
6.36
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Arafat and Jordanian Talk
Yasir Arafat, the chairman of the P.L.O., flew here today to reassure King Hussein of Jordan that despite their mutual animosities, he was not trying to sideline Jordan in the Middle East's power plays after his agreement last week with Israel for self-rule in part of the occupied territories.
It was far from clear, though, whether the meeting had achieved King Hussein's goal, expressed in a meeting with Jordanian journalists two days ago, of better coordination between Jordan and the Palestine Liberation Organization.


NAVY DROPS CASE OF TAILHOOK FLIER
In a serious blow to the prosecution of the sexual harassment cases involving assaults on women at a naval aviators convention, the Navy today dropped all charges against the first naval officer scheduled to go to trial in the scandal.
Vice Adm.
J.
Paul Reason, the senior admiral overseeing the cases stemming from the Tailhook Association convention, today told the presiding military judge that the Navy had withdrawn charges of conduct unbecoming an officer against Lieut.
Cole V. Cowden, whose trial was to start on Wednesday.


A Threat to Abortion Rights
President Clinton is on the verge of doing a grave disservice to American women by betraying his campaign promise to defend abortion rights.
Mr.
Clinton pledged to appoint Supreme Court justices who accept a woman's right to an abortion.
But according to Neil A. Lewis of The Times, the White House and Justice Department have decided not to rule out every candidate for the District Courts and the Courts of Appeals solely because they have expressed anti-abortion views.
For this Administration to install Federal judges who have publicly opposed abortion rights would be a political sellout of incalculable dimensions.
The new policy rests on the goofy notion that the lower courts are less crucial than the Supreme Court in the legal battle for women's liberty.
In fact, those lower courts are the front lines of that battle and, for many women, the final decision-maker.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; A campaign for Puerto Rico tries to redefine the island as more than a 'West Side Story' lyric.
"WEST SIDE STORY" still has Puerto Rico's tourism officials asking a question posed in "The Sound of Music": "How do you solve a problem like Maria?"
The problem is that attitudes about Puerto Rico created by Maria, Bernardo, Anita and the rest of the characters from the stage musical and film versions of "West Side Story" continue to plague Puerto Rico, the tourism officials ruefully concede.


Bridge
For players in the countries of the former Soviet Union, it is very difficult, but not impossible, to travel to tournaments in other parts of the world.
The nations competing in the 1993 European Championships in Menton, France, included Latvia, Belorussia and Lithuania, along with the former Yugoslav republics of Croatia and Slovenia.
At the American Contract Bridge League's Summer Nationals in Washington in July, one player, Alex Rapaport, arrived from Ukraine.
On the diagrammed deal from the National Imp Pairs he sat North, playing with a Ukrainian immigrant, Simon Satanowsky of Brooklyn.
They eventually located their 4-4 spade fit, although one would have expected South to show that suit a round earlier.


Bond Rally Appears to Near End
The bond market gave its strongest signal to date yesterday that the rally that pushed yields to their lowest level in 25 years could be over.
The price of the 30-year bond dropped 24/32 of a point.
And its yield, which moves in the opposite direction, jumped to 6.09 percent, its highest level since Aug. 21, and up from 6.04 on Friday.


Federal Inquiry on Software Examines Privacy Programs
In a Government investigation with implications for free speech and privacy in the information age, a Federal grand jury in San Jose, Calif., has issued subpoenas to two software publishers selling versions of a program that protects the privacy of electronic mail and other computer data.
The investigation appears to focus on whether the program has been illegally exported in violation of State Department regulations that control the sale of weapons and other technologies whose export the Government believes may compromise national security.
The relevance of such regulations in the post-cold war era is the topic of growing debate in Washington, where communications and computer executives plan to testify before Congress on Wednesday.  [ Page D3. ]


Angola's Return to War Scars Its People, and Now Its Cities
The most arresting evidence of Angola's agony is anecdotal.
It is the grasshopper-thin children of war-encircled Malanje lining up for soybean gruel at under-supplied relief kitchens.
It is the shrieks and whimpers in the trauma ward of Luanda's biggest hospital, where doctors stitch wounds without painkillers.
It is the legion of limbless men and women maimed while foraging for food in fields now salted with land mines.


Mollen Says Corruption Panel Is to Seek Insight Into Problem
The head of the commission investigating police corruption in New York City said yesterday that hearings starting on Monday would try to find out why corruption has seemed to emerge as an issue every 20 or so years and that the panel would recommend better ways to root out the problem.
A focal point of the hearings, said the panel's chairman, Milton Mollen, after whom the commission is named, would be the depth of the department's commitment to weeding out corruption.


Despite Support of Pact, An Uncertainty Lingers
Caterpillar is unusual among the corporate supporters of Nafta in its willingness to put a dollar estimate on the gains it expects.
Other corporate executives also support Nafta by an overwhelming margin, even though they are hard-pressed to project with any confidence what will happen.


First Hint of Dark Matter
The twinkling of a nearby star could be caused by dark matter in the Milky Way, American and Australian scientists reported at a conference in Italy.
The finding, if confirmed, would be the first evidence for the invisible matter that theorists believe makes up most of the universe.
Page C7.


Yes, Polo Will Open
Even a perfectionist like Ralph Lauren can't control the vagaries of construction in Manhattan.
Ralph Lauren's Polo Sport store, at 888 Madison Avenue (East 72d Street), failed to open as promised on Saturday, disappointing prospective shoppers lured by feature articles and advertising.


TV Shopping Concern Makes Bid As a Battle for Paramount Begins
QVC Inc., the home shopping company, ignited a bidding war for Paramount Communications Inc. yesterday with a $9.5 billion offer for the movie, television and publishing company.
The offer made by QVC's chairman, Barry Diller, topped a bid by Viacom Inc. that was valued at $8.2 billion when it was made last week but has since sunk in value to $7.5 billion as Viacom's stock has fallen.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-12  U.S.
OFFERS MIDEAST AID  The United States will provide a two-year aid package of $250 million to help carry out the Israeli-Palestinian accord, Secretary of State Warren Christopher announced.
He also called for an international conference on aid to the region.
A1  ISRAELIS READY TO DEBATE PACT  As Israel's Parliament begins today what promises to be a long and acrid debate on the peace accord, the key to its immediate fate is held by Rabbi Ovadiah Yosef.
A12


A Snap, a Ride, and a Memory: Yours for $$


Fly So Free Winds It Down
Fly So Free, the juvenile champion of 1990 who went on to win $2.3 million in his racing career, will be retired at the end of the season and open a new career as a stallion at Robert N. Clay's Three Chimneys Farm in Midway, Ky.
He will join a roster of distinguished stallions there, notably Seattle Slew, Slew of Gold and his own sire, Time for a Change.
Tommy Valando, the Broadway music publisher who owns Fly So Free, said yesterday that Scotty Schulhofer, his trainer, planned two more races for his star 5-year-old: the Vosburgh at Belmont Park on Oct. 9 and probably the Breeders' Cup Sprint at Santa Anita on Nov. 6.


Classical Music in Review
'Madama Butterfly'  Amato Opera 319 Bowery (at Second Street) East Village Through Oct. 10
Opera is always trying to seem less like itself; directors have copied the look of paintings, films, even television.
The Amato Opera, stuck in a space no wider than a DC-10, simply tries to look like real opera, and its passion for the larger artifice can be inspiring.
The company's new production of "Madama Butterfly" accomplishes something rather miraculous in the second act: when a garden bridge and a painted Mount Fuji are glimpsed through Butterfly's half-open screen, a sense of deep space emerges.
The headpiece for Bonzo was not as convincing, too close to the Conehead design for comfort, but Anthony Amato's direction and Richard Cerullo's designs were generally ingenious.


Classical Music in Review
Sankt Annae Youth Choir  St. Bartholomew's Church
The Sankt Annae Youth Choir bills itself as the "largest youth choir in Europe"; on the evidence of a concert Sunday afternoon, it is also one of the best.
These 200 Danish teen-agers blend their sound to a breathtaking degree, moving effortlessly from floating, ethereal timbres to full-throated unison.
Conventional problem areas for a young group do not exist; sopranos and tenors alike are unfailingly strong and accurate.


Business Digest
Companies
QVC ignited a bidding war for Paramount, making a $9.5 billion offer that topped a $8.2 billion bid made last week by Viacom.
The new bid involves two of the most powerful men in the media industry: Barry Diller, QVC's chairman, and Martin S. Davis, Paramount's chairman.  [ Page A1. ]  Paramount's board will be in the spotlight in weighing competing bids for the company.  [ D2. ]


Students Turn Cleanup Of River Into Adventure
WHEN an all-day cleanup of the Housatonic River began on a recent morning, one of the first pieces of debris retrieved from Lake Zoar, a dammed stretch of the river here, was a sign that read, "Please Carry Out What You Carry In." As the day wore on, as nearly 1,500 volunteers scoured the banks of the Housatonic from its source in the Berkshires to its mouth on Long Island Sound 150 miles down river, the shortcomings of such signs became apparent.
People who carry refrigerators down to a river don't have any plans to carry them back out.
The same goes for washing machines, old tires, broken lawn mowers, car seats, bed springs and the occasional truckload of construction rubble.
People don't get their fishing gear together and then suddenly decide, on a whim, to take their rusted-out clothes dryer along, just for the day, just for companionship.
They have a different river esthetic from the volunteers who were walking and wading in muck to pick up after them.


Tanenbaum, Man and Player, Gets His Due
He hadn't come home after work, and he hadn't called.
This was not like him.
For the 39 years of their marriage, Bobbie Tanenbaum could count on her husband, Sid, informing her of his whereabouts.
A feeling of dread swept over her.
She called at his office, the Able Metal Spinning and Stamping, in Far Rockaway, Queens.
He was the president of the company, having gone into the business started by her father.
He had joined Able after retiring as a professional basketball player in 1949, following two years as a 6-foot guard with the Knicks and the Baltimore Bullets.


Teachers Measure Up In Productivity
To the Editor:
"A Sensible Teachers' Settlement" (editorial, Sept. 2) deplores the lack of increases in "productivity" in the new teachers' contract.
This implies that teachers in New York City public schools are less productive than they should be.
Where is your evidence?


Holtzman, in Counterattack, Appeals to Traditional Base
Stressing her 20-year record in an effort to counter a spate of damaging headlines, Elizabeth Holtzman reached back to some of her oldest bloc of supporters yesterday to urge women and minority voters to back her bid for re-election.
In a midday news conference on the steps of City Hall, Betty Friedan, a well-known feminist author, suggested that the furor over a 1992 campaign loan was a move "to get Liz Holtzman."


Long-Lost Field Notes Help Decode Treasure
FROM the outbreak of World War II until the end of the cold war, several thousand artifacts of ancient Egypt lay in Chicago and Cairo museums, a treasure haunting and intriguing yet beyond scholarly interpretation.
The pieces were like cryptic messages from the past whose code books had been lost to archeologists.
The statues, jewelry, objects of erotica and various religious symbols were excavated in the 1920's and 1930's by American and German archeologists working at Medinet Habu, a major site of temple ruins on the west bank of the Nile River at ancient Thebes, known today as Luxor.
As is the usual practice, the archeologists kept meticulous notes of exactly where each relic was found -- in which buildings, at what depths in the sediments and next to what other artifacts.
Without such records, archeology is little more than a treasure hunt, and the materials cannot be reliably dated or their function and meaning reasonably surmised.


Zoos Find a New Role In Conserving Species
ONE recent afternoon at the Bronx Zoo, Dr.
Fred Koontz, the curator of mammals, watched a computer video display in which an oval representing the field of view of an orbiting earth satellite closed in on an area of Cameroon.
There, three forest elephants have been fitted with radio transmitters developed in New York and tested on a zoo elephant named Maxine.
The orbiting satellite picks up signals from the elephants and sends reports on their positions to the United States.
From these reports ecologists in the Bronx are discerning the animals' patterns of movement to determine their range, habitat and response to human settlements.
Without this information a conservation plan for the threatened elephants cannot be devised.
Virtually nothing has been known about forest elephant ecology until now because the thick jungle foliage makes the animals hard to follow on the ground.


Refugees Enrich Our National Life
To the Editor:
In "Immigrants: A Cost or a Benefit?" (Op-Ed, Sept. 3), Donald L. Huddle states that most refugees are low-skilled and dependent.
Our experience does not bear that out.


Mr. Misunderstood? Willis Makes Himself Clear
Bruce Willis laughed.
"If anyone said this career was going to happen," he said, "if anyone said I was going to make more money on one picture than anyone in my county in New Jersey made in their entire lives, if anyone said I'd have people trying to take pictures of me when I walk outside and wackos following me around and me living this life, I would have said, 'Hey, you're out of your mind.' "
Mr.
Willis's newest film, "Striking Distance," is No. 1 at the box office this week, a testament to the movie star's drawing power, and certainly not to the reviews, which were modest at best.
But Mr.
Willis, 38, accepts the film, his overall success and his stardom as if he finds it all a little hard to believe.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, a front-page article yesterday about the re-election campaign of Gov.
Jim Florio of New Jersey misstated the date of his speech at the convention of the Firemen's Mutual Benefit Association, in Atlantic City.
It was Tuesday, not Thursday.


CHRONICLE
Get out those baby barbells: MARIA SHRIVER and ARNOLD SCHWARZENEGGER have a son, their third child.
He was born Saturday morning in a hospital in the Los Angeles area, but Charlotte Parker, Mr.
Schwarzenegger's publicity agent, would not say which one.
The baby, who has not yet been named, weighed a none-too-puny nine pounds.


'Midnight's Children' Wins Special Booker Prize
Salman Rushdie's "Midnight's Children" was judged the best British novel of the past quarter-century tonight, and the novelist came out of forced seclusion to accept the honor at a crowded ceremony in the second floor of a London bookstore.
The 46-year-old author has been in hiding since February 1989, when he was publicly sentenced to death by the Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini for publication of "The Satanic Verses," a novel Iranian authorities said blasphemed Islam.
In the past year, Mr.
Rushdie has made an effort to appear more frequently in public.


One Foot Outscores 2 Arms as Chiefs Roll
They came expecting offensive fireworks.
They left having watched your basic defensive-minded, kick-in-the-teeth football struggle.
There was just 1 minute 24 seconds left in the game before the Broncos or Chiefs could finally reach the end zone.
Denver got there and Kansas City never did.
But the Chiefs got something more valuable -- five Nick Lowery field goals -- and toppled the Broncos by 15-7 before 78,453 fans at Arrowhead Stadium, the fifth largest crowd ever here and the largest since the Chiefs' 1972 season.


Chiat/Day Awarded Nynex Media Buying
The Nynex Corporation said yesterday that it would consolidate media buying on its various accounts at Chiat/Day Inc. in New York after a 15-month review.
Though Nynex would not discuss the billings on the accounts involved, which include the New York Telephone Company, estimates by trade publications have run as much as $130 million.
Chiat/Day was selected from a field of three finalists that also included Arnold Fortuna Lawner &amp; Cabot in Boston and Bozell New York.
Glen Brandow, a spokesman for Nynex in White Plains, said that Chiat/Day was chosen "because the agency's media-buying capabilities are just as creative as its advertising." The decision was a boost for Chiat/Day's New York office, which last week learned it would lose its estimated $80 million American Reebok brand advertising account.


Japanese Say They Plan to Relax Restrictions on Foreign Lawyers
When Japanese talk about what's wrong with America, they usually list crime, urban decay and a proliferation of lawyers.
A total ban on foreign lawyers here was eased six years ago, with little ill effect, but members of the Japanese bar still say they have visions of being overwhelmed by overpaid talent who would pollute the Japanese system with an oil slick of litigation.
As a result, foreign lawyers operating here have been forced to navigate a forest of obstacles.
They have been barred from hiring Japanese lawyers, giving their clients advice on Japanese law, or even arguing cases in court.


Long-Lost Field Notes Help Decode Treasure
FROM the outbreak of World War II until the end of the cold war, several thousand artifacts of ancient Egypt lay in Chicago and Cairo museums, a treasure haunting and intriguing yet beyond scholarly interpretation.
The pieces were like cryptic messages from the past whose code books had been lost to archeologists.
The statues, jewelry, objects of erotica and various religious symbols were excavated in the 1920's and 1930's by American and German archeologists working at Medinet Habu, a major site of temple ruins on the west bank of the Nile River at ancient Thebes, known today as Luxor.
As is the usual practice, the archeologists kept meticulous notes of exactly where each relic was found -- in which buildings, at what depths in the sediments and next to what other artifacts.
Without such records, archeology is little more than a treasure hunt, and the materials cannot be reliably dated or their function and meaning reasonably surmised.


ASBESTOS IN THE SCHOOLS: The Making of a Crisis; Scramble on Asbestos Is Symptom of Years Of Wider Physical Deterioration in Schools
It was a moment of clarity in the confusion and missteps of the asbestos crisis in New York City public schools.
Schools Chancellor Ramon C. Cortines, surrounded by a phalanx of elected officials and construction experts, was at an emergency meeting yesterday with angry parents in the auditorium of Public School 13 in the East New York section of Brooklyn.


Small-Cap Nasdaq Stocks
A complete listing of Nasdaq small-capitalization stocks now appears in The New York Times on Sundays.
The partial listing of those stocks, formerly published daily, has been discontinued to provide space for expanded mutual fund tables.


Corrections
An article on the Law page on Friday about Federal District Judge Charles R. Richey misstated the number of years he and his wife, Mardelle, have been married.
It is 43 years, not 23.


Dinkins, Avoiding the Defensive, Focuses Sights on Giuliani
Now that the general-election campaign has finally begun, Mayor David N. Dinkins is moving to change the subject -- and as quickly as possible.
A summerlong spurt of unremittingly bad news had left the Mayor and his administration as virtually the sole subject of the mayoral campaign.
Mr.
Dinkins was almost ceaselessly on the defensive, responding to politically damaging questions about his leadership on everything from the city budget to Crown Heights to the awarding of a $150 million contract by the city's Parking Violations Bureau.


From Desert War to Retail Wars
How does one prepare to manage a distribution system as complicated as that of Sears, Roebuck &amp; Company's far-flung retail empire?
To judge from Sears's announcement today, one way is to manage 40,000 people hastily assembled to provide American troops in a far-off, hostile desert environment with everything from tanks to cigarettes for prisoners of war.
Such a resume apparently impressed Sears.
It said today that it had hired Lieut.
Gen.
William G. Pagonis, 52, as senior vice president in charge of logistics for its department stores.
Importance of Logistics
General Pagonis, known to friends as Gus, earned nothing but kudos for the way he overcame dilapidated shipping, sandstorms and cultural misunderstandings with his Saudi Arabian hosts during the 1990 troop buildup and subsequent Persian Gulf war.
The huge deployment was the biggest rapid military operation since the Allied invasion of France in 1944.


A Sluggish Forecast by Economists
Finding little evidence that tumbling interest rates are about to perk up a lackluster economy, a panel of business economists predicted today that growth would edge up to 2.7 percent next year from an expected 2.3 percent in 1993, too little to dent the current unemployment rate of 6.7 percent.
"I think you can describe it as slow growth as far as the eye can see," said William C. Dunkelberg, vice president of the National Association of Business Economists, presenting the group's forecast at its annual meeting, which began here today.


Sallie Mae Prices 1998 Notes
The Student Loan Marketing Association, also known as Sallie Mae, priced $600 million of floating-rate notes yesterday that would mature in 1998.
The issue's underwriters, led by Merrill Lynch, said the notes were priced at 100 to float 19 basis points more than the three-year Treasury note.
A basis point is one-hundredth of a percentage point.


U.A.W. Sights Are Now Set On Bargaining at Chrysler
Having negotiated a tentative three-year labor contract with the Ford Motor Company, the United Automobile Workers will seek to replicate it at the Chrysler Corporation before moving on to the industry's financially troubled giant, the General Motors Corporation, Owen F. Bieber, the president of the U.A.W., said today.
The decision was expected, because if the U.A.W. locks up agreements with both Chrysler and Ford, it will have greater bargaining leverage with G.M., which is expected to put up the biggest fight to alter the agreement to suit its needs.


Q&amp;A
The Smell of Money
Q.  Why does new money smell so funny? Is it dangerous?
A.
As with any other printed matter, freshly printed money has an inky smell, but the fumes are not harmful, according to the Federal Bureau of Engraving and Printing.
The smell is especially strong on bills because a tremendous amount of ink is used under tremendous pressure, so that it is actually embedded in the paper, said Mary Hallsall, a public affairs specialist with the bureau.
None of it has yet worn away in hands or pockets, she said.


Topics of The Times; Cabins in the Mind
The Times ran a disturbing piece last week about a Vermonter's passion for rebuilding elegant old barns.
Why disturbing?
An unscientific survey shows that such stories regularly trigger cabin fantasies, especially in the fall and spring.
Who has not stepped onto the sidewalks of New York on a splendid morn and yearned, of a sudden, to be under a different sky, in a quieter landscape, in a cozy place of one's own?


Rangers Rookie Yells Fore!
Dmitri Starostenko has been invited to play golf.
Today, at Rye Playland, Rangers Coach Mike Keenan called Starostenko, a 20-year-old Russian right wing, the most pleasant surprise in training camp.
That earned him an invitation to Tuesday's annual Rangers alumni golf tournament -- which will include Mark Messier, Mike Gartner, Aleksei Kovalev and the other regulars -- rather than a ticket to the Rangers' affiliate in Binghamton, where 22 other players were assigned today.


Health Care Plan Would Take Double Tax Bite; Job Discrimination Risk
To the Editor:
Unless health-reform planners are careful, they will encourage employers to avoid hiring single parents, substituting job seekers who are married to (or children of) workers covered at a different job.


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY DISORDER ON DAY 1 IN NEW YORK SCHOOLS Most of New York City's public schools reopened smoothly amid a general sense of relief that the asbestos delay was over, but for thousands of students still locked out of class and their parents, the day brought continued confusion, disappointment and frustration.
A1.
Parents and educators agree that the asbestos problem is only a symptom of a much more serious ailment: deferred and nonexistent building maintenance.
News Analysis.
A1.


Review/Theater; Mother's Illness Provokes Family's Self-Examination
Doug Haverty's tirelessly informative "Could I Have This Dance?," at the Village Theater Company, tackles the thematically potent issue of Huntington's disease, a hereditary affliction that strikes people in middle age and causes, among other things, an involuntary physical jerkiness that is the macabre dance of the title.
Set in Los Angeles in 1988, a year in which presymptomatic testing for the disease had just become widely available, the play's plot is as freighted with potential dramatic friction as something out of Ibsen.
Monica and Amanda Glendenning, sisters in their 30's who run a high-powered public-relations firm together, are daughters of a woman with Huntington's and must now choose between taking the test or continuing to live with the dubious hope of uncertainty.


What, Giants Worry? Just About Movie Lines
The only thing missing from the Giants' locker room today was the theme song from the television series "Happy Days." Probably the last time there were so many smiles here was when Ray Handley was shown the door.
Isn't 3-0 just grand?
Rodney Hampton, fresh off his 41-carry, 134-yard effort on Sunday, lifted weights, received a nice massage and was all smiles.
He leads the National Football League in rushing (344 yards and two touchdowns) and total yards from scrimmage (409), so you know he's happy.


Once Again, Bosnian Peace Talks Appear to Crumble
Negotiations aimed at ending the 17-month Bosnian war stalled again tonight after Muslim, Croatian and Serbian leaders broke off talks aboard a British aircraft carrier in the Adriatic Sea, United Nations officials said.
After the talks ended, international mediators canceled a meeting of all the parties that had been scheduled for Tuesday in Sarajevo.
The mediators, Lord Owen of the European Community and Thorvald Stoltenberg of the United Nations, had expressed guarded hope that the Tuesday meeting would produce a breakthrough in the oft-derailed effort to negotiate peace in Bosnia.


Rule for Fall: Don't Rock the Boat
Too much fashion freedom is a dangerous thing, especially when the economy is turgid.
"When there are so many messages, women tend to be confused," said Ellin Saltzman, a vice president of Bergdorf Goodman.
"They tend to focus on clothes like Ralph Lauren's and Calvin Klein's, which are beautiful and simple." Bill Blass styles were also selling, she said.


Books of The Times; Seeking Fiance's Fate, and Finding Bigger Issues
A Very Long Engagement  By Sebastien Japrisot Translated by Linda Coverdale. 327 pages.
Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux. $23.
The event is horrific: in World War I, five wounded French soldiers, their arms tied behind their backs, are marched by their own troops through the trenches to the edge of no man's land.
There they are abandoned in the snow to die in the crossfire with German troops.
All five have been court-martialed and condemned to death for self-inflicted wounds.


Japan Cuts Discount Rate 3/4 Point to 1 3/4%
In an unexpectedly aggressive move, the Bank of Japan this morning cut its official discount rate 3/4 point to the lowest level in history, 1 3/4 percent.
The central bank said it made the decision, which was formally announced before the financial markets opened here, because Japan's slumping economy "is still in a stagnant state." The bank had been expected to cut the rate this month, but only 1/2 point.


Botanical Garden Joins Company in Drug Search
IN one of the largest such arrangements so far, Pfizer Inc. and the New York Botanical Garden are collaborating on a $2 million, three-year effort to collect and study plants from the United States as potential sources of new medicines.
It is the latest in a number of efforts by drug companies to step up prospecting for natural sources of pharmaceuticals.
Scientists have found it more difficult than they had hoped to synthesize drugs from scratch, so researchers are turning once again to nature.
New technologies for mass screening of plant and animal materials for medicinal properties have made this prospecting more practical in recent years.


Stein Hands the N.H.L. His Resignation
GIL STEIN, president of the National Hockey League last season, announced his resignation yesterday from his consulting role.
Stein, who started with the league as a lawyer in 1977, succeeded JOHN ZIEGLER as president in 1992 when Ziegler was told to resign after a players strike that threatened to disrupt the Stanley Cup playoffs.
Stein campaigned hard last season for the newly established office of commissioner, but the job was given to GARY BETTMAN, who took command Feb. 1.
Bettman recently hired BRIAN BURKE as a senior vice president and director of hockey operations.


On Getting Started in Multimedia
THE word "multimedia" can be variously defined, but essentially it refers to the addition to a computer's text, simple graphics and "beep" sounds of features from other mediums like rich sounds and complex graphics and even animation.
To start with multimedia, you will need a fairly powerful PC, a sound card, a CD-ROM drive and accessories both hard and soft.


Chairman Is Resigning At Lincoln Center Before He Turns 75
George Weissman, the chairman of Lincoln Center for the Performing Arts since 1986, told the center's board yesterday that he would relinquish his post in June.
Mr.
Weissman, who is 74 years old and will become chairman emeritus, said he "would be available to undertake any assignment" Lincoln Center might ask of him.
The resignation of Mr.
Weissman, who has been involved with Lincoln Center since its earliest days, was not unexpected.
He has told colleagues that he wants to leave his post before his 75th birthday, in July.


Fire Incinerates Warehouse in Jersey City


U.S. Offers 'Model' Plan for Capital Homeless
With ambitious goals but modest financing, Housing Secretary Henry G. Cisneros outlined a plan today to turn the District of Columbia into a national model for serving homeless people.
The plan would spend $20 million over two years in an effort to shift the city's emphasis from emergency shelters and toward social services and permanent housing.


ASBESTOS IN THE SCHOOLS: Manhattan; At P.S. 234, A No-Hitch Day
The first day of class at Public School 234 in TriBeCa felt wonderful, just wonderful, Lupin O'Neal said yesterday as she held her son's hand.
"Words can't begin to express it," she said, smiling broadly.
"He's here. He's safe and they know what they're doing in this school. I feel terrible that all the other parents don't have a school like this."


At Ryder Cup, It's Finally Time to Act
They tried to play a regular golf tournament here last weekend, but the Ryder Cup kept breaking out.
Who really cared whether the greens were soggy or whether Ian Woosnam came up with a magnificent first-day eagle on the 16th.
What mattered more was finding out who was going to be paired with whom on Friday against the Americans at The Belfry.


Why Poland Swung to Left
As Poland grasped the sweeping swing to the left and the victory of the former Communists only four years after they had been flung from power, one lesson seemed clear: 40 years of Communism had ingrained expectations of social security that the new parties failed to provide.
The architects of Poland's "shock therapy" knew that there would be victims in their game plan -- pensioners, unskilled young people, middle-aged workers made redundant by privatization -- but gambled that those losers would not stall the march to a full market economy.
The results of Sunday's vote will almost certainly tame the pace.


Deflate Government? Helium Didn't
When the Clinton Administration set out to streamline government, a lot of budget watchdogs said there was no better place to start than at the helium reserve here, a cluster of mines, pipes and cooling vats that was $1.3 billion in debt and 100 years ahead on the supply curve.
But when President Clinton's National Performance Review finally focused on the cold-war-era complex this month, it suggested that Congress cancel the program's debt and issued a vague call to "increase efficiencies in helium operations."


Observer; Nothing For the Ho Hum
Everybody talks about diversity, but what do we know about it except that it's good?
That's why President Clinton wants a government made up of people as diverse as America.
A government as diverse as all America would be good: so runs the season's wisdom.
Yet how many know that one of the early advocates of diversity in government was mocked and ridiculed, especially by progressive people, for speaking out in favor of this principle now so widely admired, especially by progressive people?


Accounts
*
American Resort Development Association, Washington, to Robinson, Yesawich &amp; Pepperdine, Orlando, Fla., as its first agency of record.
Billings are estimated at between $3 and $4 million. *
Ripley's Believe It or Not!
Museums, Orlando and Key West, Fla., and Branson, Mo., to Cramer-Krasselt, Orlando, as agency of record following a review that also included the incumbent, Robinson, Yesawich &amp; Pepperdine, Orlando.
Billings were not disclosed.


American in London to Test 'Deliberative' Polling
An American political scientist who has come up with a new way to plumb public opinion may finally get a chance to test the idea in the laboratory of British politics.
Channel 4, an independent television network, and The Independent, the daily newspaper, are to announce on Tuesday that they are sponsoring the first "deliberative opinion poll" next spring, on an issue yet to be decided.


C. L. Sulzberger, Columnist, Dies at 80
C.
L.
Sulzberger, a prize-winning foreign correspondent and foreign affairs columnist for The New York Times for nearly 40 years and the author of two dozen books, most of them on foreign policy and world leaders in the cold-war era, died yesterday at his home in Paris.
He was 80.
Mr.
Sulzberger, who gave up his Op-Ed page column in The Times in 1978 but continued writing his memoirs and books on foreign affairs, died of natural causes after a long illness, his family said.


Market Place; Out of the doldrums, Texaco bears good news for a change.
TEXACO, which after years of notoriety had slipped back into the doldrums on Wall Street, is creating a stir again.
Only this time the news is positive.
Last week, it announced that it had agreed to sell its petrochemical business for $1.06 billion to the Huntsman Chemical Corporation, based in Salt Lake City, a move that will free up considerable money for oil and gas exploration.


National Health
Stock in National Health Laboratories fell yesterday after the CBS program "60 Minutes" reported Sunday that the company billed patients for blood tests their doctors never ordered.
The company called the report false, but said it had received a subpoena on its billing practices last week from the Department of Health and Human Services.


Get Tough on Rights
When the United Nations General Assembly convenes today, it faces an unprecedented opportunity to strengthen its rightful leadership role in promoting and defending the fragile cause of human rights.
The U.N.
World Conference on Human Rights in Vienna last June should be seen as a catalyst for a dramatic move to strengthen the incredibly weak mechanisms in the U.N. system for preventing and correcting human rights crimes.


Clinton Pesticide Plan Would Cut Use
After decades of scientific disputes and political strife over the safety of pesticides, the Clinton Administration will ask Congress to reduce sharply the amount of toxic chemicals used in American agriculture, forestry and other industries.
The Administration's plan, which was put together by three Federal agencies and will be proposed to Congress on Tuesday, calls for the Government to change the fundamental basis of it regulation of toxic chemicals used to kill weeds and insects and stop plant diseases.


Lowly Mets' Temperature Reaches 100
With 99 losses heading into tonight's game at Three Rivers Stadium, the Mets prayed for two things: runs or rain.
Unfortunately for them, the tarpaulin was removed 45 minutes prior to the first pitch, and the runs did not exactly come in buckets, either.
Pirates pitcher Paul Wagner starved New York for eight innings, and Pittsburgh handed the Mets their ignominious 100th defeat, 6-2.


Jets Keeping Running Shoes in the Closet
Despite the Jets having the weekend off, their offense didn't lose ground in the National Football League rankings.
Before Monday night's Denver-Kansas City game, the Jets were still No. 1 in total offense in the American Football Conference, and New York quarterback Boomer Esiason remained the No. 2-rated passer in the N.F.L. behind the Broncos' John Elway.
The Jets' 9.51 yards per pass attempt also leads the league.


Sports of The Times; 2-Pound Vest Protected Krone's Life
JULIE KRONE can talk about it now, now that the danger has passed from a 1,200-pound horse hitting her directly above the heart, now that she has survived a cardiac contusion through the help of a 2-pound vest.
"It was a breath-taking force," she recalled.
"But at the same time, I could feel the vest protecting me."


Ex-Presidential Perks
To the Editor:
A Reuters news item reports (Sept. 3) that former President George Bush would be paid $100,000 as keynote speaker at a convention of Amway distributors.


Comptroller Turns to a Long-Time Friend


Pavarotti, Domingo and Midori To Usher In the Music Season
Until it was settled on Sunday, the labor dispute between the musicians and management of the Philadelphia Orchestra cast a shadow over the start of the New York concert season.
The orchestra had been booked to open the Carnegie Hall season this Thursday night in a gala benefit for the hall itself, with tickets priced as high as $1,000.
As it turns out, a last-minute settlement was reached and the concert will take place as planned, with Wolfgang Sawallisch conducting and Midori as the soloist.
The Carnegie opening, of course, is not the only show in town.
The two biggest indigenous musical organizations, the New York Philharmonic and the Metropolitan Opera, are also raising their curtains in the next few days.
Like Carnegie, both are devoting their opening nights to starry benefits.
And for music lovers who have not already bought Met and Philharmonic tickets -- both are sold out -- the Philharmonic's opening will be televised and the Met's can be heard on the radio.


Joy Rides Turn Deadly in New Jersey
It was barely after noon when the Essex-Union Auto Theft Task Force spotted its first stolen car of the day.
Within minutes, undercover squad cars swooped in on the red Pontiac hatchback at a busy intersection in the West District.
The car -- identified as stolen when a task-force officer who saw it punched its license number into a computer -- was trapped.
Two glum young joy riders looked out.


Only in Boxing: An Indictment Helps to Fashion a Rematch
The defendant, and the only witness against him, glared at each other today, while a pleased Mayor Sharpe James stood between the two with his thumbs up.
This is boxing, of course.
But even the sport with its storied history of cads, comedians and confidence men would find it difficult to match this scenario.


Health Care Plan Would Take Double Tax Bite
To the Editor
"Health Aides See a Tax on Benefits Beyond Basic Plan" (front page, Sept. 5) reports an Administration proposal under which both workers and companies would have to pay Federal income tax on employer-provided health benefits if they exceed those in the standard package to be guaranteed to all Americans.


Many Experts Say Health Plan Would Fall Far Short on Savings
A wide range of experts, including economists, consultants and members of Congress, say President Clinton's health care plan will not cut costs nearly as much as the Administration hopes and will actually increase the Federal budget deficit instead of cutting it, as the Administration promises.
In a series of interviews, the experts, both Democratic and Republican, used terms like "not credible," "difficult," "wildly optimistic" and "illusory" to describe the President's plans.


Empire Plan For Rate Rise Is Challenged
The New York State Insurance Superintendent said yesterday that Empire Blue Cross and Blue Shield has little chance of winning a rate increase next year and will not be allowed to collect part of an increase that he has already approved.
And, citing surprisingly good financial results at Empire so far this year, the Superintendent, Salvatore R. Curiale, said a $93.5 million state bailout of Empire last year had not been necessary.


WANG LABORATORIES EMERGES FROM BANKRUPTCY
As expected, Wang Laboratories Inc. emerged from Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection yesterday.
The company's business plan was approved by Federal Bankruptcy Judge William C. Hillman in Boston.
And the plan received approval from 94 percent of the creditors and 97 percent of the equity holders, Joseph M. Tucci, Wang's chief executive, said.
The Lowell, Mass., company filed for Chapter 11 on Aug. 18, 1992.


No Headline
"I think that in more than 90 percent of the schools it was not chaotic. When there was chaos, it was real chaos." -- RAMON C. CORTINES, New York Schools Chancellor.  [ A1:6. ]


Classical Music in Review
David First  Electronic Guitarist Bob 235 Eldridge Street
On Friday night, David First presented a self-described "evening of solo guitar with electronics and stuff." This composer and guitarist has established himself in the downtown scene with a mesmeric glissando style, dissolving conventional notes of the scale into a microtonal haze.


New York City Rights Chief Investigating U.S. Immigration Centers
New York City's Human Rights Commissioner, Dennis deLeon, began an inquiry yesterday into detention practices here of the United States Immigration and Naturalization Service, which advocates for immigrants call arbitrary and inhumane.
The commission will investigate assertions that genuine seekers of political asylum are detained while others are released arbitrarily, that conditions at detention centers are unacceptable, and that immigration agents subject some of those arriving at Kennedy Airport to abuse.


Caterpillar Sees Free-Trade Boon
As the showdown nears in Washington over the fate of the North American Free Trade Agreement, it is no surprise that Caterpillar Inc. has been one of the strongest corporate voices in favor of the treaty.
From its base in this small city in central Illinois, Caterpillar has grown into the largest construction equipment maker in the world.
It derives more than half its sales from exports.
And it has a reputation as a company that has never seen a free trade proposal it didn't like.


Chinese Dissident Emerges, Still Unbowed
Emerging to speak for the first time since his release from prison, China's most illustrious political dissident said tonight that if Beijing was trading on the freedom of a few political prisoners to win the 2000 Olympic Games, it was indulging in "dirty" politics.
Wei Jingsheng, who met with reporters at his parents' tiny apartment in central Beijing, said he would not give up the "struggle" for democracy in China, but would be forced to restrain his activities for three years while he is on probation.


Patterns; A trade show challenges the runway A Ghost apart Tina Chow, the collector.
A Challenger to the Runway
Runway shows may look like great theater to outsiders, but their validity is constantly being challenged.
No one buys from the strobe-flashed catwalks anyway.
The real business is done not from gilded chairs, but from folding ones, in trade shows and showrooms.


By Design; Leg Works
Stylish leg wear can pull together the disparate looks of this fall's fashions.
Textured tights can update a miniskirt as well as provide coverage under long slashed skirts.
For women who want a sense of freedom, leggings are an alternative to skirts and pants.


Colorado Town Awards Issue
A $117.3 million tax-exempt bond offering by Aurora, Colo., was awarded to Merrill Lynch in competitive bidding yesterday.
The water refunding general obligation bonds were reoffered to the public at prices to yield from 2.75 percent in 1994 to 3.80 percent in 1998, 4.50 percent in 2003 and 4.90 percent in 2008.
Taxable equivalent yields for investors in a 31 percent tax bracket would likely be about 3.99 percent in 1994, 5.51 percent in 1998, 6.52 percent in 2003 and 7.10 percent in 2008.


COMPANY NEWS: Big Mac Attack; Intel's Ads Take Aim At Apple Enthusiasts
If the Intel Corporation cannot be in your computer, it will at least be in your face.
This week, Intel takes its long-running Intel Inside advertising campaign promoting its microprocessor to the pages of MacUser, MacWeek and MacWorld, magazines for users of Apple Computer Inc.'s Macintosh, the only major personal computer that is not designed around Intel's chips.


On My Mind; The Olympic Decision
The world will not come to an end if the International Olympic Committee picks Beijing for the site of the Games in the year 2000.
But the Olympics will; at least for two important groups of people the Olympics will end.
They will end for those living in freedom who believe human rights are the basic test of national standards and international behavior.
For them it would be an obscenity, no other word, to hold the Games in China as long as it is commanded by a Government that rules by police power, as long as it uses prisons to torture thousands of political prisoners, as long as it incarcerates millions of Chinese for forced labor, officially recognized as an essential part of the economy.


Executive Changes
CHAMPIONS SPORTS, Arlington, Va., a sports bar and restaurant chain, appointed Richard E. Buckley president and chief executive.
James Martell will continue as chairman.
HICKOK ELECTRICAL INSTRUMENT CO., Cleveland, named Eugene T. Nowakowski vice president for finance and chief financial officer, succeeding Robert L. Purcell.
William A. Bruner, Gary M. Denomme and Robert C. Fiorille were also named vice presidents.


Fallon McElligott Picks a Co-President
Mark Goldstein, who unexpectedly announced last week he would step down as the president of Earle Palmer Brown, said yesterday that he would join Fallon McElligott, effective Oct. 4, in the new position of president of integrated marketing.
In overseeing Fallon's nonadvertising services like design, direct marketing and sales promotion, he inherits a powerful new client: the Coca-Cola Company.
Mr.
Goldstein, who turns 46 on Friday, will join Bill Westbrook, another former top executive of Earle Palmer Brown, which is based in Bethesda, Md.
He became Fallon's president and creative director in May.
The two will share the agency's presidency, said Pat Fallon, the chairman, with "Bill the president of the core agency business and Mark the president of our integrated marketing efforts."


Milkovo Journal; In Old Soviet Outposts, the Future Looks Empty
After 17 years of living and working amid the snows and volcanoes of the Kamchatka Peninsula on Russia's easternmost rim, Mikhail Akhmetov is calling it quits.
He will head for the sunshine and fresh fruit of his native Nalchik in the Caucasus Mountains, nine time zones away.
Mr.
Akhmetov will join a reverse migration that is slowly stripping Russia's northern periphery of many of its best-trained settlers and forcing regions like Kamchatka, a wilderness of birch forests and tundra the size of Montana, to rethink their future.


Britain May Act on Paris Trade Stance
Britain, angered by what it sees as repeated French stalling on international trade talks, threatened on Monday to boycott European Community meetings if no world trade accord is reached by Dec. 15.
The British statement, made by Foreign Secretary Douglas Hurd at a European Community foreign and farm ministers meeting here, amounted to an extraordinary threat to paralyze the activities of the 12-nation community.
The so-called empty chair policy was last employed by France in 1965 to immobilize the community over a budgetary dispute.


Kin Bringing Demjanjuk Home to Face Troubles
John Demjanjuk's family left from Cleveland for Israel this afternoon, hoping to bring him home from his small prison cell near Tel Aviv as early as Wednesday.
Mr.
Demjanjuk's impending release after nearly eight years in Israel, half of them on death row, is an enormous embarrassment to the Justice Department and a legal victory for a man who had been accused, convicted and ultimately acquitted of being "Ivan the Terrible" of Treblinka, one of the most barbaric figures of the Holocaust.


Cuban Refugees Tangle Mexican Diplomacy
A series of incidents involving Cuban refugees headed for the United States has brought Mexico's traditional friendliness with Cuba into new conflict with its effort to win approval for the North American Free Trade Agreement.
The largest group, 72 Cubans, crept under a garden wall at Mexico's embassy in the Dominican Republic on Thursday, refusing to leave unless Mexico helped them get to Miami.


Topics of The Times; Next Week: 'East Lynne'
More than 900 teen-agers entered scripts for this year's Young Playwrights Festival in New York City.
The winners' works, four one-act plays, open Off Broadway this week, and a fifth will have a staged reading.
Entering the stage door from high school with a professional production in the Big Apple is surely the thrill of a young lifetime.
The festival was the playwright Stephen Sondheim's idea 12 years ago, borrowed from a similar competition in London.
It solicits entries from high schools all over the country, and has produced 55 youngsters' plays so far.
Of this year's winners, three boys and two girls, four were 17 and one 16.


CUBAN PILOT SAYS MILITARY HAS WOES
A Cuban Air Force pilot who on Friday defected to the United States said today that the country's economic crisis under Fidel Castro had now grown so severe that the nation's military elite and its equipment, morale and readiness were being hurt.
In an interview and a news conference here, Capt.
Enio Ravelo Rodriguez said that one concern that led him to fly a MIG-21 jet trainer to Key West, Fla., from an air base just outside Havana was his fear of a popular revolt in which he would be called upon to fight against his people.
Many colleagues, he said, share that same anxiety and are wrestling with their consciences.


ASBESTOS IN THE SCHOOLS: Queens; Junior High 168: Confusion Prevails
Sheila Sachs has taught for 23 years.
And still, the night before school began, she could not sleep because of the butterflies in her stomach.
The excitement gave way to frustration yesterday, when she and dozens of teachers, parents and students arrived at Junior High School 168 in Queens to find out there would be no classes this day.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  American League  BALTIMORE ORIOLES -- Activated Gregg Olson, pitcher, from the 15-day disabled list.


ASBESTOS IN THE SCHOOLS: Brooklyn; At P.S. 27, They're Shut Out
On the surface, it looked like any other first day of school.
Children, clad in new outfits, clinging to their parents as they approached myriad of new faces.
Teachers, who had not seen each other for months, welcoming each other on the steps with warm embraces.
But yesterday was not like any other first day of school at Public School 27, in Red Hook, Brooklyn.
More than 100 children and teachers were turned away.
The school was closed after it was discovered that its hallways were tainted with asbestos.


Knicks Eye Bonner Signing
The Knicks are considering signing unrestricted free agent Anthony Bonner, a 6-foot-8-inch forward who was released by the Sacramento Kings earlier this month.
Although a deal has not been reached, Bonner is expected in New York later this week for an interview and a possible workout.
Bonner, a three-year pro who is 25 years old, is coming off his best season.
He averaged 14.5 points and 6.5 rebounds last season as a part-time starter at both forward positions.
The Kings wanted to keep Bonner, but they had to release him to make salary-cap room for Bobby Hurley, their first-round draft pick who signed last week.
The Knicks have a $550,000 salary slot available that was created when Bo Kimble was released.
Bonner may want more than $550,000, and he is expected to be pursued by several teams.


Review/Television; New York Cops in a Frank Light
Steven Bochco has once again sandbagged his opposition.
Declaring that his new show, "N.Y.P.D. Blue," would probably be broadcast television's first R-rated series, he generated an avalanche of invaluable publicity and the knee-jerk protests of assorted right-wing watchdog groups who hadn't seen a single episode.
Months before its debut on ABC tonight at 10, "N.Y.P.D. Blue" became the new season's most talked-about new series.
As it happens, it's also the best, by far.
In fact, "N.Y.P.D. Blue" does have some passing glimpses of nudity, though no more than can be seen on the average music video.
And there is some tough street language, usually in the form of slang for various body parts and functions, a device that has become a Bochco signature.
We are, after all, dealing with New York police officers here.
Station houses across the city are not likely to be shocked.
What matters is that "N.Y.P.D. Blue" has the drive, intelligence and compelling authenticity of the best of Mr.
Bochco's television work, and that includes "Hill Street Blues" and "L.A. Law."


California City's Abortion Clinic Burns, and Police Suspect Arson
An abortion clinic in Bakersfield, Calif., was destroyed before dawn today in what investigators said appeared to be a deliberately set fire.
The fire at the Family Planning Associates clinic was the latest of several destructive or violent incidents at abortion clinics around the nation.
One doctor has been shot to death and another wounded in recent months.


Review/Television; Manipulating Opinion On the Health-Care Plan
After proclaiming the Administration's health-care package "the most lobbied bill in history," tonight's edition of "The Health Quarterly" turns away from details of the plan, which are to be officially made known tomorrow, to focus on the pressures Congress is already feeling.
The favored lobbying technique these days, it appears, is not treating legislators to junkets or lunches, but churning up what passes as grass-roots opinion. (In recognition of its artificial nature, some call it Astroturf opinion.)


Emmys and Hope for 'Picket Fences'
If there were any folks in Rome, Wis., they would have had plenty to be proud of on Sunday night.
"Picket Fences," the CBS series set in the fictional town of Rome, walked away with the awards for best drama and the two top awards for acting in a drama series at the 45th annual Emmy Awards ceremony, at Pasadena, Calif.
Tom Skerritt, who plays the town sheriff, Jimmy Brock, won the award for best actor, and Kathy Baker, who plays his wife, Jill, the local doctor, won for best actress.


Georgia Panel Eases Sentence Of Youth in Ice Cream Theft
Saying there was an atmosphere of "mass hysteria" afoot nationwide when it comes to juvenile crime, the Georgia Board of Pardons and Parole today commuted the three-year prison sentence of a 17-year-old black youth for a burglary in which $20 worth of ice cream was stolen.
The board put the youth on two years' probation with the likelihood of a full pardon in 1995.
The action came five days after the five-member board took over the much publicized case at the request of Andrew Whalen, a white judge in rural Thomaston, Ga., whose original sentence prompted accusations of racism and unfairness.


Aristide Seeks the Removal Of Army and Police Chiefs
President Jean-Bertrand Aristide called today for the immediate removal of the head of the Haitian military, the Port-au-Prince police chief and hundreds of plainclothes police officers who the deposed President said have been involved in politically motivated killings in recent weeks.
"Cedras is a killer, Michel Francois is a killer and, of course, we ask for their removal," Father Aristide, a Roman Catholic priest, said at a news conference.
Lieut.
Gen.
Raoul Cedras is the head of Haitian armed forces, who deposed him in a coup two years ago, and Colonel Francois is in charge of the police in the country's capital.


Topics of The Times; Shine On, Mr. Taylor
Enthusiasm for "reinventing government" by eliminating burdensome regulation has captured Washington and sundry state capitals.
Last week it finally reached New Jersey's suburban Bergen County, across the Hudson from New York City.
It became obvious the county needed help when it issued 18 pages of regulations for the shoeshine stand in the lobby of the county courthouse.
The new rules subjected the concession to competitive bidding, and the operator to a dress code -- a dark brown or burgundy knee-length wrap-around smock, with pockets.


If Yanks Keep This Up, Add Sightseeing to Plans
There are nice restaurants in Toronto, and there is always a place to catch a movie.
Maybe the Yankees could walk around the city and talk hockey because that time of year is near.
Alternative plans might be needed for the Yankees to entertain themselves this weekend because their series against the Blue Jays is rapidly losing its impact.
Pennant race?
Not really.
The American League East has evolved into a pennant chase, and the Jays are sprinting away from the floundering Yankees, who suffered a 5-4 loss to the Minnestoa Twins last night at the Stadium.


The Pop Life
Late Miles, No Apologies
"No." That was always Miles Davis's answer when Quincy Jones asked him if he would once again perform his 1950's collaborations with the arranger Gil Evans.
"He made a declaration that he wouldn't go back and do anything he'd done before," Mr.
Jones said on Monday in a telephone interview, "which left out these beautiful masterpieces he'd done with Gil. I first asked him 15 years ago and I just kept bugging him about it."


SUNY Maintains Quality and Access Despite Budget Woes
To the Editor:
I read with interest, and sadness, your recent news article about the devastating cuts to public higher education in California and the impact these cuts seem to be having on the access and opportunity that were once hallmarks of California's great public university systems.


U.S. Troops Arrest Somali Warlord's Top Aide
More than 50 Army Rangers swooped down by helicopter on a compound in Mogadishu, Somalia today and arrested a chief aide to the fugitive clan leader, Mohammad Farah Aidid, United Nations military officials in the Somali capital said.
A United Nations military spokesman, Maj.
David Stockwell, said the Rangers arrested Osman Hassan Ali, known as Ato, who was described as the "principal adviser to Aidid and his militia." Three other Somalis whose names were not released were also arrested.


Eating Well
"AT $5 a box I'm not going to buy any of those," said the woman who was poring over the shelves of cold cereals at a supermarket.
"I'm going to stick with oatmeal."
She was reflecting a growing sentiment among shoppers that cold cereals, as well as many other brand-name products, cost too much.
And they are registering their disapproval in numerous ways: switching to other brands or waiting for coupons and two-for-one offers that reduce the cost by as much as $1.


Japanese Coalition Partner Is Not Religious
To the Editor:
Japan's Komeito (Clean Government Party), an important member of the new coalition government, has been called a religious organization, raising concerns that the inclusion of Komeito in the Japanese Government abridges the separation of religion and state that is protected under the Japanese Constitution (see, for example, "Buddhist Power Grows," letter, Aug. 30).


Critic's Notebook; How '60 Minutes' Holds Its Viewers' Attention
Why is "60 Minutes" different from other television news magazines?
One answer could be found in Sunday's season-starter: Mike Wallace did a pointed report on the chronic, evidently uncontrollable waste and worse within the United Nations; Morley Safer was the droll guide to excrescences of the modern-art market, and Lesley Stahl looked into a large-scale fraud by blood-testing laboratories.
The selections were notable for what they excluded: violent crime, victimized children, tales of courage or despair in the face of disease or other physical or mental affliction, show-biz profiles.
That is not to say that "60 Minutes" does not resort to such staples with fair frequency (next Sunday, Mr. Wallace interviews Luciano Pavarotti), only that it can be counted on to take a chance now and then on an hour without the more common audience-grabbers.


Tombstones Defaced With Pro-Nazi Slogans in North Jersey Jewish Cemetery
Nearly 100 tombstones in a Jewish cemetery here were defaced with swastikas and pro-Nazi slogans, including "Hitler Was Right," the police said today.
"It's the largest anti-Semitic desecration of a cemetery that I can recall," said Jeffrey Maas, New Jersey director of the Anti-Defamation League for 18 years.
He denounced the white spray-painted symbols as "calling cards of hate."


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Fox Video's 'Once Upon a Forest' wants to go on a magic profit ride with Disney's 'Aladdin.'
MANY carpets have tassels.
Few carpets, even magic ones, sport coattails.
Yet when the Walt Disney Company releases the home video version of "Aladdin" next week, a rival marketer hopes to grab on and ride off with a hit of its own.
Walt Disney Home Video's expectations for "Aladdin" are soaring higher than the eponymous hero did during the animated musical comedy-adventure.
Video industry executives predict that the cassettes, due in stores on Oct. 1, will break a record set only last year when Disney sold an estimated 20 million copies of "Beauty and the Beast." Some say that "Aladdin," the highest-grossing animated theatrical film in history, could sell as many as 30 million copies.


Killer of Wealthy Parents Pressed for a Motive
Two sharply conflicting theories of what drove two brothers to kill their wealthy parents four years ago clashed in a courtroom duel today, as a prosecutor tried to paint the elder brother as a spoiled brat and a chronic liar.
The cross-examination of Lyle Menendez was the first time that the prosecution has directly confronted a defendant after 41 days of testimony in the trial of Lyle, 25, and his brother Erik, 22.
The brothers could be sentenced to death if convicted of first-degree murder in the Aug. 20, 1989, shotgun slayings of their parents, Jose Menendez, 45, an entertainment executive, and Kitty Menendez, 47.


Dinkins Outlines Plan for Future Economic Growth
Trying to position himself as an incumbent candidate for change -- a challenging political proposition -- Mayor David N. Dinkins yesterday sketched a broad blueprint for future economic growth in New York City, saying he would create 110,000 new private-sector jobs if elected to a second term.
For Mr.
Dinkins, who has steadfastly insisted that his administration bore little responsibility for the recession that has cost the city more than 350,000 jobs since 1989, the plan was a sharp departure.
He is now stressing job creation instead of job retention.


INQUIRY BY EMPIRE FINDS FALSE DATA FILED ON FINANCES
Empire Blue Cross and Blue Shield said yesterday that the results of an internal inquiry show the company filed false information with the New York State Insurance Department for years.
The announcement amounted to an official admission by the company that allegations that it had been keeping double records and misstating its losses were true.
The company said it would probably refile the records for the last four years, a period during which the inaccurate figures were used to influence legislation overhauling the state's insurance industry.


Boston Whittles Mayoral Field To 2 for Runoff
In a strikingly civil, some might even say dull, campaign waged in a city with a history of truculent politics, voters here today chose two political veterans, a city council member and a state representative, to face each other in the November mayoral election.
The councilman, Thomas M. Menino, 50, became the Acting Mayor in July when his longtime political ally, Raymond L. Flynn, left the job two years early to become the United States Ambassador to the Vatican.


Giuliani Garners More Endorsements for His Mayoral Campaign


Referee's New Assignment in Doubt
The appointment of MICKEY VANN to referee the title fight between the W.B.C. heavyweight champion, LENNOX LEWIS, and FRANK BRUNO on Oct. 1 is being challenged because of his involvement in the PERNELL WHITAKER-JULIO CESAR CHAVEZ bout.


Browns' Mack Runs Out of Retirement
Fullback KEVIN MACK ended his two-month retirement yesterday and signed a contract with the Cleveland Browns for the rest of the year.
Mack, who led the Browns in rushing last season for the sixth time in eight years, retired in July, saying he had lost his desire for the game.
"I don't like the way I did it," said Mack.
"It was like I just quit, and I'm not a quitter." (AP)


Larocca Decides to Quit as Head of Business Group After 8 Years
To James L. Larocca, one of the most disheartening events of his eight years as head of the Long Island Association was the Olympus Corporation's recent withdrawal of its plans to build a new corporate headquarters in Huntington.
Faced with opposition from civic groups, which maintained that traffic generated by the project would overtax local roads, the company decided to look elsewhere.
In Mr.
Larocca's view, it was a serious setback to Long Island's efforts to lure major corporations, at a time when the region's economy desperately could have used the financial and tax boost the Olympus project would have provided.


New York Magazine's Head Replaces Editor of Esquire
Surprising the magazine industry yesterday, Hearst Magazines removed Terry McDonell as editor in chief of Esquire and went outside the company to replace him with Edward Kosner, editor and president of New York magazine.
Mr.
McDonell was named editor in chief and publisher of Sports Afield, a much less visible Hearst magazine.
Tom Paugh, editor in chief of the outdoor magazine since 1978, becomes editor emeritus until his retirement in April 1994.


Oregon Quake Jars Buildings And Emotions
Most schools and businesses in this farming and timber town of 18,000 people closed today as city workers inspected each building for damage in an earthquake that shook southern Oregon on Monday night.
Centered 15 miles northwest of Klamath Falls, the earthquake, the second in this area in seven months, registered 5.7 on the Richter scale of ground motion and was followed by two aftershocks that witnesses said created a rolling sensation inside buildings.
One person died in the initial quake when a boulder fell on a pickup truck.
Several building facades fell, bridges cracked, causing roads to be closed, and cars were smashed by falling brick.


No Headline
"My duty as president is to state that the current corps of deputies has lost its right to be in control of crucial levers of state power." -- PRESIDENT BORIS N. YELTSIN.  [ A18:4. ]


Glee Followed Strangling, Youth Testifies at Trial
James P. Wanger pounded his fists in joy and jumped up and down yelling "We did it! He's dead! He's gone!" the night he strangled Robert A. Solimine Jr., said one of the three youths who confessed to witnessing the crime.
The youth, who pleaded guilty to murder for his part in the ritual strangling testified in Superior Court that Mr.
Wanger garroted Mr.
Solimine with an outdoor extension cord "about as thick as a dime." Both youths were 17 at the time.


Jean-Rene Guerrand; Perfumer, 89
Jean-Rene Guerrand, patriarch of the family that owns the Paris-Based Hermes Group, died at his country home near Le Havre in Normandy last Friday.
He was 89.
His nephew, Jean-Louis Dumas, chairman of the fashion company, announced his death yesterday.


Arnold Schneidman, Software Expert, 69
Arnold Schneidman, an expert in the design and application of computer software for accountants, died on Sunday at a hospital in New Haven.
He was 69 and lived in Greenwich, Conn.
No cause of death was provided.


Small-Cap Nasdaq Stocks
A complete listing of Nasdaq small-capitalization stocks now appears in The New York Times on Sundays.
The partial listing of those stocks, formerly published daily, has been discontinued to provide space for expanded mutual fund tables.


Tell Teen-Agers It's Not O.K. to Get Pregnant; Circumstances Vary
To the Editor:
Lynn Martin is to be commended for contributing to the discussion of teen-age pregnancy (Op-Ed, Sept. 8).
However, the notion of group homes for pregnant and parenting adolescents is not new.
The Florence Crittenton division of the Child Welfare League of America has provided such services for more than 100 years.


CLINTON'S HEALTH PLAN: White House Memo; If It's Tuesday It Must Be . . . Health, Nafta, Yeltsin, Lunch
The big house on Pennsylvania Avenue rang today with the clamor of its distant Jacksonian past.
Not in many years have as many people from as many different groups poured into the salons and onto the lawns of the White House in one day on as many different errands.
Government activism is back in vogue, and this was a great chance to watch the show.


New Progress Reported in Bosnia Talks
A day after United Nations officials reported new snags in negotiations toward a negotiated settlement of the war in Bosnia, signs of a breakthrough reappeared today when mediators reported an agreement by all sides on a plan to allow a proposed Muslim state an outlet to the Adriatic Sea.
Bosnia's Muslim President, Alija Izetbegovic, had made access to the sea one of the main conditions for accepting the current peace plan, which would partition Bosnia into three ethnic republics, with the likelihood that the Serbian republic will eventually be annexed by Serbia and the Croatian republic by Croatia.


Open Positions on Short Sales Surge on Big Board
With prices high and merger activity strong, the New York Stock Exchange reported that the number of shares sold short and not covered surged by 12 percent this month, to a record 1.23 billion shares.
It was the largest increase in recent years, Big Board officials said.
The American Stock Exchange, however, reported a drop in short interest of 4.4 percent, to 99.9 million shares.
It was the second-largest figure ever for the exchange.


In Cuba, No Doubt Who's No. 1
On the night of the title fight between Julio Cesar Chavez and Pernell Whitaker that was billed as the event to decide who, pound for pound, was the world's best boxer, Alcides Sagarra had an intriguing thought.
"We have followed both of these fighters closely," said the man who has directed Cuba's national boxing program for three decades.
"They are both tough opponents, but our system has produced boxers who could defeat either of them."


It's Barkley Live Before Saturday Night
Charles Barkley is nervous about being the host on "Saturday Night Live" this weekend, but he is never shy about speaking his mind.
Barkley, the National Basketball Association's most valuable player last season, addressed a number of issues yesterday at a news conference in Manhattan staged to promote his appearance on the NBC show.
Barkley's team, the Phoenix Suns, was rocked last week when the starting small forward, Richard Dumas, was suspended by the league and entered a drug rehabilitation clinic.
But Barkley insisted that the Suns would still be a contender, even if they don't sign the free-agent forward A. C. Green. 'Michael's Doing a Lot Better'
Asked about the Suns' pursuit of the highly sought Green, Barkley said: "A. C. Green is really ticking me off. We've offered him great money. We've wined him and dined him. We've got a great team. We've got a great organization. We've got a great building. We got great fans. If he wants to come, great. If he don't. . . .


Studies Show Futility of Rushing Some Heart Victims to Hospitals
It is futile, and economically wasteful, for emergency medical workers to rush heart attack victims to the hospital after efforts to resuscitate them in the field have failed, two major studies have found.
The studies, done in Memphis and Houston, add to a growing body of evidence that patients who do not respond to advanced cardiac life support before being rushed to a hospital have little chance of survival, researchers said yesterday.


Census Data Show Rise In Child Care by Fathers
Fathers are taking care of one in every five preschool children while mothers work, the first big increase in more than 10 years, according to a Census Bureau report made public yesterday.
Although the study did not directly ask families why fathers were providing child care, its author, Martin O'Connell, attributed the increase to rising unemployment, the high cost of child care, a growing number of parents who work night shifts or part-time, and changing social attitudes.


How's Kicks? In N.F.L., They're Remarkably Good
National Football League place-kickers have traditionally been the butt of jokes.
They were not viewed as athletes but as eccentrics who simply showed up on Sunday afternoons.
Most of them were foreign-born, and a few spoke little English.
And their legend as being the quirkiest personalities in the league was fueled in Super Bowl VII in 1973, when Miami's Garo Yepremian grabbed the football after a blocked field-goal attempt and tried to pass, with the ball ending up in the hands of Washington's Mike Bass.
The next embarrassing image was that of Yepremian chasing Bass, diving and clutching only air as Bass returned the blunder 49 yards for a touchdown.


Another Suit In Safecard Legal Battle
Robert L. Dilenschneider, the influential former chief executive of Hill &amp; Knowlton who now heads his own public relations firm, has been accused in a lawsuit of arranging a board room dismissal of a one-time client for personal profit.
The former client and plaintiff in the suit, Peter Halmos, used to be the chairman of Safecard Services, a credit card protection service based in Fort Lauderdale, Fla.
The company and Mr.
Halmos were subjects of criminal investigations over a number of years by the Internal Revenue Service.
While no charges were ever filed, Safecard cut its ties with him last year amid allegations of financial impropriety


Ivy League Finds Itself Locked in Bidding War For Prospective Students
In the two years since an antitrust action led Ivy League institutions to stop setting common limits on awards to scholarship applicants, the colleges are increasingly being drawn into bidding wars for promising students, officials say.
A student can now receive financial aid offers that vary as much as $5,000 from college to college in the Ivy League.
"We have certainly seen in the past two years more instances of significant divergences in financial aid awards," said James O. Freedman, the president of Dartmouth College in Hanover, N.H.
"What it does to us is a student calls us up and says, 'This institution gave me $2,000 or $4,000 or $5,000 more than you did.' That rarely happened before."


CHRONICLE
Barnard College said farewell on Monday to ELLEN V. FUTTER, its president, who is leaving to become the head the American Museum of Natural History.
But the mood was anything but somber.
In fact, the tone of the "Futterfest" was set when 14 members of the Columbia Marching Band trooped onto Lehman Lawn wearing Barnard boxer shorts -- over their jeans, on their heads and wrapped around their arms.
Playing their saxophones, drums, horns, mops and tambourines, they pulled Ms.
Futter out of the crowd of more than 500.


Review/Theater: Richard II; Richard Thomas Puts His Stamp On Giving Up a Throne Vigorously
Surely, no Richard II has ever given up the throne of England with quite the deviltry or vigor that Richard Thomas brings to the proceedings in the Shakespeare Theater production that Michael Kahn has directed here.
In an audacious, freshly conceived performance, Mr.
Thomas stands the orthodox interpretation of Shakespeare's lugubrious, unseated king on its head -- or, to be more precise, on its feet.
For this is not the usual cerebral Richard, the poet king who melts from regal arrogance into introspective resignation, a character Samuel Johnson, for one, accused of having too much "passive fortitude" for a monarch.
Once Mr.
Thomas's Richard hands over his crown to the usurping Bolingbroke, he does not go at all quietly into oblivion.
An actor of prodigious physical energy (as anyone who saw his indefatigably inventive "Peer Gynt" with the Hartford Stage Company a few years ago can testify), Mr.
Thomas invests the King with an active, blazingly kinetic anger and uses the character's soliloquies on disposession as slyly confrontational speeches to sting the consciences of his betrayers.
When scholars note that Richard foreshadows Hamlet, they are usually referring to the character's paralyzing melancholy.
Mr.
Thomas, who has played Hamlet, finds another, more provocative level of kinship: the "antic disposition" of crafty, double-edged madness and a fierce sense that the world he believes in has suddenly gone out of joint.
The resulting performance turns a poetic meditation of a play into an evening of dynamic jolts and surprises.
Though Mr.
Thomas's performance is longer on bravado than subtlety (and occasionally marred by an excessively plummy accent), it is carefully and consistently thought out.
Richard was only 11 years old when he ascended the throne, and in this production, 20 years into his reign, he remains a medieval child king: a man brought up to believe that his country is, unchangingly, his own colorful board game.
Clad in radiant gold and white brocade, with a long pre-Raphaelite blond mane, the Richard of the pre-abdication scenes wears his raiment (perhaps a bit too obviously) like a tantrum-prone little boy playing dress-up.
He is clearly in love with the part: he pronounces edicts of banishment and taxation gleefully, more with the exhilaration of capricious power than with any firm sense of political consequence.
Accordingly, when finally forced to acknowledge the growing popularity of Bolingbroke's rebellion, he delivers his famous heaven-summoning apostrophe on divine right like a boy reciting fairy tales he has never previously been given evidence to disbelieve.
Once it becomes clear these fantasies are false, he turns abruptly into a colossally astonished, Cassandra-like prophet of national doom, and the entire production slips into high, aggressive gear.
When Richard descends from the balcony of a castle in Wales to meet the rebel Bolingbroke on his own ground, he marches down the stairs in a petulant, tight-lipped fury that portends the explosions to come.
The most incendiary of these occurs in the legendary scene in which Richard asks for a mirror to see if the king's face still even exists.
He does not, as the text indicates, dash the mirror to the ground.
Rather, he shatters it against his forehead, drawing blood, and smears the hand of Bolingbroke (now Henry IV) with it as he kneels before him.
What is usually presented as a symbol of disintegrating narcissism becomes an outward gesture of ferocious defiance.
It has something of the harrowing effect of Lucia di Lammermoor arriving at her wedding reception in a bloodied nightgown.
It could be argued that Mr.
Thomas's performance is too extroverted.
If the play is fundamentally about a king who loses his throne to find himself, Mr.
Thomas never quite convinces us of that metamorphosis.
Indeed, Richard's final, inwardly burrowing soliloquy in prison never really takes off until he finds new cause for active indignation.
But basically Mr.
Thomas's interpretation has a sustained, compelling logic, and it infuses the entire play with an unexpected ardor.
The production that surrounds Mr.
Thomas is always serviceable, and sometimes more.
Mr.
Kahn has staged the play as a Darwinian transition from a frozen medievalism to a more brutal, fluid world of pragmatic politics.
This is underscored both by Tom Broecker's costumes, which juxtapose Richard's burnished luminescence against the more somber clothing of the courtiers, and Derek McLane's set, which places platforms on crude scaffolding before a massive gold-toned reproduction of the Westminster Abbey portrait of Richard.
In the course of the play, this portrait is dismantled, and the final image, with Bolingbroke triumphant, is one of a dark stage strewn with bodies.
While visually effective, there is something a little dishonest about this, as it suggests a nostalgia for a more regimented world that Shakespeare himself had little affection for.
The supporting performances, while occasionally flat, include strong contributions from Edward Gero, as a calculating, increasingly careworn Bolingbroke, and Franchelle Stewart Dorn, in a robust comic turn as the Duchess of York.
And as directed by Mr.
Kahn, the actors are usually able to find the energy in what can be a static text.
Ultimately, though, the production belongs to Mr.
Thomas.
Throughout this century, Richard II has attracted an august assortment of stars, from John Gielgud to Jeremy Irons.
It is to Mr.
Thomas's credit that he makes the part so distinctly his own, with a fiery style that should rightfully banish forever the ghost of the gentle, fawn-faced John-Boy Walton, the television role that made him a star.
With Nigel Hawthorne now touring the country with the National Theater production of Alan Bennett's "Madness of George III," it is a very good year in America for unhinged British kings.
Richard II  By William Shakespeare; directed by Michael Kahn; associate director, Daniel Fish; set by Derek McLane; costumes by Tom Broecker; lighting by Howell Binkley; composer and sound designer, Adam Wernick; fight director, J. Allen Suddeth; vocal consultant, Elizabeth Smith; stage manager, James Latus; production manager, Randy Engels.
Presented by the Shakespeare Theater, Michael Kahn, artistic director; Jessica L. Andrews, managing director, in association with the University of South Carolina.
At 450 Seventh Street N.W., Washington.
King Richard II . . .
Richard Thomas John of Gaunt, Duke of Lancaster Ted van Griethuysen Edmund of Langley, Duke of York James J. Lawless Henry Bolingbroke, Duke of Hereford Edward Gero Thomas Mowbray . . .
Christopher McHale Duke of Aumerle . . .
Robert Petkoff Isabel, Queen to King Richard . . .
Tari Signor Duchess of York . . .
Francelle Stewart Dorn Henry Percy, Earl of Northumberland Tom Spackman


Offering by U S West Unit
Rising long-term interest rates did not deter a flurry of corporate bond issues from coming to market yesterday.
Analysts said the recent rise in rates had not kept corporations from refinancing older debt because, even with the rise, interest rates remained at historic lows and many issuers were locking in rates before they moved higher.
New corporate debt offerings were led by a $1 billion bond issue from U S West Communications, the telephone operating subsidiary of U S West, in the midst of a restructuring.
The company said proceeds from the sale of the 40-year bonds would help pay for previously announced bond redemptions.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, a report in the Company News column of Business Day yesterday, about the decision by the board of Tambrands Inc. against selling the company, located the company's headquarters incorrectly.
It is in White Plains, not in Lake Success, L.I.


Little Things Are Big In Reeves's Game Plan
It was a message the Giants haven't needed for three years: "Don't Blow It!"
William Roberts wrote it large on the locker-room chalkboard today, a reminder that they are 3-0, with a week off and a stretch of playoff opponents coming up.
But it was a reminder that is all but superfluous with Coach Dan Reeves in charge.


U.S. Petroleum Data
In millions of barrels except refinery utilization
Sept 17
Sept 10
Sept 18
1993
1993
1992
Gasoline production, daily
7.6
7.5
7.1
Distillate production, daily
3.2
3.2
3.0
Gasoline stocks
204.6
201.5
206.1
Distillate stocks
129.1
128.6
130.3
Crude imports, daily
6.3
6.5
6.8
Product imports, daily
1.6
1.9
2.2
Crude stocks
339.0
341.1
326.9
Crude production, daily
6.8
6.8
7.0
Refinery utilization (%)
93.2
92.9
89.3
Source: American Petroleum Institute


Langer Is Likely for the Ryder Cup
The European captain, BERNARD GALLACHER, said yesterday that he was optimistic that the Masters champion, BERNHARD LANGER, would play in the biennial matches, which begin Friday at the Belfry in Sutton Coldfield, England.
Langer has a neck injury that has made him a questionable starter for the 12-man team that will attempt to regain the Ryder Cup.
That decision will be made Wednesday, Gallacher said, but added that "if Langer can play like he played today, that's good enough for me." (AP)


SCHOLAR WHO SUED WINS $1.2 MILLION
A Michigan judge ordered the University of Michigan yesterday to pay $1.2 million in damages to a scientist after a jury found that her supervisor had stolen credit for her research and that the university had failed to investigate properly.
The civil case is believed to be the first in which shortcomings in a university's inquiry into an accusation of scientific misconduct brought a large court award, and university officials say they are worried that it may encourage similar lawsuits.
Judge Patrick J. Conlin of the Michigan Court of Claims in Washtenaw County issued the order yesterday and is expected to enter it officially today.


Tokyo Journal; Japanese Leaders Remodeled, on Sleek U.S. Lines
When John Major dropped by the Prime Minister's residence here the other day to meet Japan's new leader, Morihiro Hosokawa, at least a few things were familiar holdovers from the 38-year-rule of the Liberal Democrats that ended abruptly this summer.
The roof of the aging brick building still leaks.
The meeting rooms retain a musty smell suggesting that no one has opened a window since the end of World War II.
But just about everything else is different.


Noir by the Father of the New Wave
Of the major French film makers, Jean-Pierre Melville (1917-1973) remains one of the least known in this country.
Those Americans who do know him are probably more familiar with his reputation as the father of the New Wave than with his films, especially the film noir melodramas so adored by the young French critics of the 1950's and 60's.
Two of his best, most characteristic films are "Bob le Flambeur," which was made in 1955 but was not seen in this country until 1981, and "Le Samourai" (1967), released here as "The Godson" in 1972.
"The Red Circle" (1970), opening today at the Film Forum, will be of interest primarily to those who already know Melville's work.
It may baffle anyone coming upon him for the first time.
Having been cut from 140 minutes to 99, "The Red Circle" would seem to be good deal more laconic and austere than even Melville would have wished.


Ken Wilson; Newspaper Executive, 71
Ken Wilson, a longtime executive at The San Francisco Chronicle, died on Monday at his home in Santa Rosa.
He was 71.
The cause was cancer, his family said.


Olympic Shot-Put Champion Faces Ban
The American Olympic shot-put champion, MIKE STULCE, faced a life ban yesterday after failing a drug test at last month's world championships in Stuttgart, Germany.
Stulce, winner of the gold medal at the Barcelona Olympics last year and the bronze in Stuttgart, tested positive for the second time in his career.


Contemplating Nature To Celebrate the Season
The circle of people gathered on the sun-dappled hillside to celebrate the death of all that surrounded them.
They gathered to celebrate the first day of fall.


Harvard Settling Suit Alleging Bias
To settle a suit with a former professor who said she was denied tenure because of her sex, Harvard Law School is contributing $260,000 to help her establish an institute that will provide free legal services to battered women.
Prof.
Clare Dalton, who is married to Labor Secretary Robert B. Reich, sued Harvard in 1987 for discrimination when five male professors were granted tenure but she was not.
Professor Dalton, who is now tenured at the Northeastern University School of Law, reached an out-of-court settlement with Harvard on Monday.


Child-Molesting Case Raises Old Questions in San Diego
In what has become a familiar courtroom drama around the country, a jury here has been hearing evidence for the last five months about a child-care worker accused of sexually molesting small children and frightening them with bizarre acts that included hanging them upside down from a chandelier, dunking them in toilets, drinking blood and mutilating animals.
The case has become a running local drama in newspapers and on talk shows, and has raised questions again about the reliability of the testimony of small children and their susceptibility to suggestive questioning.


RATIFY PACT, RABIN URGES LEGISLATORS
Putting his Government's fate on the line, Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin appealed to Parliament today to approve his agreement with the Palestine Liberation Organization, calling it "hope for an end to tears" and to the hundred years' war between Arabs and Jews in this battle-weary land.
In rebuttal, the main opposition figure, Benjamin Netanyahu of the Likud Party, demanded new elections, accusing the Government of reneging on promises and of mistaking hope for reality, which, he said was that Israel now stood in mortal peril.


What's Driving Diller To Play for Paramount?
To his close friends, the $9.5 billion bid made by Barry Diller, the chairman of QVC Network, the television home shopping company, for Paramount Communications was totally out of character.
Normally secretive, Mr.
Diller has almost openly expressed his hunger for Paramount in recent weeks, and friends say he has pined after Paramount as the ideal soulmate for QVC.
Some friends believe Mr.
Diller's bid has elements of personal revenge in it -- he despises Martin S. Davis, the chairman of Paramount and Mr.
Diller's former boss, whose actions prompted his departure from that company.
Mr.
Diller, 51, has insisted to associates, however, that such matters are irrelevant in the face of the lightning growth of television and multimedia technology.


A New Era for Windows on the World
WINDOWS ON THE WORLD, which had been one of the five top grossing restaurants in the country before it was forced to close by the bombing of the World Trade Center on Feb. 26, will be a different restaurant when it finally reopens.
Last week, 36 restaurant owners were asked by the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey, which owns the World Trade Center, to submit proposals for renovating and operating the restaurant and banquet complex on the 106th and 107th floors of 1 World Trade Center.
Initial replies have to be submitted by Oct. 4, with the final proposals due Dec. 10.


Arafat Ally Slain After Gaza Rally
A local leader of Yasir Arafat's Fatah group in the Palestine Liberation Organization was assassinated today in Gaza in what Palestinians said was a power struggle within the faction.
It was the first slaying of a prominent Palestinian since last week's signing of the Israeli-P.L.O. agreement on self-rule in the occupied territories.


Rangel Backs Hevesi In Comptroller Race
Representative Charles B. Rangel of Manhattan yesterday endorsed Alan G. Hevesi over the incumbent, Elizabeth Holtzman, in the Democratic primary runoff for New York City comptroller.
Mr.
Rangel, who had not taken sides until now in that race, said his decision was based strictly on what he considered Mr.
Hevesi's better chances to win that election and his ability to help Mayor David N. Dinkins in his bid for re-election in November.


3 Rules of Salons: Talk, Talk, Talk
A SALON, says Webster's New World Dictionary, never at a loss for words on such matters, is "a regular gathering of distinguished guests such as might meet in a drawing room; esp., a meeting of literary or artistic people in a celebrity's home."
The social scene in late 1993 seems less Andy Warhol, more Gertrude Stein.
Many club habitues of years past are finding contentment in quieter corners and deeper discussion.
Sylvia Miles, actress and champion party goer, says that more and more of her invitations are summonses to salons.


No Tall Tale: 7-6 Bradley and a 5-3 Bride
SHAWN BRADLEY, the 7-foot-6-inch Philadelphia 76ers' multimillion-dollar rookie, is heading to the altar.
The bride is 5 feet 3 inches.
Bradley told radio station WXTU-FM in Philadelphia that he would walk down the aisle on Saturday with his fiancee, whom he met at church.
Bradley, 21, was not eager to make his wedding plans public.
But his fiancee, ANNETTE EVERTSON, egged him on.


M. McClelland, 53; Helped Experiments In Theater and Arts
Maurice McClelland, a champion of experimental theater who in his last years devoted himself to the fight against AIDS, died on Sunday at his home in Jersey City.
He was 53.
The cause was AIDS, a spokeswoman for the family said.


Tourist Murders Expose Our Values
To the Editor:
I read "The Warning Shots in Miami" (editorial, Sept. 13) and as I write, I hear on the news that another tourist was mugged and killed today, this time an Englishman.


Review/Theater: Blown Sideways Through Life; Fat and 64 Jobs Later, Misfit Finally Finds A Niche on the Stage
Claudia Shear is a Brooklyn-born woman of uncertain age (the late 30's, perhaps?) who personifies two middle-class nightmares.
She is fat, and she cannot keep a job.
As she explains in "Blown Sideways Through Life," her hourlong autobiographical monologue at the New York Theater Workshop, to be fat is to be branded not merely unerotic but un-American.
And to have had and lost 64 (count 'em, 64) jobs -- for employers as varied as Bear Stearns and a whorehouse operating clandestinely on East 49th Street -- is to be seen as without character, class or a place in the world.
But in this aptly titled piece, Ms.
Shear has at last found a place: in the theater.
Her show, drawn exclusively from her own true, sometimes hilarious misadventures, marks the debut of a born dramatist.
Neither a stand-up routine nor a strictly journalistic memoir, the monologue mixes vividly observed anecdotes with a sly, poignant and highly theatrical investigation of one woman's search for an identity deeper and more human than any job description.
The questions Ms.
Shear raises about her own hapless quest for personal fulfillment in the workplace end up implicating an audience that may have arrived at the theater smug in its identity as the gainfully employed.


CHRONICLE
There are still people around who get a kick out of meeting former New York Mayor EDWARD I. KOCH, and GEORGETTE SHIPP, a court stenographer from Bergenfield, N.J., is one of them.
Not only did she get to exchange a few words with Mr.
Koch yesterday afternoon, but he also gave her $10,000, something she had never anticipated when she happened to walk by a promotion being conducted by the Milton Bradley Company for its newest game, "Oodles."


Personal Health
ONLY a decade ago, seven out of every eight operations involved at least one night's stay in the hospital before surgery and often several nights afterward.
Today, according to the New York State Society of Anesthesiologists, about 60 percent of operations are done on an outpatient basis: the patient arrives at the hospital or surgical center the day of surgery and goes home well before the next day dawns.
In a few years, the society estimates, two-thirds of operations will be such ambulatory procedures.
But just because an operation does not require an overnight hospital stay does not mean it is a totally safe and innocuous procedure.
All operations carry risks both during surgery and for days and even weeks afterward.
Awareness of the possible hazards and proper preparation by the patient or a surrogate can help to forestall complications and to get prompt and perhaps lifesaving care when postoperative problems arise.


People
*
Murray M. Loecher was named president and general counsel of Arnell/Bickford Associates, New York, succeeding Ted Bickford, who left in August to run Grand Street Productions, a music company.
Mr.
Loecher was previously a lawyer in private practice.
Also, Charles Rose, chief financial officer, was named to the additional new positions of director of client services and senior vice president of finance, and Bruno Asselin, a vice president of account services, was named to the new position of senior vice president and marketing director. *
Midge Richardson, editor in chief for 18 years at Seventeen magazine, New York, was named to the new position of editor at large at its parent, K-III Magazines.
A successor at Seventeen is being sought; Nancy Hessel-Weber, creative director, was named acting editor.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  American League
CALIFORNIA ANGELS -- Signed Joe Magrane, pitcher, to a three-year contract extension through 1996.
National League


Market Place; Ralston may try more sprucing up with a second spinoff.
WHEN Wall Street talks about dogs in connection with the Ralston Purina Company, it is as likely to be describing some of the St.
Louis conglomerate's major businesses as it is the pets for which Ralston makes food.
Acknowledging its problem, Ralston has already spun off 55 percent of its baking subsidiary, and tomorrow the board is scheduled to consider a spinoff of its Chex cereal, Beechnut baby food and private-label crackers operations.


Sega to Use Hitachi Chip In Video Game Machine
Sega Enterprises said today that it would base its next-generation home video game machine, due in the fall of 1994, on a new chip being developed by Hitachi Ltd.
Sega and Hitachi will be pitted against the team of the Nintendo Company and Silicon Graphics Inc. and against a newcomer, the 3DO Company, in the battle to sell advanced video game machines offering images more vivid and realistic than those in today's machines.


Corrections
A subheading in Science Times yesterday with an article about Lyme disease appeared in error in some copies.
It duplicated the subheading of another article on the page.
Under the headline "Doctors Pin Hopes on Vaccine for Lyme," the subheading should have said, "Tests are set on Block Island, where exposure to the disease is common."


Fastest, Maybe Smoothest, Trip Up
Even as it streaks skyward at 41 feet a second, there is virtually no noise or vibration in the world's fastest passenger elevator.
The only clues that one is moving, in fact, are a speedometer readout in the elevator and the popping of the passengers' ears.
A 10-yen coin, about the size of an American quarter, can be stood on its edge and not topple during the 68-story journey.
In Japan, the race is on to build the world's fastest elevator.


Corrections
The Metropolitan Diary column of The Living Section on Sept. 8, quoting a letter about a couple who used a therapeutic technique of mimicking barking dogs to break the tension of an argument, misnamed the technique and misspelled the name of the letter writer, who thought it up.
She is Berta Hershcopf, and her technique is called "bark therapy," not "bark theory."


Smith and Yank Goal Both Rusting Away
Lee Smith never really knew if he would adjust to New York.
Or make people forget the troubles the Yankee relievers have seen.
Or just suffer the same sort of fate that sometimes befalls noted rent-a-stoppers like Jeff Reardon, who tried but failed to save world championship desires of the Atlanta Braves last year.
Twenty-two long days and nights after being acquired by the Yankees, Lee Smith still did not know the answers to any of the above yesterday.


Touted Rookie Roaming the Bench, Not the Field
Marvin Jones, the Jets' first-round draft pick, says he's getting a little antsy about his lack of playing time, but it looks as if it could be a while before the linebacker gets a significant role on the defense.
He is not close to moving Kyle Clifton out of the starting middle linebacker position.
Jones, who missed 14 days of training camp before signing his five-year, $5.9 million contract, has been playing mainly on special teams.
He was in for two series -- about six plays -- in the first game against Denver.
He didn't play at all against the Dolphins.
He got a lot of practice during the bye week, but is not considered ready to step into the lineup just yet.
Coach Bruce Coslet wouldn't even commit to getting Jones more playing time against the Patriots this Sunday.


Kunstler to Defend Sheik in Bombing Case
William M. Kunstler, the flamboyant civil rights lawyer, said he has agreed to represent Sheik Omar Abdel Rahman against charges that he led a terrorist conspiracy in New York.
Mr.
Kunstler and his partner, Ronald L. Kuby, are already defending 2 of the 15 suspects in the case -- Siddig Ibrahim Siddig Ali and Ibrahim A. Elgabrowny.
They said they had been asked Monday by the sheik's supporters to replace Mr.
Abdel Rahman's current lawyer, Harry Batchelder Jr.


No One Admitting Defeat In N.F.L. Expansion Game
St.
Louis, insisting that its finances are in place, still appears a strong candidate.
So do Baltimore and Charlotte.
That status report was reinforced today when the 28-team National Football League stepped up its process to pick two cities to field expansion teams for the 1995 season.
This morning, the five candidate cities started making their final major presentations to the N.F.L.'s expansion and finance committees.
Behind closed doors at the O'Hare Hilton Hotel, representatives of St.
Louis, Baltimore and Jacksonville, Fla., spent 60 to 90 minutes each making their cases.
Memphis and Charlotte, N.C., will do the same Wednesday.
The bidding groups brought along such heavy hitters as Gov.
William Donald Schaefer of Maryland, Mayor Freeman Bosley of St.
Louis and Mayor Ed Austin of Jacksonville.


After 7 Years in Jail, Demjanjuk Leaves Israel
John Demjanjuk, saved from the gallows after the Israeli Supreme Court overturned his conviction on charges of being the notorious Nazi death-camp guard known as Ivan the Terrible, left Israel a free man early today on a flight to the United States.
Mr.
Demjanjuk was taken directly from his cell near Tel Aviv to Ben-Gurion Airport, where he departed this morning on a scheduled El Al flight for New York.


U.S. Vision of Foreign Policy Reversed
President Clinton's national security adviser today presented the first outline of the Administration's foreign policy vision.
The adviser, Anthony Lake, said the vision aimed to replace the cold-war policy to contain the Soviet threat with a policy to enlarge the family of democratic market economies.
"The successor to a doctrine of containment must be a strategy of enlargement, enlargement of the world's free community of market democracies," Mr.
Lake said in a speech at the School of Advanced International Studies of the Johns Hopkins University.


Poll on Changes in Health Care Finds Support Amid Skepticism
President Clinton tonight addresses a nation that is already convinced that the health care system is in crisis and, by a strong majority, says that it is willing to pay higher taxes to make health insurance secure and available to all, according to the latest New York Times/CBS News Poll.
But the survey also shows a deep skepticism about the ability of the Government to achieve a successful overhaul of the system.
Americans were sharply divided on whether the President "will be able to bring about significant health care reform," the survey found: 45 percent said he would, 41 percent said he would not.


Live Coverage Of Clinton's Address
President Clinton's health care address to a joint session of Congress will be carried live at 9 P.M. on ABC, CBS, CNN, NBC and C-Span.
PBS will provide live coverage of the speech to its affiliates.
WNET, Channel 13 in New York, will broadcast the speech at 10 P.M.


Drug Maker Reshuffles At the Top
Marion Merrell Dow, the slumping pharmaceuticals company, reshuffled its senior management yesterday, announcing the resignation of its chairman and naming as its president a former heir apparent at Merck &amp; Company who shocked the industry in July by abruptly stepping down.
Marion Merrell said its chairman, Joseph G. Temple Jr., 64, would resign.
He will remain a member of the Marion board and of the board of the Dow Chemical Company, which owns about 71 percent of Marion Merrell.


With Blessing of Women's Tour, Title Sponsor Waves Early Goodbye
It might seem somewhat unusual, but the women's tennis tour is now without a sponsor for 1994 and happy about it.
The Women's Tennis Council and the Women's Tennis Association, which will continue as the tour's dual governing bodies until their merger in July 1994, agreed Friday night to allow their title sponsor, Kraft, to extricate itself from the final year of its five-year contract.
Kraft, citing a shift in corporate strategy to promote specific brands rather than the overall Kraft name, informed the women's tour last February that it had no interest in prolonging its title sponsorship role once its contract ran out at the close of 1994.


A Day of Wild Ups and Downs
In another day of wild ups and downs, the price of the 30-year Treasury bond fell and its yield rose yesterday, while prices of short-term Treasury notes rose and their yields fell.
Traders and analysts said there were a lot of forces buffeting the market, which helped explain its gyrations.


YELTSIN AND LEGISLATURE ACT TO OUST EACH OTHER; CLINTON BACKS PRESIDENT
Declaring that the "irreconcilable opposition" of the Russian legislature, with its large number of Communists, had paralyzed his reforms and his ability to govern, President Boris N. Yeltsin ordered the group dissolved on Tuesday and called elections to a new parliament for December.
Almost immediately, the Supreme Soviet voted by an overwhelming margin to depose Mr.
Yeltsin and ordered security forces not to obey him.


U.S. Supports Move By Russian Leader To Break Deadlock
President Clinton, taken by surprise by the events in Moscow, moved swiftly today to throw the support of the United States behind President Boris N. Yeltsin in his showdown with the Russian Parliament.
"I support him fully," Mr.
Clinton said in a statement released by the White House late this afternoon after Mr.
Clinton was able to hold a 17-minute telephone conversation with the Russian leader.
And Mr.
Clinton and other White House officials were in touch with European allies tonight to encourage them to issue similar statements of support for Mr.
Yeltsin on Wednesday.


Haiti in Turmoil as It Awaits Aristide
Five weeks before the planned return of Haiti's exiled President, the Rev.
Jean-Bertrand Aristide, Haitians and foreign diplomats say the country's transition faces grave threats from logistical and political problems and from a wave of violence sweeping the country.
Hoping to shore up Father Aristide's transitional Government and send a message of its commitment to the restoration of democracy in Haiti, a high-level delegation of Clinton Administration officials arrived on Monday for a three-day visit.


Whitman Economist Has Reagan Credentials
In choosing Lawrence Kudlow to help create her economic plan, Christine Todd Whitman landed a swashbuckling Reagan-era economist who pitches Cadillacs on television and who is eager to try in New Jersey the supply-side economics he alternately embraced and rejected during his tenure in the White House.
Mr.
Kudlow, now chief economist of Bear, Stearns &amp; Company, is one of the two architects of an economic revival plan released today by Mrs.
Whitman, the Republican candidate for governor of New Jersey.
Along with Malcolm Forbes Jr., president of Forbes Inc. and editor in chief of Forbes magazine, Mr.
Kudlow helped Mrs.
Whitman put together a plan based on the supply-side theory that the best way to stimulate a stagnant economy is by cutting taxes.


Four-Footed Immigrant Makes It in the Big City
IT is not clear what went wrong for Cody back in Australia or why it was he left his native land to come here at so young an age, but the literature is full of precedents.
After all, frisky young aristocrats have long set out to prove themselves in America.
Some arrived to seek adventure, some to overcome early failure or to recover from sex and love gone wrong.
Actually, this last explanation would not apply to Cody since he is a gelding, but you get the idea.
There he is, a once-promising race horse whose day job at the moment is pulling a carriage through Central Park for tourists and lovers.


Putting Down the Mop and Picking Up the Chalk
For 17 years Helen Gray and Bessie Pender worked together as custodian's helpers at Larrymore Elementary School here.
Every day they cleaned 17 classrooms each.
"High dusting, low dusting, washing, mopping," Mrs.
Gray said.
"Four bathrooms, three offices, the teachers' lounge."
Dressed in green smocks, they left the dark, empty school at 9 o'clock each night, exhausted.
"You just ain't in no shape to do nothing after that," Mrs.
Gray said.
"Take a bath and go to bed," Mrs.
Pender said.


Novell to Try to Make Unix More Acceptable
Novell Inc. said today that it planned to spread the acceptance of the Unix computer operating system software by selling computer manufacturers a standard, complete, ready-to-ship product identical to the Unixware software it sold through retailers.
That would be a departure from previous practice, in which computer manufacturers have had to create their own Unix products from raw software code.


Corrections
A map yesterday with an article about the Bosnian peace talks referred incorrectly to the port of Neum, to which the Bosnian Government has demanded access.
It is in a Croatian-controlled part of Bosnia, not in Croatia itself.


27 Attorneys General Oppose Joe Camel
The attorneys general of 27 states sent a letter yesterday to Janet D. Steiger, chairwoman of the Federal Trade Commission, urging that the R. J. Reynolds Tobacco Company be banned from using the Joe Camel cartoon character in its Camel cigarette advertising.
The attorneys general, including Robert Abrams of New York, charged that the cartoon camel encouraged children to smoke and undermined the effectiveness of state laws prohibiting the sale of cigarettes to children.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.25
3.38
3.04
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
2.91
2.93
2.91
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.04
3.06
2.94
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
4.98
4.98
6.05
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
6.12
6.09
7.46
TELEPHONE BONDS
7.16
7.10
8.45
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
5.48
5.47
6.46
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Metropolitan Diary
DEAR DIARY:
Cheer steps out from the most unexpected places.
Consider: on a particularly bleak day, I stopped at a sidewalk vendor's cart and ordered a hot dog.
"Ketchup or mustard?" the chef said.
"Both," I said.
He took the ketchup bottle and squirted a curious pattern of curliques onto the dog, embellishing his design with the mustard.
He handed me my lunch and smiled.
And I responded in kind when I saw "Love" written on my hot dog. -- E. WENDY BLAKE
. . .


2 Powerful Democrats Battle Over Transportation Projects
The chairmen of two House committees are battling over $305 million in transportation projects that critics call pork and supporters call indispensable.
Representative Bob Carr, the Michigan Democrat who heads the Appropriations Committee's Subcommittee on Transportation, touched off the dispute by adding the projects to a $37.7 billion transportation spending bill.


Scientists Trace 'Voices' in Schizophrenia
HEARING voices, the hallmark symptom of schizophrenia, occurs when there is a heightened activity in the same part of the brain people use when they speak or think words, new findings suggest.
The results support a leading psychological theory of auditory hallucinations, which proposes that when people with schizophrenia hear voices, they are unable to recognize them as their own thoughts, and so perceive them as words spoken by someone else.


More Than Just a Rerun at Parliament
The evening was still young when a police officer started putting up metal barriers in front of the White House, as the Russian Parliament building is known.
It was, he said with a shrug, the most obvious thing to do under the circumstances.
Two years and one month ago thousands of Muscovites rushed to the building after President Boris N. Yeltsin of Russia stood atop a tank and defied a hard-line Communist coup.
On Tuesday at 8 P.M. the same President, now in the Kremlin, announced that he was disbanding Parliament.
By 10 P.M. the parliamentary leadership -- now the defiant occupants of the White House -- had moved to oust Mr.
Yeltsin.


Wine Talk
BY mid-September, the grape harvest is well under way on this lush island in the Atlantic.
The lower coastal vineyards, mostly of malmsey and bual grapes on high-staked, Mediterranean-style vines, were picked in early September.
The workers have moved high up on the precipitous slopes, edging along the narrow terraces like so many mountain goats, picking the later-maturing grapes, sercial and verdelho.
The last grapes, grown in the cooler north and on the high volcanic plateau, won't ripen until the end of October or early November.


INSIDE
Big Drop in Stock Prices
The stock market fell sharply, with the Dow Jones industrials sinking nearly 70 points before recovering to close with a 38.56-point loss.
Page D1.
An Apology From Holtzman
Elizabeth Holtzman apologized for her actions in obtaining a campaign loan from a company seeking business with New York City.
Page B1.


Holtzman Apologizes In Loan Issue
Moving beyond her earlier rebuttals, Comptroller Elizabeth Holtzman apologized yesterday for her handling of a campaign loan, saying she should have checked whether the bank her campaign borrowed money from last year was seeking business with New York City.
She also said she should have formally recused herself from the process in which the bank's sister company was selected as an underwriter of New York City bonds.


Appeal by Red Sox Denied
The American League yesterday denied Boston's protest of its 4-3 loss to the Yankees last Saturday by saying that the Red Sox did not file the protest properly.
After a 15-year-old fan charged onto the field and disrupted play with Boston ahead by 3-1 in the ninth inning at Yankee Stadium, nullifying what would have been the last out of the game, the Red Sox, according to league rules, should have protested to the umpire in charge before the next pitch.
Instead, they waited until Sunday.


Going on Offensive, Whitman Plans Cuts In New Jersey Taxes
Christine Todd Whitman, the Republican candidate for governor of New Jersey, announced an economic plan today with a promise over the next three years to make the most sweeping tax cuts in state history, to reduce the size of government and to create 450,000 jobs.
"This is radical, but when you look at what's happened to this state over the last three and one-half years, then it's obvious something radical has to happen," Mrs.
Whitman said at a news conference.
"If not, we are going to become a third-world country in this state."


Smith Is Devils' Latest Find on Defense
Although his helmet was knocked around at his feet three or four times and his face received numerous swipes from the sticks of Eric Lindros and the rest of the Flyers, Jason Smith kept smiling.
The 19-year-old Smith, the Devils' rookie defenseman, had a couple of similar experiences against the Islanders two days after his encounter with Lindros in Philadelphia last Thursday night, but no one from the Islanders could knock the grin from his face either.


BUSINESS DIGEST
International
Russian political instability intensified, with President Yeltsin dissolving the legislature and calling elections.
The Supreme Soviet swore in Vice President Rutskoi as acting president.
The developments caused nervousness in the financial markets.  [ Page A1. ]
The Democratic Party's support of the Nafta weakened as the House majority leader announced his opposition.  [ A1. ]


Poland's Former Communists Try to Lure Foreign Investors
Since their election success the former Communists have been trying to reassure foreign investors that they would not deplete the economic gains of the last four years by unleashing inflation and running up a huge budget deficit.
But the former Communists have confirmed that they plan to raise pensions early next year and assist some state industries that previous Governments had ignored.


Democratic Split Over Trade Agreement Widens
The cracks in the Democratic Party over the North American Free Trade Agreement widened into a public crater today when Representative Richard A. Gephardt, the majority leader in the House of Representatives, announced his opposition to the accord.
At the White House, President Clinton, who has promised to work hard to win Congressional approval for the agreement, said of Mr.
Gephardt's defection, "It doesn't help, but I don't think it's fatal."


Executive Changes
CONRAN'S HABITAT, New York, the home furnishings retailer, appointed Joanna Bradshaw president of retail.
COUSINS PROPERTIES INC., Marietta, Ga., a real estate company, named William C. Smith president of its office division.
He had been chief operating officer and senior vice president of the John Akridge Co., an office development company in Washington.


Fuzzy Thinking Has Merits When It Comes to Elevators
In a perfect world, elevators would never do those irritating things elevators do, such as coming late or not at all.
Or stopping at every floor between here and there.
Or suddenly slamming their doors on a passenger who has been a nanosecond too slow, or generously opening their doors to show a would-be rider an elevator packed tighter than a Broadway local subway car at rush hour.
But this is an imperfect world, and that is why Bruce A. Powell, John S. Kendall and David J. Sirag labor for the Otis Elevator Company in the rolling hills of central Connecticut, using various forms of artificial intelligence -- technologies and disciplines with odd names like fuzzy logic and neural networks -- to improve the relationship between humankind and its elevators.


Tell Teen-Agers It's Not O.K. to Get Pregnant; Lack of Disincentives
To the Editor:
Lynn Martin decries the "past where a child was branded illegitimate or a desperate marriage ruined two or more lives," and she decries it as "equally damaging to ignore the economic and social realities faced today by single teen-age mothers" (Op-Ed, Sept. 8).


EASTERN COLLEGE REPORT
Big East Report
Wounded, if not scarred, by three losses -- two of them trouncings -- and a tie last Saturday, the Big East will attempt to regroup this week with a schedule that includes five out-of-conference contests.
Rutgers (2-0) is at Penn State (3-0), and Miami (2-0) is at Colorado (2-1), each on national television.


Edward Baquet Sr., 71; Ran Creole Restaurant
Edward Baquet Sr., founder of Eddie's, one of New Orleans's most popular creole restaurants, died on Tuesday at University Hospital there.
He was 71.
The cause was leukemia, a disease he fought for a decade, family members said.


Schintzius May Be Milwaukee-Bound
The agent for the Nets' 7-foot-2-inch backup center, DWAYNE SCHINTZIUS, expects the Milwaukee Bucks to sign Schintzius to an offer sheet within days.
Schintzius, 24, averaged only 1.4 points and 1.6 rebounds in limited action last season.
He is a restricted free agent, meaning the Nets would have 15 days to match any offer that Schintzius signs.
But FRANK MARTIN, Schintzius's agent, hopes the Nets do not match.
And if the Nets do match, Martin plans to include a termination clause in the contract that would make Schintzius an unrestricted free agent after one year.
"I don't mean to bad-mouth the Nets, but other guys have walked away from there the last few years, like TERRY MILLS and CHRIS DUDLEY," Martin said.
"People are always interested in young 7-footers. He can help someone, and he wants to play for a team that really wants him."


Basketball Stars Under Investigation
Dozens of the nation's top high school basketball players may have jeopardized their eligibility when they played in a Nike-sponsored all-star tournament in Oregon this month.
By attending the two-day tournament, which supplemented Nike's annual summer camp, the 36 players may have violated high school rules governing all-star game participation and amateur eligibility.


Comptroller Debate
The candidates in the Democratic runoff for New York City Comptroller, Elizabeth Holtzman and Alan G. Hevesi, will debate tonight on New York 1 News from 10 P.M. to 11 P.M.


COMPANY BRIEFS
BE AEROSPACE CORP., Wellington, Fla., said it had agreed to buy Philips Airvision, a unit of Philips Electronics for $12 million in cash.
HAWKEYE BANCORPORATION, Des Moines, said it would buy Centre Pointe Leasing Co. for an undisclosed amount.


Topics of The Times; Capitol Games    Last January, following the Republican gain of 10 seats in the 1992 elections, House Democrats awarded themselves five more votes that are essentially meaningless. The new votes went to the four previously non-voting delegates -- from the District of Columbia, Guam, the Virgin Islands and American Samoa -- and the resident commissioner from Puerto Rico. It was a shameless display of majority muscle, meant primarily to mollify Washington D.C. residents who want statehood and real representation but aren't getting either anytime soon.   The new arrangement lets delegates vote when the House meets as a "committee of the whole" to do most of its legislating. But if anything is decided by a margin so narrow that delegate votes made the difference, another vote would follow automatically without the delegates.


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt  *
Lafayette, La., is offering $49.5 million of tax-exempt utilities revenue refunding bonds through Smith Barney Shearson, initially priced to yield from 2.75 percent in 1994 to 4.75 percent in 2004.
The bonds are insured by the Ambac Indemnity Corporation and rated triple-A by Moody's and S.&amp; P. *
Kentucky Higher Education Student Loan Corp. is offering $124.8 million of insured student loan revenue bonds through underwriters led by Paine Webber.
Initially priced to yield from 3.60 percent in 1995 to 5.30 percent in 2005, the bonds are rated A-1 by Moody's and AA- by S.&amp; P. For some investors, these bonds may be subject to the Federal alternative minimum tax.


Pope Meets a Chief Rabbi, Feeding Talk of Israeli Ties
Pope John Paul II met one of Israel's chief rabbis today in a visit that was denounced as "blasphemy" by a former Chief Rabbi in Israel, but that could signal progress toward full Vatican-Israeli relations.
The Vatican said the half-hour meeting between the Pope and the Chief Rabbi of Israel's Ashkenazi Jews, Yisrael Meir Lau, at the Pope's summer residence of Castel Gandolfo near Rome sought to offer the Vatican's moral support to the latest peace moves in the Middle East.
The visit was the first between a Pope and one of Israel's chief rabbis since the founding of the Jewish state in 1948, although the Pope has met in the past with Israeli Government officials.


Delivery Company Assigns Accounts
TNT Express Worldwide, a delivery company based in Amsterdam, said yesterday that it had assigned new worldwide corporate advertising and public relations accounts to the J. Walter Thompson Company and Shandwick P.L.C., respectively.
Billings on the advertising portion were estimated at $20 million in the first year; billings on the public relations portion were not disclosed.


Yeltsin's Gamble: Force the Issue Now
Six months ago, President Boris N. Yeltsin of Russia threatened to declare presidential rule to break the power of the holdover Parliament and Soviet-era Constitution.
But cautious, even hesitant about the breadth of his support, Mr.
Yeltsin pulled back from the brink, from the whole racked and bloody history of single-man rule in Russia.
He was nearly impeached for his pains.
Tonight, after months of increasing political paralysis, an ever-weakening central authority and economic disarray, Mr.
Yeltsin finally rolled the dice he had been juggling for so long.
He declared presidential rule, ordered Parliament disbanded and called new elections for early December.


Clinton Moves to Assemble Support for His Health Plan
President Clinton today put the finishing touches on the health care plan that he hopes will become the crowning achievement of his Presidency.
At the same time, he raced to assemble a political coalition to support the plan and won an endorsement from the A.F.L.-C.I.O.
Mr.
Clinton's proposal to control health costs and guarantee medical care for all Americans represents the biggest initiative in domestic social policy in a half-century.


Food Notes
All About Beer
For the first time, a major beer show is being held in New York.
It will take place on Oct. 1, from 3 to 11 P.M., at the Jacob K. Javits Convention Center, 11th Avenue between 34th and 39th Streets.
Breweries large and small will offer samples of their wares, which include porters, stouts, lagers, wheat beers, ales, barley wines and fruit beers.
There will even be a smoked beer.
Beer-making equipment will be on display, and there will be opportunities to learn about home brewing.
Admission to the event, open only to those 21 or older, is $25.
Tickets will be sold at the door.
Vampires, Beware: Garlic
The annual Hudson Valley Garlic Festival, which has grown from a gathering of a few hundred garlic lovers, in 1989, to an event that attracted 5,000 people last year, will be held on Saturday from 10 A.M. to 5 P.M. in Saugerties, N.Y. (in Cantine Field, at the end of Market Street).
It is sponsored by the village's Kiwanis Club.
There will be cooking demonstrations and lectures about everything from how to grow garlic to how to use it medicinally.


Books of The Times; Ups and Downs and Ups Of Life in Hollywood
They Can Kill You . . . but They Can't Eat You
By Dawn Steel
Illustrated. 285 pages. Pocket Books. $22.
When Dawn Steel discovered, hours after giving birth to her daughter, Rebecca, that she had effectively been removed as president of production at Paramount Pictures while she was in labor, she experienced the sort of feminist career epiphany that should make her story well worth telling.
"This is a story about anger (mine), pain (mine) and power (theirs)," she explains in her introduction, which addresses the difficulties faced by women in a male-dominated workplace.
"I still have a lot to learn, but I finally feel as if some lessons now belong to me so profoundly that I can share them with others. Women must begin to tell the truth of their lives to one another."


Restaurant Empires Built of Diverse Pieces
SEEKING financial stability in rough economic times, chefs and restaurateurs are both diversifying and opening less-expensive places.
Rather than staking their futures on a single crown jewel, they are trying to feed people in as many ways and places as they can dream up.
They are opening bistros, spaghetti houses, pizza parlors, carryout shops and bakeries.
They're providing off-premises catering.
And they're selling jams, salsas and T-shirts -- even copies of the restaurant's furniture.
The restaurant mania of the 1980's encouraged the most fashionable chefs to open more than one expensive place, sometimes in different cities.
Most of them soon learned that those restaurants could not be sustained without their presence.
When the economy worsened and the great shakeout began, their enterprises suffered.
Some were left with only their original restaurant; others were left with nothing.
Stephan Pyles, who began with the highly acclaimed Routh Street Cafe and Baby Routh in Dallas and went on to open two more restaurants in Minneapolis, has no restaurant now, though he is working on a new place that is expected to open this year in Dallas.


Rhode Island's Chief Justice to Face Impeachment
Armed with a petition signed by a majority of the Rhode Island House of Representatives, the House Speaker today called a special session of the Legislature to begin impeachment proceedings against Supreme Court Chief Justice Thomas F. Fay.
The impeachment effort was prompted by depositions and statements filed in a criminal ethics complaint brought four weeks ago by Rhode Island's Attorney General.
The court documents indicate that Justice Fay used court employees, offices and equipment to conduct the business of Lincoln Center Properties, a real estate firm in which he is a partner.


New York's Deteriorating Schools
Monday's opening of New York City schools was hardly normal, but neither was there total chaos.
It certainly could have been worse.
After weeks of contending with the asbestos crisis, about 90 to 95 percent of the schools managed to function.
But whatever consequences the asbestos crisis has for the school system, it has exposed the appalling physical condition of city schools.


Music Notes; Paying For Review Of One's Playing
"Psssst! Performers! Want to buy a review?"
With classical-music magazines going out of business and newspapers no longer covering every recital, some musicians have been complaining about the difficulty of getting reviewed in New York.
Now Howard Aibel, a pianist and teacher in Janesville, Iowa, is offering a solution.
For $285, a performer (or manager or publicity agent) can arrange for a review in Mr.
Aibel's publication, New York Concert Review.
For an extra $25, Mr.
Aibel will run a photograph, too.


Braves, Phillies Take Command
NATIONAL LEAGUE WEST  Braves 18, Expos 5
With every swing the Atlanta Braves took, the numbers seemed to get bigger on the Montreal scoreboard and in the National League standings.


Markets Jolted After News of Russian Turmoil
The stock market fell sharply yesterday, with the Dow Jones industrials sinking by nearly 70 points before recovering to close with a loss of 38.56 points.
Much of the stock market's jumpiness was attributed by analysts to news of the political turmoil in Russia, which broke in New York at midday.
But analysts also pointed to uneasiness about whether the market was due to lose some ground after its prolonged run-up.


Russia: A Democrat's Coup
Boris Yeltsin had no constitutional authority to suspend the powers of Russia's Parliament yesterday and call early elections.
But his bold coup could help consolidate Russian democracy, economic reforms and more respectful relations with former Soviet republics.
President Clinton was right to quickly extend American support.
Relations between Russia's first democratically elected President and its last perestroika Parliament have been poisonous for more than a year, compromising key policies and promoting disillusionment with political and economic reform.


Madden Is Returning to Kidder, Peabody
Michael D. Madden is returning to Kidder, Peabody &amp; Company, four years after the investment banker left the firm while it was in turmoil as its owner, the General Electric Company, began to exercise more control.
Kidder said yesterday that Mr.
Madden was returning with a plan to use the G.E. connection for Kidder's benefit.


Tell Teen-Agers It's Not O.K. to Get Pregnant; Educating Fathers
To the Editor:
Lynn Martin says the "one critical area" left out of the debate over Joycelyn Elders's nomination as Surgeon General is "the steady rise in teen-age motherhood." But Ms.
Martin's radical proposal leaves out and even dismisses another critical area: male responsibility.


Gain for British G.D.P.
Britain's economy is growing at a faster pace than previously thought, according to revised data issued today by the Central Statistical Office.
It said gross domestic product grew by six-tenths of 1 percent in the second quarter, rather thatn the five-tenths of 1 percent estimated earlier, pushing year-on-year growth up to 2 percent rather than 1.5 percent.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-19  A NEW RUSSIAN ORDER?
President Yeltsin dissolved Parliament, the Supreme Soviet deposed him and Vice President Aleksandr V. Rutskoi, a former ally, was sworn in as acting President.
A1  CLINTON JOINS THE FRAY  A surprised President Clinton quickly bolstered President Yeltsin's actions, saying he supported the Russian President fully.
A1


Bridge
All bridge experts sooner or later suffer the ultimate setback: some players of much less expertise perform some wildly improbable miracle, and land them with a disastrous score.
A bridge writer has the minor consolation of describing the episode with wry wit, as the late Charles Goren did on the diagrammed deal played almost 40 years ago.
He sat West, playing, he said, against "a pair of charming ladies who professed to be readers of mine." Looking at the diagram, one would expect North-South to bid a game and fail.
If left to themselves, North-South might have attempted three no-trump, but that was ruled out when East bid spades.
They now seemed headed for a minor-suit game that was headed for defeat, but stopped in the surprising contract of four hearts.
Presumably each player thought that a 4-3 fit had been located.
"North had got into the swing of raising partner," Goren reported, "and South got rather tired of bidding".


Pope Meets Israeli Rabbi Amid Talk of Diplomatic Relations


RESULTS PLUS
TENNIS  Frazier Scores Upset in Japan  Amy Frazier of the United States defeated fifth-seeded Katerina Maleeva of Bulgaria, 6-1, 6-4, yesterday in the first round of the $375,000 Nichirei International Ladies tennis championship in Tokyo.
American Lindsay Davenport, 17, outlasted Mana Endo of Japan, 6-4, 5-7, 7-5. (AP) GOLF  Busch Leads New Jersey PGA by 2  Pete Busch of Shackamaxon fired a 4-under-par 68 to take a two-stroke lead in the New Jersey PGA Championships yesterday in West Orange, N.J.
Defending champion Mike Burke Jr. of Mountain Ridge was alone in second place after playing a bogey-free round, while Bill King of Spring Lake and Greg Baker of Morris County were three shots off the lead. (AP) Vershure Takes Lead: Rick Vershure of Quaker Ridge, winner of the Westchester Open earlier in the year, shot a 4-under-par 68, best round of the tournament, in light rain for a 36-hole 140 and the lead in the Izod/Cadillac Met PGA Championship at the Inwood (L.I.) Country Club.
Defender Mark Mielke of Lawrence is 6 strokes back at 146.
The field of 144 was trimmed to 61.


Officers Kill Man In Queens Gunfight
Police officers shot and killed a man during a gun battle that broke out last night in a Transit Authority yard in Jamaica, Queens, the police said.
The exact circumstances of the shooting were not immediately available, and the police did not identify the man or say how many shots were fired.
According to an initial account by the police, four armed men -- two of them carrying Tech-9 semiautomatic pistols -- turned and fired at police officers who had chased them into the yard from Jamaica Avenue at 126th Street around 8:40 P.M.


Role in Health Expands Hillary Clinton's Power
For eight months, Hillary Rodham Clinton has presided over scores of closed meetings, huddled with hundreds of members of Congress and traveled to more than a dozen states to help create the President's ambitious health care plan.
Now, even as President Clinton prepares to take over her role as the chief advocate for the Administration's plan, Mrs.
Clinton is solidifying her position as the power beside, rather than behind, the throne.


Schools Bureaucracy: A Centipede Dancing
Public School 158 in Brooklyn was closed, but no one was told, so a crowd of muttering parents and children showed up on the sidewalk outside on opening day, and hundreds of other confused souls phoned the school to find out what was happening.
"There's no school," the school receptionist, Rhonda Baratz, told callers over and over.
"The parents voted to keep the schools closed."


Reviving Memories of Big-Deal Days
The fight for Paramount Communications Inc. is a reminder of better times for Wall Street's takeover speculators, a group that since the hectic, epically profitable days of the 1980's has either evolved or withered away.
Stock arbitragers rode the crest of that decade's merger and acquisition wave but found their ranks dwindling after the stock market crashed in October 1987.
And two years after that, their business took a nearly fatal blow when the financing went awry on a leveraged buyout of the UAL Corporation.
The collapse of that deal took other merger stocks -- and many arbitragers -- down with it.


N.B.A. and Turner in 4-Year Pact
The National Basketball Association expanded its cable television horizon with the Turner Broadcasting System by agreeing yesterday to a four-year deal that keeps games on TNT and adds new ones on the TBS superstation through the 1997-98 season.
The $350 million total is 27 percent higher than the $275 million Turner paid for a four-year contract that runs through this season.


On Day 2 in Schools, Lessons in Asbestos and Fears
In Room 306 at the Amalia Castro School on the Lower East Side, some of the sixth graders wonder whether they and their younger brothers and sisters could die from the "asbestos disease." Others brood about falling behind in their preparations for the citywide reading test.
But 12-year-old Hector Vazquez has a recurrent vision that may best capture the concerns of students in one of the hundreds of asbestos-damaged schools: It is graduation day in June, the freshly scrubbed students are dressed in caps and gowns.
The parents arrive but the auditorium, its varnished blond wood sparkling, is still sealed with gray duct tape, and they have nowhere to go.


Healthful and Tasty Chinese Food
THERE has been a lot in the news lately about how unhealthful Chinese food can be.
This menu is an effort to show that it can be low in fat, calories and sodium and just as flavorful as the high-fat, high-calorie, high-sodium dishes that give it a bad name.
Large quantities of meat are the source of the fat, but you don't have to rely on it for flavor.
The appealing taste can come from the seasonings -- garlic, onions, sherry, ginger, soy sauce and, in this case, hot-pepper flakes.


60-Minute Gourmet
ANYONE who has been to a fish market in recent years knows that seafood prices have risen faster than a Maine tide.
Cooks on a budget have to be resourceful, seeking lesser-known species in the market and being imaginative with preparation.
I recall how in the early 1980's American fishermen tossed monkfish back to sea because no market existed for them.
The same applied to skate.
To be sure, neither would win a deep-sea beauty contest.
But each has distinctive flavors and textures that have been prized in Europe for centuries.
Today, both skate and monkfish are considered delicacies and are getting more expensive every year.


U.S. Seeks Money From Iran-Contra Affair
The Justice Department today filed a civil lawsuit against a retired Air Force general and his business partner to try to recover millions of dollars left in Swiss bank accounts after the Reagan Administration's secret arms-for-hostages deals with Iran in 1986.
The suit, filed in Alexandria, Va., named Richard V. Secord, a retired major general who helped set up the deals, and Albert A. Hakim, Mr.
Secord's business partner, who helped organize financing for the sales.


BACKSTAGE WITH: Kurt Masur; Politics, Podiums And a Maestro's Two Homes
HANGING on the wall above the stage-door guard's desk at Avery Fisher Hall in Lincoln Center are a good-luck horseshoe, a smallish American flag and a black-and-white photograph of Kurt Masur.
Mr.
Masur, the bearlike German conductor whose off-the-podium trademark is a bolo tie, is no longer a visitor in New York.
Upstairs in his office yesterday, he was eating takeout chili and talking about old movies he watches on his big-screen projection television.
Tonight, he will begin his third season as the music director of the hometown orchestra, the New York Philharmonic.
But he has not forgotten his first impressions of an intimidating city.


Miller Picks Agency For a New Ice Beer
The Miller Brewing Company said yesterday that it had named Young &amp; Rubicam Chicago to develop advertising concepts for Icehouse, an ice beer it is introducing in test markets in Lansing, Mich., and Oakland, Calif.
Icehouse will be produced at Miller's brewery in Fulton, N.Y., and distributed under its Plank Road Brewery banner.
Eric Kraus, a spokesman for Miller in Milwaukee, said Icehouse would initially be advertised only through point-of-sale materials because of its limited distribution.
Y. &amp; R. Chicago is the agency for other smaller Miller brands like Miller High Life and Milwaukee's Best.


Datum
Shares of Datum Inc., a maker of electronic instruments, soared more than 25 percent in Nasdaq trading yesterday, when the company announced that it had received a multimillion-dollar contract from MCI Communications, the long-distance carrier.
Datum said the contract was for "a variety of equipment" but did not elaborate.


Washington at Work; Pal, Teacher and Now Power Broker: A Gathering Force of One at Pentagon
A combination of necessity and personal connections has suddenly transformed a little-known chemistry professor from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology into one of the most influential powerbrokers at the Pentagon.
Saddled with the deceptively bland title of Under Secretary of Defense for acquisition and technology, the official, John M. Deutch has parlayed his scientific sophistication and his longtime friendship with Defense Secretary Les Aspin into a role as the Pentagon's point man on issues from base closings and nuclear testing to military industry conversion.
As the Pentagon's chief of acquisitions, Mr.
Deutch (pronounced doych) is nominally responsible for overseeing the Pentagon's annual budget of about $100 billion for weapons and equipment -- out of a total military budget of $273 billion this year -- as well as nearly 800 scientists, engineers, logisticians and weapons experts.


Lending Plan Clears Senate Panel
The Senate Banking Committee today approved the Clinton Administration's program for spurring lending in poor communities, adding provisions to make borrowing by small businesses easier and to protect consumers from exploitation by home-equity lenders.
Some Republicans expressed doubts over the plan, pushed by the Clinton Administration to fulfill a campaign promise to provide seed money for unconventional lenders that make loans in poor communities where regular bankers are reluctant to lend.


Utilities Issue Mortgage Bonds
The Consumers Power Company and the Texas Utilities Company were the largest issuers of debt being sold by utilities yesterday.
According to Stephen W. Carter, an analyst with MCM Corporatewatch, a Wall Street new issue research firm, about $2.155 billion of new utility debt was priced, and Consumer Power and Texas Utilities accounted for about half of it.


Kasparov Lulls Short, Then Pounces
After sneaking along, slowly improving his array of pieces and pawns, Gary Kasparov got the drop on Nigel Short yesterday in Game 7 of their world championship match in London, and started a powerful attack.
But Short dug in stubbornly and was making a stand until he blundered and let the Russian score a quick kill.
Kasparov has now moved to a 4-point lead in the 24-game series with 5 1/2 points to Short's 1 1/2.
The winner of the match will get about $1.43 million, the loser $861,000.


METRO DIGEST
WHITMAN OFFERS ECONOMIC PLAN
Christine Todd Whitman, the Republican candidate for New Jersey governor, unveiled an economic plan in which she promised over the next three years the most sweeping tax cuts in state history, significant reductions in the size of government and the creation of 450,000 jobs.
A1.
In choosing Lawrence Kudlow to help create her economic plan, Whitman landed a swashbuckling, Reagan-era economist.
B6.


In America; Fudging Health Care Costs
In the mid-1960's Lyndon Johnson tried to hide the true costs of the Vietnam War from Congress and the American people.
He was pushing his Great Society programs and felt that if Congress knew how expensive the war was becoming it would say, in effect, "Mr. President, you can't have both."
And the President knew that instead of financing the Great Society, Congress would choose to finance the war.


Justice for Jurors
There should be cheers for Judith Kaye from jury boxes near and far.
As New York State's Chief Judge, she has created a special panel to improve the quality of jury life.
It's not just a local problem.
Judge Kaye will rate a gold star if her panelists can dispel the frustration of being yanked away from home or job to sit on uncomfortable chairs in an airless room for days on end, waiting to get on a jury.
She already qualifies for a silver star for her considerate initiative.


Cystic Fibrosis Experiment Hits a Snag
THE first effort to install healthy genes in the lungs of cystic fibrosis patients has hit a few bumpy spots, forcing researchers in the United States to redesign their projects and sharply reduce the dose of the experimental therapy they give to people taking part in the trials.
At the same time, scientists in Britain have begun a human gene therapy trial of their own, using a very different and theoretically gentler method of inserting new genes into the diseased airways of cystic fibrosis patients.


Sports of The Times; One Went; One Stayed; Both Yearn
THE last great race for the Yankees was nine years ago, but, unfortunately for them, it was for the American League batting title, not the pennant.
On the final day of the 1984 season, Don Mattingly's four hits against Detroit carried him past Dave Winfield, who was second-best, which, as we were reminded again recently by the world's foremost expert on winning, means absolutely nothing.
Nobody quite knew it then, but that day was symbolic of the Yankee owner's revelation that, while Mattingly was worthy of remaining a Yankee, Winfield was not.
Mattingly would go on to become the one franchise fixture in the bloody reign of George M. III.
Winfield would become the target of owner Steinbrenner's downright vicious crusade to force him out.


Mattingly's Stretch Run Gets Him Nowhere Fast
Don Mattingly, who has had far fewer memorable pennant chases than he would like, has waited for this kind of September for a long time.
Sadly, the Yankee captain is putting together a final month of the season that is turning out to be memorable for all the wrong reasons.


One-Time Commandos Become Cops
The pipes skirled, the drums beat, and Capt.
Faisal Mahmoud Mustafa, trained as a Palestinian airborne commando to drop one day on Israel, began -- somewhat awkwardly -- to discuss his new mission as a simple cop, protecting Arab and Israeli alike on the beat in Gaza or Jericho.
The paratrooper was one of 21 ex-soldiers from the Palestine Liberation Army who are being retrained as policemen at the Jordan police academy.
They are to take over new duties in the West Bank and Gaza under last week's pact between Israel and the Palestine Liberation Organization.


Respond, the Freed Hostage Insists; Anderson Stumps New York State for a Changed Politics
Terry A. Anderson lands amid pristine farm fields at twilight, arriving in triumph and plunging like a candidate into the Yates County Democratic Party's big $15-a-plate dinner, where everyone wants his autograph and his tale of what it was like to be chained hostage for nearly seven years by the militants of Islamic Holy War.
He is obliging up to a point, modest and terse in recalling his ghastly captivity, the longest endured by any of the Western hostages in Lebanon.
But he is far more interested in his self-designed new life -- as barnstorming civic evangelist of New York State politics.
Dealing With the Present
Mr.
Anderson is a singular man who would rather rail against the entrenched majority of the Republican-controlled Senate in Albany than denounce the fanatic minions in Beirut who stole his years but hardly his appetite for what he smilingly terms his Jihad Americana -- a holy crusade to transform New York's government.


New Schedule for Talks In Broadway Dispute
Formal negotiations between Broadway producers and Local 802 of the American Federation of Musicians that had been scheduled for tomorrow have been postponed until Monday.


Putting Wars Over Core Studies Into Historical Perspective
True or false: Throughout most of this century there has been general agreement among university faculties about the need for a core curriculum of Western history and literature.
False, argues a Stanford University English professor in a new book that has been widely discussed since it was published last month by Stanford University Press.


QVC's Other Bid May Get Less Priority
QVC Network Inc. intends to put its pending merger with Home Shopping Network Inc. on the back burner, as it continues to pursue its bid for Paramount Communications Inc., several people close to QVC said yesterday.
Such a move would leave Barry Diller, QVC's chairman, free to devote all his energies and financial resources to prying Paramount away from its proposed merger partner, Sumner M. Redstone, the chairman of Viacom Inc.


Tell Teen-Agers It's Not O.K. to Get Pregnant
To the Editor:
Lynn Martin's impassioned plea in behalf of unwed teen-age mothers' plight makes a cogent argument in favor of a well-reasoned approach to their problems through government-sponsored group homes and support services ("For Children Who Have Children," Op-Ed, Sept. 8).


Dismissal Urged for Teacher With Ties to Child-Sex Group
A Bronx High School of Science physics teacher who is said to advocate sex between men and boys is unfit to teach and should be dismissed, a New York City investigator urged yesterday.
A report by Edward F. Stancik, the Special Commissioner of Investigation for the New York City school district, asserted that the teacher, Peter Melzer, as an official of the North American Man-Boy Love Association had championed child pornography and child prostitution.


Administration Is Divided on Role For U.S. in Peacekeeping Efforts
President Clinton's top national security advisers have been unable to reach agreement on what role the United States should play in peace enforcement operations around the world, officials said today.
The Clinton Administration, the officials said, is moving away from a proposal, once broadly supported, that would allow American troops to be put under United Nations command in such peace keeping operations.


Book Notes
Sequels to Austen
"Scarlett," the 1991 sequel to "Gone with the Wind," may have been a critical disaster, but it was unquestionably a commercial success, with readers so eager to learn what happened to Margaret Mitchell's original characters that they bought 2.3 million copies of Alexandra Ripley's follow-up.
Two books coming this fall try to do the same with Jane Austen's "Pride and Prejudice," the classic tale of love, money and social maneuvering that has been called one of the world's first romance novels.
One of the sequels, "Presumption," (M. Evans &amp; Company) was written by Julia Braun Kessler and Gabrielle Donnelly, two Californians who use the collective pseudonym of Julia Barrett.
The other, "Pemberley" (St. Martin's Press), was written by Emma Tennant, an English novelist.


Aristide Seeks the Removal Of Army and Police Chiefs
President Jean-Bertrand Aristide called today for the immediate removal of the head of the Haitian military, the Port-au-Prince police chief and hundreds of plainclothes police officers who the deposed President said have been involved in politically motivated killings in recent weeks.
"Cedras is a killer, Michel Francois is a killer and, of course, we ask for their removal," Father Aristide, a Roman Catholic priest, said at a news conference.
Lieut.
Gen.
Raoul Cedras is the head of Haitian armed forces, who deposed him in a coup two years ago, and Colonel Francois is in charge of the police in the country's capital.


College for Commuters: Last Car on Early Train
If students are late to the new "Principles of Management" course offered by Dean Junior College here, they will not only miss the class; they will also miss the train.
The class, which began this morning, is held in the last car of a 7:45 commuter train traveling from Franklin to Boston, a distance of 25 miles.
Tuition for the three-credit course is $330.


A Highlight for Carnesecca
LOU CARNESECCA was in the Downtown Athletic Club, congratulating and being congratulated by his extended basketball family at his induction into the New York City Baskeball Hall of Fame. 'This is what New York is," the legendary St. John's coach said last night. "New York is basketball."


Health Benefits and Care: Who Will Get How Much?
By channeling most consumers through the same purchasing alliances, the Clinton plan would go a long way toward providing equal access to medical care for all Americans.
Everyone would have insurance and would chose from the same package of benefits, with premiums paid by some combination of employers, employees, unemployed people and government subsidies.
But some people with high incomes or better benefits at work would still be better off than others, while poor people in rural areas and inner cities may still have trouble finding quality care.


A Dark Shadow of Duvalier Still Blights Haiti
In their separate ways, two phenomena in this city provide a foretaste of a chaotic period before the scheduled return of Haiti's exiled President on Oct. 30.
At several sites today, groups proclaiming allegiance to the country's brutal longtime dictator, Francois Duvalier, staged rowdy parades to celebrate the dead leader's memory.


Corrections
An article on Monday about the Boston mayoral election misstated the number of Irish-Americans among the eight candidates in the race.
There are four; Christopher Lydon and Diane Moriarty are Irish-Americans, as are James T. Brett and Francis M. Roache.


Du Pont Account Goes to Saatchi
E.
I. du Pont de Nemours &amp; Company said yesterday that it had selected Saatchi &amp; Saatchi Advertising in New York and Rochester to handle its American corporate image account, which had been at BBDO Worldwide in New York for the last 51 years.
While billings have been estimated at $10 million, Saatchi estimated that they would grow to $15 million.
Saatchi's Rochester office, which already handles Du Pont accounts like American agricultural and chemical advertising, teamed with its New York office for the two-month review, which was narrowed to BBDO, Saatchi and another core Du Pont agency, Young &amp; Rubicam in New York.


YELTSIN SUPPORTED BY SECURITY CHIEFS IN POLITICAL FIGHT
President Boris N. Yeltsin received crucial pledges of support today from leaders of Russia's military and police forces, while opposition members of Parliament issued a stream of defiant resolutions against them.
There was no change in the basic situation since the startling developments of Tuesday, when Mr.
Yeltsin ordered the disbanding of the Supreme Soviet, or Parliament, which includes many Communists and nationalists opposed to Mr.
Yeltsin's policies.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article yesterday about a foreign policy speech by Anthony Lake, who is President Clinton's adviser on national security, misstated the location of the site, the Johns Hopkins School of Advanced International Studies.
It is in Washington, not Baltimore.


Mayoral Rivals In Boston Meet After Victories
Just hours after their victory parties, the weary winners of the mayoral primary faced off over coffee here early this morning, and at times the two political veterans sounded more like running mates than opponents.
Thomas M. Menino, the City Council president who took over as Acting Mayor in July after Raymond L. Flynn left City Hall to become United States Ambassador to the Vatican, poured coffee for James T. Brett, the State Representative who will oppose him in the nonpartisan election on Nov. 2.


This Stable Isn't Big Enough
Suddenly, the stable isn't big enough for the both of them.
Riyadh, who will attempt today to become the first pacer in 10 years to win the triple crown by capturing the $575,000 Little Brown Jug at the Delaware County Fairgrounds in Ohio, has emerged from the shadows of his much-heralded stablemate, Presidential Ball.
Both 3-year-old colts from Bill Robinson's stable will race in separate seven-horse divisions in the first of two heats.
Each must finish in the top four in his heat in order to square off in the second one.


The Candidates for Comptroller Debate
During a debate last night at the offices of New York 1 News, the two candidates in next Tuesday's Democratic primary runoff for New York City Comptroller, Alan G. Hevesi and Elizabeth Holtzman, offered starkly different views of what each would bring to the office.
HOLTZMAN "The Democratic Party will be weakened if it does not have a woman on the ticket. How much further can we go without recognizing that over half of our population are women, that we need a woman's voice and a woman's presence on the ticket? And it's shameful in this state we do not have a woman in statewide office, but surely it will be shameful if we don't have a woman in citywide office. We will be going backward. And that's what's at stake in this race."


Metropolitan Museum to Return Turkish Art
After a six-year legal battle, the Metropolitan Museum of Art has agreed to return more than 200 gold, silver and bronze objects from the sixth century B.C. to the Turkish Government within 30 days.
The collection, known as the Lydian Hoard, consists of pitchers, bowls, ladles and incense-burners as well as jewelry of gold, silver, carnelian and glass from the reign of King Croesus of Lydia, a kingdom in western Asia Minor that flourished in the seventh and sixth centuries B.C.
The Turkish Government says the objects were looted in the 1960's.


Old Friends
IT reminds you of how it feels to fall in love again.
In this case, the objects of renewed affection reflect the kind of design that has been a bit out of favor the last few seasons.
Perhaps no more.
Murray Moss, far left, a design consultant, and Jon Weiser, left, president of Charivari, the avant-garde fashion stores, have opened Bar Oggetti for those passionate people who always spell the word design with a capital "D."


U.S. Narrows Terms for Its Peacekeepers
Reflecting widespread anxiety within the Administration over open-ended peacekeeping missions in Somalia and Bosnia, the Administration is defining new limits for a future role in United Nations operations, senior Administration officials said today.
The evolving policy would require justifying involvement in terms of United States national interests and would limit situations in which American troops would serve under United Nations command, the officials added.


Bridge
In a social evening at the Westbury Hotel, 15 East 69th Street, Tuesday night, more than $40,000 was raised for the Israel Cancer Research Fund.
The winners in a field of 86 pairs, repeating a victory a year ago, were Lynn Tarnapol of Manhattan and Selma Schlechter of Purchase, N.Y.
The field included many who have won national and international titles.
On the deal shown in the diagram, South invariably did a lot of bidding and eventually had to decide whether to persevere to the six-level over an opposing bid of five spades.
Even looking at all four hands, the answer is not obvious.


Nafta Maintains U.S. Environment Standards
To the Editor:
Carol Clark is flat-out wrong in her assertions that the North American Free Trade Agreement would require the Federal or state governments "to adopt international standards for pesticides on food" (letter, Aug. 27), or that Nafta would make us allow food imports with DDT or other substances currently banned in the United States.


I.M.F., on Eve of Meeting, Cuts Forecast for World Economic Growth
With Germany and Japan in recession and the American economy continuing to stumble along, the International Monetary Fund forecast today that the world economy would grow more slowly over the next year than it had predicted just a few months ago.
On the eve of the I.M.F.'s annual meeting here, the fund predicted that the industrial world's economy would grow by a meager 1.1 percent this year, so slow that it would fuel trade protectionism and anti-immigrant sentiments in many countries.
It also predicted growth of 2.2 percent for next year.
In May, the fund had forecast growth of 1.7 percent for 1993 and 2.9 percent for 1994.


Leaders Around the World Are Supporting Yeltsin
Governments and politicians around the world have lined up solidly behind President Boris N. Yeltsin in his showdown with the Russian Parliament, declaring that only he could bring a measure of political stability and hope for economic reforms.
Western leaders appeared to have swallowed discomfort at Mr.
Yeltsin's suspension of Parliament, finding ample solace in his call for new legislative elections to be held in mid-December.


D. Vincent-Daviss, Law Professor, 50, And Law Librarian
Diana Vincent-Daviss, a professor of law and law librarian at Yale University Law School, died on Tuesday at Yale-New Haven Hospital.
She was 50.
A spokeswoman for the university said she died of a cerebral aneurysm.


Indiana Court Won't Review Tyson Case
The Indiana Supreme Court refused yesterday to consider the rape case that landed the former heavyweight champion, MIKE TYSON, in prison.
The justices issued a one-page order in Indianapolis that didn't give a reason for not reviewing an Appeals Court decision upholding Tyson's conviction and six-year sentence.
"The only thing left for him to do is if he could find some constitutional issue -- and there is none -- and take it to the U.S. Supreme Court," said GREG GARRISON, the prosecutor who won the 1992 conviction.


Croatia Reportedly Buying MIG's, Defying U.N.
The Croatian Government has been acquiring MIG fighter planes in violation of a United Nations arms embargo, diplomats and military analysts here say.
"There's no doubt that this is happening," said a diplomat with access to intelligence reports.
"We have hard information. Our people tell us at least half a dozen MIG's have been brought in over the last couple of weeks."


CHRONICLE
What emerges when teachers and students turn into collaborators?
In music, powerful sounds and egalitarian relationships.
Or at least that is the case for the 25-year-old Cleveland Quartet and their proteges, the Ying Quartet, who are to play two concerts together this weekend: one at Ossining (N.Y.) High School on Saturday at 9 P.M. (the late hour to accommodate Yom Kippur observers), the other at South Mountain Concert Hall in Pittsfield, Mass., at 3 P.M. on Sunday.


In Provinces, Russians Debate Whom to Obey
"Our people look at Moscow like a spectacle, some kind of show, and they treat it like that," said the chairman of the Podolsk City Council.
"They wonder how many times someone can step on a rake. That Russia still exists at all is due only to the sober-minded people in the provinces."
Aleksei A. Umansky was holding forth just before an open council meeting in this industrial city of 210,000, some 30 miles south of Moscow, called urgently to deliberate the city's stance toward the dual developments of the night before -- President Boris N. Yeltsin's disbanding of the federal Parliament and Parliament's election of Vice President Aleksandr V. Rutskoi to replace Mr.
Yeltsin.


Miami Freshman Hits No. 1 on Chart
There are young football players who are devoured by the system -- overpublicized at an unproven stage, overwhelmed by the intensity of the recruiting process and overmatched by the competition for spots at the top of a big-time depth chart.
And then there is Ray Lewis.
After nearly becoming another academic casualty, Lewis's ability to overcome problems with the Scholastic Aptitude Test marked the beginning of a dizzying rise through the system.
He has reduced a trip that usually takes years into a matter of weeks.


The Republican Alternatives
Republicans in Congress have professed their willingness to work with President Clinton on health care reform.
But a number of G.O.P. plans have also been put forward, most notably by a group of Senate moderates led by John Chafee of Rhode Island and Phil Gramm of Texas and by a group of House members.
While the Republican plans differ, all rely far less on Government intervention to expand coverage or hold down costs than the Clinton plan does.
Instead, they say, their plans would increase competition, making insurance more affordable and adding incentives for holding down costs.
None of the G.O.P. plans would require all employers to pay for health care, as the Clinton plan does.
None would set as rapid and definite a target for universal coverage.
None would reshape the health care system in the aggressive way the President's plan proposes, and none would impose mandatory ceilings on the growth in the nation's medical spending.


Holtzman-Hevesi Debate Centers on Ethical Lapses
Alan G. Hevesi accused City Comptroller Elizabeth Holtzman yesterday of violating Federal law in accepting a $450,000 campaign loan from Fleet Securities but then went on the defensive himself when asked about charges that he had missed as many as 1,000 Assembly votes.
In their first head-on debate since a close three-way primary forced a runoff election for the Comptroller's post, Mr.
Hevesi explained his absences by both dismissing the importance of the votes and, for the first time, citing a debilitating illness suffered by his wife, Carol.
He suggested that her illness had occasionally distracted him from some of his less pressing duties in the Assembly.


PARENT &amp; CHILD
LINDA BRAUN recalled how she hated school for the first few weeks of the eighth grade.
On the first day of school, a teacher assured everyone that they would do just fine that year if they had kept their notebooks from the previous year.
Since Ms.
Braun was the only one in her class who had attended a different school the year before, she didn't have the notebooks.
"I panicked," said Ms.
Braun, who is the director of Families First, a parent education program in Boston.
"I felt like I'd never be able to catch up with the other kids."


New Gun Takes Aim at Tailpipe Pollution
Like something out of "Star Wars," it will prowl the streets of New York City taking the measure of cars as they pass by unaware and taking pictures, too, that could be used to summon the drivers to make amends.
The enemy: tailpipe pollution.


Classic looks, but modern sound
THOUGH he set out to revolutionize communication, Alexander Graham Bell also made a lasting impact on interior design when he invented the telephone in 1876.
"There were periods when hundreds of companies were making phones," said Richard Marsh, president of the Chicago Old Telephone Company, a North Carolina mail-order concern that restores and sells vintage phones.


CLINTON'S HEALTH PLAN: What the States Must Do; States Are Wary Partners In President's Big Venture
President Clinton's health plan creates a mind-boggling array of new duties for the 50 states, which would be responsible for carrying out Mr.
Clinton's promise to guarantee insurance coverage for all Americans.
Health care experts say a handful of states, like New York, New Jersey, Hawaii, Minnesota, Vermont and Washington, have established innovative programs to control costs and expand insurance coverage.


LIKUD SPLIT SEEN ON PEACE ACCORD
The opposition Likud Party's solidarity against Israel's peace agreement with the P.L.O. began to crack today with one Likud deputy saying he supported the accord and three others hinting they may at least abstain when Parliament votes on the issue Thursday.
As the Parliament's debate droned on for a second day, Ovadia Eli, a former Deputy Defense Minister, stunned Likud Party colleagues by saying: "I have a personal announcement to make. I support the peace agreement."


Review/Music; Being Analytical With Tchaikovsky
The Long Island Philharmonic opened its 15th season on Saturday evening, at the Staller Center for the Arts here, with varied evocations of national color: short and saccharine, long and diffuse.
Christopher Keene, who helped found the orchestra in 1979 and led it for a decade before taking over the New York City Opera, returned for the occasion.
He set a festive, almost frenzied, tone with a garish arrangement of "The Star-Spangled Banner." In contrast, Malcolm Arnold's first set of English Dances seemed a study in subtlety despite its cloying reliance on tinkling glockenspiel.
But these were mere appetizers for the main courses: Tchaikovsky's First Piano Concerto and Sibelius's Second Symphony.


Pop and Jazz in Review
Barbara Cook  Cabaret Singer Cafe Carlyle Madison Avenue at 75th Street Through Oct. 30
Sometimes all it takes for an artist to reach a deeper level of expression is a seemingly small adjustment of technique.
That is what Barbara Cook, one of Broadway's greatest lyric sopranos, has accomplished in her new cabaret act.


Review/Dance; Modern Double Bill By Brazilian Visitors Stresses Ensemble
The autumn season at the Joyce Theater got off to an exuberant start on Tuesday night with a performance by Bale Teatro Castro Alves, a 24-member modern-dance company from Salvador, the capital of the Brazilian state of Bahia.
Not every scrap of choreography in the program's two offerings -- Guilherme Botelho's "Do Not Go Gently" and Luis Arrieta's "Sanctus" -- was of equal interest.
Far from it.
Both pieces would profit from judicious pruning.
But there was enough choreography of quality to sustain interest.
And the energy of the dancers enlivened even the dull patches.


Share of Foreign Chips In Japan's Market Slips
American and Japanese officials announced today that the market share of imports in the Japanese computer chip market, a widely watched trade figure, had dropped again, to 19.2 percent in the second quarter.
The lower market share for computer chip imports provoked immediate dismay from American Government and industry officials.
The drop was politically ill timed because it came just five days before President Clinton is scheduled to hold his first meeting with Prime Minister Morihiro Hosokawa of Japan, in New York at the United Nations.


I.O.C. Choice Comes Down To Envelopes
In an atmosphere that resembled a political convention more than a sporting occasion, the five cities bidding to be host to the 2000 Summer Olympics scrambled to outmaneuver one another today in the hope of influencing the International Olympic Committee's crucial vote Thursday.
According to London bookmakers and an overheated Monte Carlo rumor mill, Beijing is favored to win despite strong Western criticism of China's human-rights record.
Sydney, Australia, is running second, and Manchester, England, is a possible surprise choice, while Berlin and Istanbul are rank outsiders.


Pop and Jazz in Review
Mel Torme  Jazz Singer Michael's Pub 211 East 55th Street Manhattan Through Oct. 10
Mel Torme's annual fall appearances at Michael's Pub have become a harbinger of the New York cabaret season, in which this most genial of pop-jazz singers conveys the vocal equivalent of the first crisp autumn weather.
And in his eighth consecutive mid-September engagement there, he is hewing closely to the format that has made him one the club's biggest draws.


The Search Goes On And On for a Leader
Did you know that horse racing, like major league baseball, has a search committee?
Both sports are searching for a commissioner, and they must not be having too much luck.
Baseball has been searching for more than a year and hasn't found one.
Horse racing has narrowed its search to a short list of five, including a marketing specialist from professional wrestling and another from auto racing.


A 2d Witness Gives Details Of Strangling
The story unfolding in James P. Wanger's murder trial in State Superior Court is one of a band of disaffected youths who plotted to kill 17-year-old Robert A. Solimine Jr. because he didn't fit in.
It is about five Clifton, N.J., youths who came together in the late fall of 1991 and quickly formed a clique, complete with ringleader.
The group -- Mr.
Wanger, then 17, another 17-year-old, two 14-year-olds and their 18-year-old leader, Frank Castaldo -- whiled away the time driving around aimlessly, shuttling back and forth to one another's houses and thinking up ways to dispose of Mr.
Solimine, who sought their companionship.


Report Calls for Restoring Aid to Independent Colleges
A report to be presented today to the New York State Board of Regents recommends a large restoration of aid to independent colleges and universities in the state, a proposal that was immediately embraced by key legislators.
The financing, known as "Bundy Aid," was cut sharply during the fiscal crisis of 1990-91, from 7 percent of total aid for higher education to 3 percent.
The report, by a panel of 18 educators and administrators commissioned by the Regents to study higher educational needs in the next decade, recommends that to insure the continued financial health of the state's 139 independent colleges, the state needs to add as much as $84 million a year in financing.
The colleges together will receive about $36 million next year.


An Easy Time for F.C.C. Nominee
Reed E. Hundt, a Washington lawyer and former classmate of both Vice President Al Gore and the Clintons, sailed through his Senate confirmation hearing today to be the next chairman of the Federal Communications Commission.
But Mr.
Hundt, an attorney best known for his work in antitrust law, gave no clue about what he thinks -- or even if he has thought -- about the policy battles now roiling the telecommunications industry.


Strawberry Says His Outlook Is Better
A day after saying he had contemplated suicide because of his accumulated problems this summer, Los Angeles Dodgers outfielder DARRYL STRAWBERRY said he did no more than flirt with the idea.
On Tuesday, he discussed the idea of suicide in a telephone interview with The Los Angeles Times.
On Wednesday, he told The Associated Press that he had "explained the fact that I contemplated suicide a few times. I thought about it. I'm quite sure that a lot of people have thought about it."


Political Memo; California Guarantees Warm Primary Season
Forget the images of Presidential candidates trudging through the snows of Iowa and New Hampshire as they search for votes.
Instead, picture the White House aspirants spending the dead of winter campaigning on the beaches of California.
It may be three years before the next Presidential election, but the political landscape for the opening of the 1996 campaign is about to change from snow to sand, a development that could play a big role in determining who becomes the next President.


Economic Scene; The Palestinians may now have a chance to spur their economy.
WITH peace breaking out in what some call Palestine, can prosperity be far behind?
Even those inclined to optimism are apt to be shaken by the squalor of the occupied territories -- the open sewers, impassable roads, rag-tag refugee camps.
But the wretched state of the infrastructure masks a remarkable gain in private income during the two decades sandwiched between the 1967 war and the start of the open rebellion against Israel.
More important, it ignores Palestinians' greatest, if least tangible, assets: an enterprising business culture that has proved its mettle in the Persian Gulf states and a relatively well-educated work force.


Senator Durenberger's Immunity Defense Has Valid Precedent
To the Editor:
Your editorial "Ethics at Midnight" (Aug. 24) about the Senate's friend-of-the court brief in Senator Durenberger's criminal case was misleading and unfair.


Strike Against New Fuel Tax Paralyzes Managua
Most of Managua was paralyzed today as thousands of people barricaded major streets to protest a new tax on automobiles and fuel, posing yet another serious challenge to the Government of President Violeta Barrios de Chamorro.
A senior police official and a woman, a mother of five, were killed in a shootout late Tuesday at one barricade.
More than 20 others were reported wounded.
More than 50 people have been arrested.


Big Investors Maintain Their Calm
As the battle for control of Paramount Communications Inc. continues between Viacom Inc. and QVC Network Inc., a handful of savvy media investors with holdings in one, two or all three companies could hardly be mistaken for disinterested observers.
Still, even though an eventual deal could yield their clients millions of dollars in profits, at this stage these money managers are remarkably dispassionate in their analysis of the bids.
Edward Antoian, a portfolio manager at the Delaware Management Company, may be the most stoic.


California Creations
CALIFORNIA was fertile ground for the development of an American version of the English Arts and Crafts movement.
The environment, with its poppies, pines and redwoods, influenced potters and furniture makers, among them Reginald Machell, whose painted wood throne is shown at left.
The state's colonial past inspired the ceramic tiles with multicolored glaze, at left, by Solon &amp; Schemmel, circa 1925.


North Is Entering G.O.P. Senate Race in Virginia
Oliver L. North has made it official: He will run next year for a Senate seat in Virginia.
For months he has been acting like a candidate, spending four or five days a week on the road in Virginia, preaching his hard-right brand of patriotic conservatism, raising money and exploring his chances of winning the Republican senatorial nomination.


CLINTON'S HEALTH PLAN: Reaction; Congress Praises President's Plan But Is Wary of Taxes and Costs
Members of Congress registered strong support tonight for the outlines of President Clinton's plan to recast the nation's health care system, but many lawmakers immediately began to pick fights with details relating to expected increases in taxes and costs.
Republicans and Democrats gave the President repeated standing ovations, and appeared to agree that the present health care system was too expensive and did not cover everyone who deserved care.
More importantly, members of both parties expressed hope that they could work in a spirit of bipartisanship to pass at least a modest change in the system by late next year.


Garden Q. &amp; A.
Nonblooming Hydrangeas
Q.
Last year, my hydrangea bushes had no flowers; this year, only a few.
I've added fertilizer, but to no avail.
Please advise. -- Barbara Fields, Rye Brook, N.Y.


INSIDE
New Jersey Tax Fight Rises
Governor Florio said the tax cut plan of his opponent, Christine Todd Whitman, was a "voodoo" program meant to help the wealthy.
Page B1.
A Flight With Demjanjuk
Flying to the United States, John Demjanjuk was reminded by passengers that he would forever be linked to the mass killing of Jews.
Page A3.
Primerica wants to buy Travelers for $4 billion, in a move that would create a financial-services giant.
Page D1.


100 Are Linked to a Huge Insurance Scheme
Widening an already extensive attack on insurance fraud in the New York region, Federal law-enforcement officials yesterday announced the indictment of 37 people and disclosed that 49 others have already pleaded guilty to cheating insurers out of $43 million.
The new indictments, unsealed yesterday in Federal District Court in Brooklyn, assert that the fraud caused more than $25 million in insurer losses, and officials disclosed for the first time that there was widespread complicity in the fraud by insurance company employees.


He's Mr. Sunday Night: Parcells Works Room
Perhaps if Bill Parcells were returning to Giants Stadium on Sunday night with a powerhouse team to go against the Giants, the team he coached to two Super Bowl championships, his emotions would be bubbling over.
But lugging his new team, the 0-3 Patriots, into Giants Stadium to play the Jets isn't sending his Excit-O-Meter into the red.


Corrections
Because of editing errors, the main article yesterday about the political turmoil in Russia misstated the dates of the elections of President Boris N. Yeltsin and the Russian Congress of People's Deputies.
Mr.
Yeltsin was elected in 1991, not 1990; the Congress was elected in 1990, not 1989.
Also because of an editing error, in some editions the article misstated the number of members of the Russian standing legislature, the Supreme Soviet.
It is 250, not 25.


Urgency on U.S. Aid to Russia
White House officials and members of Congress agreed to speed up efforts on a $2.5 billion American aid package for Russia as a sign of support for President Yeltsin.
Page A13.


Giuliani Tells Of Attrition For Cutbacks
Seeking to take the hard edges off his proposal to cut the city government work force by 35,000, Rudolph W. Giuliani told a union representing 17,000 social-service workers last night that he would make those cuts over several years through attrition so he would not "dislocate people."
But stressing one of the foundation points of his campaign, Mr.
Giuliani, the Republican-Liberal candidate for mayor, told members of Local 371 of the Social Service Employees Union that the city government must shrink before private industry will expand.
"We can't continue to exist if the only job growth that occurs is in government," he said.


Corrections
An article yesterday about a New Jersey celebration of the autumnal equinox misstated the time of the vernal equinox.
It is in March, not June.


A Gunman Is Sought in 5 Brooklyn Slayings
The New York City police have enlisted the help of officers in several other cities to track down a gunman whose nickname is Babyface and who they say is responsible for five killings in Brooklyn.
The suspect, Richard Jameswhite, is 19 years old.
But, the police say, at a height of 5 feet and with a slight build, he looks 13.
They say that in addition to the five deaths in Brooklyn, he is responsible for the wounding of five other people.


COMPANY BRIEFS
BAXTER HEALTHCARE CORP., the main unit of Baxter International, Deerfield, Ill., said it had signed contracts with two hospital chains to provide about $295 million of medical supplies and services.
The buyers are Holy Cross Health System of South Bend, Ind., and Alverno Administrative Services of Mishawaka, Ind.
NEWELL CO., Freeport, Ill., said it had completed its purchase of the Lee-Rowan Co.
Terms were not disclosed.


Dealers Are Warned on Political Gifts
The executive director of the Municipal Securities Rulemaking Board, Christopher A. Taylor, offered municipal bond dealers two strong warnings yesterday.
One is that the board means business when it says it will not allow political contributions that are made to public officials with the aim of winning underwriting business.


Ryder Cup Course Saves Worst for Last
It all looked so simple today in the light breeze and sunshine at the Belfry.
Twelve Americans yanked out their drivers and long irons and took their best shots at the infamous 18th hole that has been so unkind to their country.
All 12 finished their practice rounds by handling it with ease.
The only thing missing was Ryder Cup pressure.


Primerica in Talks to Create a Financial Giant
Only months after adding the Shearson brokerage firm to its growing financial empire, Primerica, headed by Sanford I. Weill, is offering $4 billion to take over the Travelers Corporation, the large insurance company, in which it holds a 27 percent stake.
Primerica said it would adopt the Travelers name.
Both companies said yesterday that negotiations were under way, but executives at both declined to be interviewed.


Sports of The Times; The Gehrig, Showalter Connection
ON the table behind Buck Showalter's desk in his Yankee Stadium office sits a small framed photo.
"To Buck," the inscription reads.
"With kindest personal regards. Cordially, Lou Gehrig."


Now for a Mideast Development Bank; Early Peace Efforts
To the Editor:
It is inaccurate for you to write in recent news articles that the dialogue between Israel and the P.L.O. began only this year.
In August 1965 we formed an Israeli party, Haolam Hazeh (New Force), and elected the publisher Uri Avneri on our two-state platform.
In June 1967 we formed the Committee for the Israeli-Palestinian Federation, and in 1968 two of our members were elected to the Knesset.


CLINTON'S HEALTH PLAN: The Overview; CLINTON ASKS BACKING FOR SWEEPING CHANGE IN THE HEALTH SYSTEM
President Clinton sought to establish a place in history tonight as the guarantor of health care for all Americans, asking Congress and a national television audience to work with him to enact the most sweeping national program since Social Security in 1935.
He argued that this was the time to confront and vanquish a problem that had thwarted past Presidents back to Franklin D. Roosevelt.


Edward Baquet Sr., 71; Ran Creole Restaurant
Edward Baquet Sr., founder of Eddie's, one of New Orleans's most popular creole restaurants, died on Tuesday at University Hospital there.
He was 71.
The cause was leukemia, a disease he fought for a decade, family members said.


Market Place; Two game plans for investing under the health care overhaul.
NOW that President Clinton has officially announced his large-scale plan to overhaul the health care system, one big question pops to mind: Is there any way for investors to make money off this thing?
Absolutely, the investment pros say.
While most health care stocks suffered in the last year as anxious investors awaited details of the Administration's plans, with their disclosure, investors have a strategy road map -- almost regardless of what happens in Congress.


Somalia Pullout Date Set
The Security Council voted today to set March 1995 as the date for ending United Nations peacekeeping in Somalia and handing over responsibility for the country to an elected government.
The resolution, adopted unanimously, emphasized that the United Nations was committed to promoting reconciliation between warring clans in Somalia and that it supported efforts to disarm Mogadishu and capture Gen.
Mohammed Farah Aidid, despite widespread criticism because the operation resulted in civilian deaths.


Senate Panel Gives Alexander Its Vote And a Rave Review
After a session that resembled a curtain call more than a Congressional hearing, the actress Jane Alexander was unanimously confirmed today by a Senate committee as chairwoman of the National Endowment for the Arts.
The full Senate is to vote on her confirmation within two weeks.
In her appearance before the Senate Labor and Human Resources Committee, Ms.
Alexander steered determinedly clear of the disputes that have dogged the endowment, while promising to undo any damage that has been done.
Looking coolly composed, the nominee took the high road, offering inspirational anecdotes of how the arts had transformed her life and promising that if she was confirmed, her goal for the arts would be that "the best reaches the most."


'The Series' Is at Hand, But the Drama is Gone
On the television set in the Yankee players lounge, the Blue Jays had lost to the Red Sox and several players turned and walked out, silently.
Another wasted opportunity.
If the Yankees had won last night, they would have been only four games out of first place before leaving today for tomorrow night's opener of a three-game series in Toronto.
But with their 5-2 loss to the Twins, they remained five games behind with only nine to play.


Oracle Posts Record Profit For Quarter
Shares in the Oracle Systems Corporation, the largest supplier of data base software, rose today after the company late Tuesday reported record quarterly revenues and earnings that were much higher than estimates by Wall Street analysts.
Oracle shares closed today at $58.625, up $3.875, in Nasdaq trading.
Shares of other data base software companies also gained today.
In Nasdaq trading, shares of the Informix Corporation, surged $2.375, to $21.125, while Sybase Inc.'s shares jumped $5.625, to $62.625.


A New Framework for Health Care
To control medical costs and provide secure coverage to all, President Clinton has proposed a vast restructuring of the health care system, to be phased in over several years.
The proposal would use financial incentives to encourage consumers to join low-cost health maintenance organizations, and would push doctors, hospitals and insurers to join together in networks.
The strategy is to make consumers conscious of the true cost of their care and, by fostering competition among plans, to force the plans to cut costs and offer better service.
If competition does not drive down costs, mandatory ceilings on the growth of insurance premiums would aim to keep total spending in line with the growth of the economy.
The Overseer A seven-member National Health Board, appointed by the President, would monitor state compliance and the functioning of health alliances, interpret the standard benefit package and make recommendations about new benefits to reflect changing technology and needs, and set regional medical spending ceilings.
It would develop indicators of the quality of service and care offered by health plans and publicize the results to promote informed consumer choices.
A committee would monitor drug prices, raising quesions to the pharmaceutical companies about those drugs it deems unreasonably expensive.
The Payers EMPLOYERS Would pay the bulk of the cost.
The plan requires them to pay at least 80 percent of the average cost of premiums in their region, and to support family coverage for married workers.
EMPLOYEES Would contribute an average of 20 percent toward their own insurance premiums, plus any required deductibles or co-payments.
SELF-EMPLOYED AND NON-WORKERS Would be required to buy insurance, paying the full cost of premiums, unless they qualify for government subsidies.
The cost would be fully tax deductible.
Currently, only 25 percent of the cost is tax deductible.
GOVERNMENT Would subsidize costs for many small and low-wage businesses and for individuals (like part-time workers and the unemployed) who have incomes below 150 percent of the poverty line.
Medicare payments would continue for the elderly and disabled.
Medicaid would continue to pay for the poor, but through health alliances.
LARGE CORPORATIONS Woudl have the option to negotiate directly with insurers for their employees' coverage, but would still be required to pay at least 80 percent of employees' premiums.
The Brokers HEALTH ALLIANCES The core of the plan.
Run by the states under Federal scrutiny, these regional purchasing groups would collect and distribute premiums, certify health plans and offer them to consumers, insure that average premiums grow no faster than Federally set limits, collect and publish data on performance of health plans and negotiate with local doctors and hospitals to set fees for service provided outside H.M.O.'s.
ACCESS: All citizens and legal residents would be covered.
COST: Alliances would determine a target range for average premiums charged by plans in its area.
Plans would not be eligible if their charges were higher than the range.
ELIGIBLE PLANS: Alliances would write a contract with any plan that met state requirements.
OPTIONS: Alliances would offer a range of medical plans of three types: an H.M.O., a fee-for-service plan, or a combination of the two.
Patients could not be turned away unless a plan is oversubscribed.
QUALITY: Alliances would publish information to help consumers compare the service and the medical performance of various plans.
SIZE: Alliance size would be based on population, so the number of alliances in each state would vary.
Large cities would have one alliance.
STRUCTURE: Alliance structure would be determined by states.
Could function as nonprofit corporations or state agencies, but consumers and employers would have to be equally represented in the management of the alliance.
CORPORATE ALLIANCES If these employers decided to negotiate directly with insurers and form their own alliances, they would still have to offer the guaranteed benefits package and a choice of plans, though their employeees might have fewer providers to choose from.
The Options Most alliances would offer a large selection of plans, but all must include at least one fee-for-service option offering free choice of doctors.
The administration estimates that the average plan cost would be $1,800 a year for an individual and $4,200 for a family, but costs would vary by region.
Plans of any type would vary in prices; people choosing costlier ones would pay a higher share of premiums.
Plans could offer supplemental policies covering items like extra dental or mental health benefits; employers could choose to pay for these or consumers could buy them with after-tax dollars.
H.M.O.
The least-expensive option.
Patients sign up with a health maintenance organization and only consult doctors affiliated with that organization.
Subscribers typically pay only $10 for an office visit.
If they visit a doctor outside the plan, they pay 40 percent of the bill.
Combination Plan The middle option.
Patients sign up with a group for most of their care, but reserve the right to consult outside doctors by paying 20 percent of the fee for those visits.
Fee For Service The most expensive option, offering the widest choice of doctors.


U.S. to Speed Money to Bolster Yeltsin
Senior Clinton Administration officials and top American lawmakers agreed today that the $2.5 billion American aid package for Russia now being considered by Congress should move ahead quickly as a tangible sign of support for President Boris N. Yeltsin.
A day after Mr.
Yeltsin dissolved Parliament and called new elections, the Clinton Administration has settled comfortably into a policy that officials summarize as business as usual with Mr.
Yeltsin and the back of the hand for his opponents.
The general feeling within the Administration was confidence that Mr.
Yeltsin would prevail, coupled with a fasten-your-seat-belts attitude that this sort of power struggle is going to be a feature of political life in Russia for years to come.


ON LOCATION WITH: Fabio; Please, Judge the Book by Its Cover
LET'S face it.
Fabio has a better body than you and I. Striding across the hotel lobby, he looks like some mirage come to life, some bare-chested superhero who stepped shimmering from the pages of a Marvel comic book.
He looks too big for the room.
He looks as if he owned the room.
"I'm Fabio," he says, gazing down with Mel Gibson-blue eyes and a face that looks as if it were chiseled from rock.
"It's nice to meet you, sweetie."
If you don't know who Fabio (pronounced FAH-bee-o) is, you've likely seen him someplace: grasping an ingenue on a romance novel's cover, perhaps, or appearing on television talk shows or, increasingly, going to the type of party covered by People magazine.
With his income of several million dollars a year, he has been called the highest-paid male model in the world.
And though he sometimes seems like a celebrity's celebrity, his presence in this Mexican resort town, where he is filming a new television series, is part of Fabio's own rigorous regimen to transform himself into a one-word household name, bigger than Madonna, bigger even than Arnold.


For Passengers, a Nightmare at 70 Miles an Hour
Elizabeth Watts remembers being catapulted out of her sleep and over the seat in front of her.
She remembers clambering from her partly submerged train car as warm, muddy bayou water rushed in.
But mostly she remembers the surreal sense of horror that pervaded what she thought would be her last moments.


CHRONICLE
The hot topic at a party planned for tonight at the "21" Club to celebrate ART COOPER'S 10th anniversary as the editor in chief of GQ magazine is sure to be: a) President Boris N. Yeltsin's dissolution of the Russian Parliament b) President Clinton's national health plan or c) the future of the New York Yankees.
The answer: none of the above.
Rather, the guest of honor himself expects that the 200 guests who are to attend for cocktails and the 40 who are to stay on for dinner will be buzzing about the sudden removal of Terry McDonell as the editor in chief of Esquire and his replacement by Edward Kosner, the editor and president of New York magazine.


At the Russian Parliament, Waiting and Confusion
The lights were on all over the Russian Parliament building tonight.
Groups of men, some with guns, hung about the lobbies.
The cafeterias were open for service.
Aides rode the elevators, bearing stacks of newly issued decrees, but according to the man guarding the door to the third-floor presidential suite, Russia's most recently sworn-in President had left the building.
The guard said Aleksandr V. Rutskoi -- still referred to by most Russians as their vice president -- would be back shortly.
He had spent last night inside the White House, now headquarters for Russia's one-day-old, self-anointed parallel Government.
And given the uncertainties of the country's political situation, he was sure to return to his command post before long, if only for security's sake.


Where's the Mayor? On the Front Porch
MOST evenings, weather permitting, Robert Kelly emerges from his two-story home in Northwest Washington to engage in a little porch sitting, a type of old-fashioned neighborliness analogous to putting out the welcome mat.
From there Mr.
Kelly, 68, who is known to friends and neighbors just as "Kelly," can see and be seen.
For nearly 35 years he has been the eyes and ears of the 700 block of Nicholson Street.
When a neighbor dies, Mr.
Kelly has details on the wake.
If a younger resident wins a college scholarship, Mr.
Kelly is the first to trumpet it.
If there are new faces on the block, anything out of the ordinary or anything in need of fixing, Mr.
Kelly is the one to turn to.


Tax-Cut Temptation
Promising not to raise taxes is tricky business for any politician.
Ask George Bush.
Or Gov.
Jim Florio, whose record $2.8 billion tax increase came within months of a 1989 campaign promise to resist the temptation.
Now Christine Todd Whitman, Mr.
Florio's Republican challenger in the governor's race, has promised not only not to raise taxes, but to slash the state's income tax for most residents by 30 percent over three years.


CLINTON'S HEALTH PLAN: News Analysis; Pledging Peace of Mind
President Clinton rode to power on the economic anxiety of the middle class and the promise that the Government could do something about it.
Tonight, standing before the nation with a health security card in his hand, he tried to deliver, pledging a vast new benefit for all Americans.
"With this card, if you lose your job or you switch jobs, you're covered," Mr.
Clinton declared, holding aloft the freshly-minted red, white and blue card.
"If you leave your job to start a small business, you're covered. If you're an early retiree, you're covered."


Norman Jaffe, 61, an Architect Famed for Home Designs, Is Dead
The Suffolk County Medical Examiner today confirmed the death of Norman Jaffe, an architect who had been missing and presumed drowned for more than a month.
Mr. Jaffe, 61, of Bridgehampton, was last seen Aug. 19 before an early-morning swim.


CLINTON'S HEALTH PLAN: Reporter's Notebook; Props and Fuzzy Anecdotes In a Sober, Grown-Up Talk
It was the night Elvis stayed home.
President Clinton came to Congress this evening and spoke without the usual array of facial expressions he often borrows from his childhood idol -- the lip-biting, the downcast eyelids, the tucked-in chin.


Books of The Times; For South Florida, the Creeps in 2 New Thrillers
Pronto  By Elmore Leonard  265 pages.
Delacorte Press. 21.95.
Strip Tease  By Carl Hiaasen  354 pages.
Alfred A. Knopf. $21.
Poor South Florida, bane of international tourism, focus of inclement weather.
Now to add to its troubles, it's the place inhabited by the creeps who crawl through two new crime thrillers, Elmore Leonard's "Pronto" and Carl Hiaasen's "Strip Tease."


Riverboat Casino Owner Bidding for Action in N.F.L.
The National Football League learned today that a prospective investor in a proposed franchise in St.
Louis was attempting to get a license there to conduct riverboat gambling.
The commissioner of the league did not seem disturbed.
On Tuesday, the expansion and finance committees, heard presentations from groups seeking franchises for St.
Louis, Baltimore and Jacksonville, Fla.
Today, the meetings ended after presentations from Memphis and Charlotte, N.C.


Now for a Mideast Development Bank; It's the Western Wall
To the Editor:
A Sept. 16 photo showing women praying for peace in Jerusalem misnames the site as "the Wailing Wall," a wall believed to be a remnant of the Temple of Solomon, or, more accurately, of the Second or Herod's Temple.
Since its destruction in 70 A.D.
Jews have referred to the wall as Kotel Ha'Maaravi, the Western Wall.
"Wailing" carries a slightly pejorative connotation, a semantic error I committed for years until corrected by friends.
PETER L. FERRARA  New York, Sept. 19, 1993


Turnabout for Steinbrenner
Nine days after challenging the Yankees to produce a pennant and questioning their character and courage, George Steinbrenner addressed the team before last night's game against Minnesota, apparently intent on downplaying his Sept. 13 remarks.
The Yankee clubhouse was closed 20 minutes earlier than usual so Steinbrenner could speak to the players.
Since the owner chastised them in Milwaukee, the Yankees are 4-5 and have fallen from three games behind the Blue Jays to five games out.


U.S. Offers a Trade to Help Japan Build Missile Defense
In a novel initiative to to correct the imbalance in its technological trade with Japan, the Clinton Administration proposed today to aid Tokyo in building a missile defense system in exchange for access to advanced commercial technologies that could help American industry.
The unusual proposal, described to Japanese officials here today by a senior Pentagon official, appears to represent the first time that the United States has offered to trade the fruits of its military research and development projects for technology that would be used primarily in non-military fields.


Maurice Abravanel, 90, Utah Symphony Leader
Maurice Abravanel, a conductor who led a long, colorful career on several continents and headed the Utah Symphony Orchestra for more than three decades, died yesterday in Salt Lake City.
He was 90.
He died of natural causes, said Jeff Paris, director of marketing for the Utah Symphony.


Clinton on 'Nightline' Tonight to Push Plan
President Clinton will appear on a special edition of "Nightline" on ABC tonight to answer questions about his health care proposal.
The program will begin at 10 P.M.
Eastern time.
The President will answer questions from an audience of about 1,000 people at the Tampa Bay Performing Arts Center in Tampa Bay, Fla.
Most of the network's affiliates will break away for local news at 11 P.M. and the program will resume at 11:30 P.M. on a tape delay.


Corporate Economists Are Back
Robert E. Hayes Jr., an economist for Kmart, is pondering such issues as floor-space planning and why his company so often frustrates customers by having no bathing suits for sale in July.
Constantine G. Soras is helping crank a 29 percent jump in cellular phone customers over the last year into the Nynex Corporation's 1994 budget.


Review/Rock; Depeche Mode's Sound Of Obsession and Risk
Without its sound, Depeche Mode's show on Tuesday night at the Brendan Byrne Arena in East Rutherford, N.J., could have been a typical party-style concert.
The audience was on its feet, often dancing; the English band's lead singer, David Gahan, was twitching his hips like Mick Jagger, shaking his shoulder-length hair like Bono of U2, whirling his microphone stand and throwing his hands in the air to cue shouts and sing-alongs.
The crowd squealed when Mr.
Gahan tossed off his jacket and, later, his shirt.
But the rock-star preening made an odd match with the songs.
Martin Gore, Depeche Mode's songwriter, specializes in dark introspection and minor keys; Alan Wilder, who arranges the songs, fills them with foreboding, reverberant sounds that turn declarations of love into something unsettling.
For Depeche Mode, love is no idyll; its transcendence comes with a fearful, annihilating obsession.
The concert opened with "Higher Love" -- with Mr.
Gahan intoning, "I surrender heart and soul" -- and concluded, before encores, with "In Your Room," in which the singer promised to be "your favorite slave." Behind him, video screens showed shadowy embraces by nearly nude figures wearing leather cuffs.


Hang Tough, Boris
By dissolving Parliament and scheduling early elections, President Boris Yeltsin has thrown Russia into one of its periodic fits of political uncertainty.
Yet the "crisis" is very peculiar.
For all the supposed drama of the confrontation, the most important political forces all have the same interest: to see Mr.
Yeltsin succeed.
If he holds on to his strength, Russia may turn a crucial corner in creating democratic institutions.
Two groups will be among the arbiters of the confrontation: the military and the heads of provincial governments.
Since the failed coup of August 1991, Russia's generals have sought to keep their institution out of politics and have largely succeeded.
They say the politicians should sort out their differences.


Pop and Jazz in Review
Debu Chaudhuri  Sitarist Merkin Concert Hall
The World Music Institute opened its fall season on Saturday night with a recital by an Indian sitarist, Debu Chaudhuri, that was most notable for its restraint.
Mr.
Chaudhuri is dean of fine arts and head of the department of music at Delhi University; Somnath Mukherjee, who accompanied him on tabla drums, also teaches there.
The sitarist has written books on Indian music, and the first part of the concert was a pair of ragas he composed.


Mexican Conservatives Pick 1994 Candidate
Leaders of the conservative National Action Party, one of Mexico's two main opposition groups, today endorsed Diego Fernandez de Cevallos, their party's most prominent congressman, as its candidate for President next year.
The pledges of support appeared to assure Mr.
Fernandez of the nomination of his party, which is known by its Spanish initials as the PAN.


A Murderous Double Standard
Affluent whites' lives are valuable; poor blacks' lives are not.
That's one dismal conclusion when a country accepts wholesale slaughter in ghetto streets, then gets outraged over the murders of three foreign tourists in Florida.
Americans need to understand that the lives they value and those they don't are intimately connected.
The murderous ghetto children we now grow can no longer be held to preying on their own.
It's time the country changed its attitude about what are now regarded as garden-variety murders.


Miscellany
*
Magdol &amp; McCone Inc., an advertising executive search firm in New York, named Jean-Marc P. Schwarz and Leslie Ross to the new positions of managing partners.
The appointments came after the recent death of the company's founder, Alice Magdol-Conrad. *
Forbes magazine, New York, opened an advertising sales office in Washington, headed by Kelly Emery in the new position of Washington manager.
She was previously Southeastern sales manager at Barron's, Washington.


Farrar, Straus Heir Apparent Quits in a Genteel Family Tiff
Roger Straus 3d, long the heir apparent to his father at Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux, the privately owned book publisher, announced yesterday that he was resigning as managing director of the company because of "philosophical differences."
That leaves open the question of who will run the firm after the elder Mr.
Straus, now 76, either retires or dies.
He co-founded Farrar, Straus in 1946 and his idiosyncratic personality has set its tone ever since.
Despite the younger Mr.
Straus's resignation, however, he is to remain a stockholder and will have controlling interest in Farrar, Straus after his father's death, the company said.


White Castle Chain Narrows Its Review
White Castle System Inc., the fast-food restaurant chain based in Columbus, Ohio, said yesterday that it had narrowed the review on its estimated $10 million to $15 million account to 2 shops from 15.


Trying to Save A Patch of Pride
A DOZEN people stood under a weeping willow tree on West 84th Street on Tuesday night talking about how to save the garden they built out of rubble and heroin needles 15 years ago.
Now, the New York City Housing Authority wants it to build 35 apartments for the homeless.
"This willow tree was planted the day I had my first child," said Linda Carter, staring up into a graceful canopy that now soars 80 feet into the sky.
Her firstborn, a daughter named Teniqua, is 14.


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt  *
Detroit is offering $165 million of tax-exempt limited tax revenue refunding bonds for the Cobo Hall convention center expansion project.
The issue was initially priced through Paine Webber to yield a maximum 5.65 percent for a bond due in 2012.
Serial bonds with shorter maturities were priced to yield from 3.75 percent in 1994 to 5.45 percent in 2007.
The issue is rated A by S.&amp; P.
*
Michigan Higher Education Student Loan Authority is offering $158.5 million of student loan and revenue refunding bonds initially priced with a maximum yield of 5.40 percent for a bond due in 2008 through Smith Barney Shearson.
Yields on the shorter- maturity serial bonds range from 4.30 percent in 1998 to 5.05 percent in 2004.
Because the bonds are insured by the Ambac Indemnity Corporation, they are rated triple-A by Moody's and S.&amp; P.


Required Volunteerism: School Programs Tested
In 1990, when Lynn Steirer was starting ninth grade, the public schools here enacted a mandatory community service program, requiring 60 hours of volunteer work to graduate from high school.
At the time, Lynn spent practically every free minute of her life volunteering -- with the Girl Scouts, at Meals on Wheels, at a nursing home, coaching basketball, at Bethlehem's music festival and restoration village.
Still, she was ticked.


Now for a Mideast Development Bank
To the Editor:
With the recent developments toward a Middle East peace, now is the time to press for a Middle East Development Bank.
Such a bank could build infrastructure, provide technical assistance, finance schools, hospitals and sanitation facilities, and support the modernization of the private sector.
Ultimately a development bank would help reduce differences in the standard of living of Arabs and Israelis, an underlying reason for so much of the hostility between them.


Insurers Warned on Shoreline Policies
New York State's top insurance official is asking private insurers to resume writing policies for houses in shoreline areas of Long Island and coastal areas of New York or risk state legislation requiring them to provide the coverage.
The insurers, frightened by billions of dollars in losses caused by Hurricane Andrew in Florida last year, say the storm compelled them to reassess risks in New York, particularly along the storm-vulnerable South Shore of Long Island, and to seek ways to limit their exposure.


Ogilvy Chicago Gets Australian Executive
A top executive from Ogilvy &amp; Mather Worldwide's Australian operation is leaving to join the Chicago office.
Derek Carstens, chairman and chief executive at Ogilvy Australia in Sydney, will join Ogilvy Chicago as president, effective in mid-October.
Mr.
Carstens, 44, assumes responsibilities from Austin McGhie, 37, the general manager who left in April to become president at a sibling shop, Cole &amp; Weber in Seattle.


Rams Sign Lofton to a One-Year Pact
The Los Angeles Rams, still trying to get their passing attack out of low gear, signed wide receiver JAMES LOFTON to a one-year contract yesterday.
To make room for Lofton on their 53-man roster, the Rams released wide receiver TONY HARGAIN, who had been claimed off waivers on Aug. 25.
He didn't play in the team's first three games.


Max Wechsler, 86, Architect and Designer
Max Wechsler, a New York architect for more than 50 years, died on Friday at Tisch Hospital in Manhattan.
He was 86 and lived in Manhattan.
The cause was a heart attack, family members said.


Viacom Spurns Aid In Merger
The bidding war for Paramount Communications Inc. intensified yesterday, as the contestants dug in their heels.
Spurning regional telephone companies' offers to aid its bid, Viacom Inc. said yesterday that it preferred to go it alone in pursuing the deal it reached last week to acquire Paramount.


City Council to Vote on $180 Million Center
J.
HOWARD (BUMPY) FRAZER, president of the United States Tennis Association, says he has his fingers crossed regarding the City Council's intentions toward the proposed $180 million center that would become the new home of the United States Open.
The final vote by the Council is expected tomorrow, and if no suits are filed against the project in the next four months, construction could be under way at Flushing Meadows next spring with the 1996 Open targeted for the move-in date.
"As of last week, I heard the majority of the Council believes as I do, that this plan is good for the city and people of New York," said Frazer.


Yankees' September to Remember? Well, Forget It
Finishing the season has become a chore.
The Yankees do not mention the pennant race anymore unless they are questioned about it.
How can they?
How can anyone realistically place the Blue Jays and the Yankees in the same sentence anymore?
Not after what transpired this month.
Not after one team soared, one team sputtered and the burst for first evolved into a rout.
Sure, there are still Yankee die-hards who believe a miracle can occur.
Even after the Yankees played another terrible game in losing to the Twins, 5-2, last night at the Stadium, there are some fans clinging to scenarios that will enable New York to overtake the first-place Blue Jays, who lost to Boston, 7-5, and lead by five games.


Tokos Medical
The stock of the Tokos Medical Corporation has lost almost half its value since June and may come under even more selling pressure soon.
Robert F. Byrnes, chairman and chief executive of the troubled home health care company, has filed notice in the last week to sell a total of 207,000 shares of Tokos stock.
The announcements came just a couple of weeks after Mr.
Byrnes filed notice to sell 108,335 shares.


Santiago Journal; In Pinochet's Old Realm, Twilight of Honecker
He used to take walks in the quiet mornings through his tree-lined Santiago neighborhood, but in June they stopped, friends say, because of the Southern Hemisphere's winter.
When he first came here in January, there was immense press attention, but his only public statement was upon arrival at the airport and he has granted no interviews, made no political speeches, given no news conferences, so reporters no longer congregate outside the high-walled compound of condominiums where he lives.


A Decorative Corner of Academe
THERE'S nothing like an exhibition with the title "Along the Royal Road: Berlin and Potsdam in Porcelain and Painting, 1815-1848" to remind us of the scope and scholarship of the decorative arts.
Fittingly, the show marks the opening of the Bard Graduate Center for Studies in the Decorative Arts, an international study and exhibition space in a Beaux-Arts townhouse at 18 West 86th Street.


CLINTON'S HEALTH PLAN: The Region; In Albany, Trenton and Hartford, Some Anxieties
Because New York has 2.2 million residents without health insurance, state officials applaud President Clinton's plan to provide coverage for everyone.
But they are concerned that any savings for the state produced by universal coverage might be undermined by the Administration's proposal to limit the growth in Federal payments for Medicaid and Medicare.
The Clinton Administration has yet to release details about how its proposed cap on spending on programs for the poor and disabled and the elderly would affect each state.
Therefore, New York officials cannot yet determine the actual impact of the plan on the state's budget.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-15  ARMY AND POLICE BACK YELTSIN  Boris Yeltsin received crucial pledges of support from Russia's military and police forces while opposition lawmakers issued defiant resolutions against them.
A1  The atmosphere inside the Parliament building was low-key.
A12


Secrets of Long Life From 2 Who Ought to Know; In Their Book, Westchester Sisters Share Lessons From More Than a Century of Living
Two days shy of her 104th birthday, Sarah De lany and her younger sister, Annie Elizabeth, who is 102, sat in their front parlor doling out secrets to long life like candy on Halloween night. (Yoga, cod liver oil and a daily dose of garlic, chopped fine and swallowed whole, are all recommended.)
Sadie and Bessie Delany, daughters of a slave who became the country's first black bishop of the Episcopal Church, have also lived to tell how they outsmarted the "rebby boys" of the Jim Crow South and outlasted just about everyone who ever tried to hold them back.


Transcript of President's Address to Congress on Health Care
Following is a transcript of President Clinton's address to a joint session of Congress last night on his plan to overhaul the nation's health care system, as recorded by The New York Times.
Mr.
Speaker, Mr.
President, members of Congress, distinguished guests, my fellow Americans: Before I begin my words tonight, I would like to ask that we all bow in a moment of silent prayer for the memory of those who were killed and those who have been injured in the tragic train accident in Alabama today.


Term-Limit Issue Must Go to Voters, Judge Rules
A State Supreme Court judge ruled yesterday that a referendum to limit the terms for most of the city's elected officials must appear on the Nov. 2 ballot, overturning an earlier decision by the City Clerk.
But the city's Corporation Counsel, O. Peter Sherwood, said last night that the city is most likely to appeal the decision.
How soon an appeal would take place and whether the measure would appear on the ballot in less than six weeks remain unclear, but appellate courts have generally granted speedy reviews of cases on ballot issues.


Dow Manages an Unenthusiastic Rebound
The stock market bounced back modestly yesterday from the preceding day's 38-point loss, but analysts said the somewhat lackadaisical gains suggested that investors lacked real enthusiasm.
Michael Metz, chief portfolio strategist for Oppenheimer &amp; Company, said the preceding day's selloff, which analysts say was sparked by the political turmoil in Russia, suggested that "the market was in the mood to find an excuse to sell off, and it seized on that."


Got Them Gas, He Says, and They Set Him Afire
A man who loves to tinker with cars says that he took a can of gasoline to some stranded motorists just outside Cincinnati early Tuesday morning and that they repaid the favor by splashing him with it and setting him on fire.
The victim, Milton Metcalfe, was listed today in critical condition with second- and third-degree burns over 75 percent of his body at University Hospital in Cincinnati.


Corrections
An article in the The Living Section yesterday about the diversification of restaurants into other businesses misidentified a general store affiliated with the Coyote Cafe in Santa Fe, N.M.
It is Coyote Cocina, not Coyote Casino.


Turning a Loss Into a Gain
The puzzling rise of QVC Network's stock yesterday may have hurt Viacom's chances of buying Paramount Communications, but it potentially made Viacom's chairman, Sumner Redstone, $63 million richer than he was a day earlier.
Under the deal the determined billionaire negotiated with Paramount, Viacom is entitled to receive a $100 million consolation prize plus 24 million new Paramount shares at $69.14 each if Paramount merges with another company.


People
*
Tony Fisher was named to the new position of executive vice president and executive creative director at Ally &amp; Gargano, New York.
He was previously a senior vice president and group creative director at McCann-Erickson New York. *
Diana (Dee) Lynn was named to the new position of director of direct-marketing services at Harris Drury Cohen, Fort Lauderdale, Fla., heading a new direct-marketing department.
Ms.
Lynn was previously an executive vice president and account services director at Lowe Direct, New York.


Review/Music; Amid Festivities, 2 Sides of the Philharmonic
In the last two seasons, gala opening-night concerts have not generally displayed Kurt Masur and the New York Philharmonic at their best.
Two years ago, Mr.
Masur was making his debut as music director of the orchestra, and sweaty palms and intense pressure may have slackened the playing.
Last year, the orchestra's opening night was led, with varied success, by three different conductors in honor of its 150th-anniversary season.
Last night, finally, one hoped for some sign of settling into a normal season, even in the midst of the festivities, which included a pre-concert cocktail party, a post-concert black-tie dinner, a television broadcast on "Live From Lincoln Center," a local radio simulcast on WQXR, and ticket prices that, at a high of $90, were to benefit the orchestra's pension fund.


Review/Dance; Leaping Above and Beyond the Surface
The idea of presenting Elizabeth Streb Ringside in the Brooklyn Bridge Anchorage was a brilliant one.
Two extravagant conceits -- dance as a test of physical endurance and control, and high-arching brick vaults as a theater space -- were matched to impressive effect.
The possibilities and limits of Ms.
Streb's kind of dance were made clear in two premieres on the program, seen on Friday night.
In "Surface," performed to a score created by Matthew Ostrowski from the miked thuds of bodies as they moved, seven dancers interacted with two huge plywood panels.


Ralph Lauren Takes His Line on the Road
While other retailers are taking their acts to television's home shopping networks, Ralph Lauren is taking his new line of jeans and rugged clothing on the road in an 18-wheeler.
A team of nine young salespeople yesterday started selling the designer's RRL, or double-R L, collection out of a Peterbilt semitractor trailer truck parked on the campus of New York University in Manhattan.
The trailer, painted with mustangs running across one side and pulled by a cherry red cab, plans to visit college campuses across the country cultivating customers who might otherwise miss the company's more traditional marketing efforts.


One Specious Argument for Nafta
With the Congressional vote on the North American Free Trade Agreement shaping up as a nail-biter, advocates on both sides of the issue are firing away with arguments fair and foul, hoping to swing critical votes their way.
On balance, the pro-Nafta side has argued more carefully and, in our view, more persuasively.
But one line of pro-Nafta argument insults North Americans on both sides of the Mexico-U.S. border.
Delay or defeat of the treaty, some claim, would have disastrous consequences for U.S. foreign policy in Mexico and throughout Latin America, undermining reformers and speeding a return to the anti-gringo nationalism of the past.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.13
3.23
3.06
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
2.90
2.91
2.91
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.04
3.04
2.96
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
4.96
4.98
6.08
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
6.09
6.12
7.48
TELEPHONE BONDS
7.14
7.16
8.48
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
5.49
5.48
6.42
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Asbestos Cleanup May Take Four to Six Weeks
It will take four to six weeks, considerably longer than previously estimated, before the scores of New York City schools that are closed or badly disrupted by the asbestos crisis can return to a normal class schedule, school officials said yesterday.
During testimony before the Board of Education yesterday, Burton Sacks, chief executive for school monitoring for the board, said asbestos cleanup work in a majority of the schools that failed to open was likely to drag out for a month or more.
On Monday, Schools Chancellor Ramon C. Cortines estimated that the work could take two weeks or less.


RESULTS PLUS
SOCCER  Marseilles Is Stripped of French Title  French officials investigating a payoff scandal yesterday suspended three players, barred the former manager of Olympique Marseilles from the sport and stripped the team of its 1993 French championship title.
It was the second sanction against Olympique Marseilles.
The European federation earlier this month excluded the team from defending its European Champions Cup title.
The former manager, Jean-Pierre Bernes, who is charged with paying or trying to pay members of the Valenciennes team in northern France up to $43,000 to go easy on Marseilles in a match on May 20, was banned from the sport until further notice.
The French soccer federation made its announcement under tomorrow's deadline imposed by FIFA, the sport's international governing body, to take action or be barred from global competition.
France currently leads European Group 6 in qualifying play for the 1994 World Cup and is scheduled to play host to the 1998 World Cup finals.
Further sanctions will hinge on the outcome of the trials of those charged, the French federation said. (AP) Norway Inches Closer to World Cup Berth: Norway closed in on its first World Cup berth in 55 years yesterday with a 1-0 victory over Poland in Oslo, and the Netherlands poured on the goals in San Marino, 7-0.
Norway, on a 53d-minute goal by Jostein Flo, increased its lead to 3 points in Europe's Group 2, and needs only one victory or two ties in its remaining two games to advance to the World Cup finals for the second time, its previous appearance coming in 1938.
The Netherlands, needing to win by five goals to move into second place in the same group, took care of matters in San Marino.
The victory by the Netherlands dropped England into third place in Group 2 on goal differential.
Norway leads the group with 14 points, with the Netherlands and England both with 11 points.
All three teams have two games remaining, with England playing at the Netherlands on Oct. 13.
In other games, Italy moved into second place in Group 1 with a 3-0 victory in Estonia, and Spain stayed in contention in Group 3 with a 5-1 victory in Albania. (AP)


Poland: The Failure of Success
The numbers say that Poland's version of shock therapy -- leaping from a command economy to capitalism overnight -- is working.
The economy is growing by 5 percent a year while other economies in Eastern Europe and the former Soviet Union are shrinking.
Inflation is 35 percent a year; in Russia, inflation is 35 percent a month.
The deficit is down, waiting lines at stores are gone and foreign investment is up.
Half the work force is in private-sector jobs.
So why, then, did Polish voters -- on the very day that the last remnants of the Red Army moved out of Poland -- vote former Communists back into power?
The answer isn't hard to find.
Reform not only put color TV's and VCR's into Polish homes; it also put 20 percent of Polish workers into unemployment lines.


Calendar: An Exhibit, Plant Sales And Talks
About Frank Lloyd Wright  National Institute for Architectural Education, 30 West 22d Street; (212) 924-7000.
On Tuesday, the architect Edgar Tafel will speak about Frank Lloyd Wright, with whom he worked for nine years, in the first of six lectures by authors in architecture and design.
Future programs include a discussion of architecture from 1943 to 1968 by Joan Ockman (Oct. 12), women and machines by Ellen Lupton (Nov. 9) and the photography of architecture by Akiko Busch (Dec. 7).
All talks start at 6:30 P.M.
Reservations are suggested.
Fee is $3; members, no charge.
On Architecture and Fashion  Metropolitan Museum of Art, Fifth Avenue at 82d Street; (212) 570-3949.
Morrison Heckscher, the curator of American decorative arts at the museum, will talk about American architecture from 1650 to 1915, on four consecutive Tuesdays at 2:30 P.M., starting Oct. 5.
Fee is $30.


METRO DIGEST
FOR HEVESI, RECOGNITION Something funny happens to Alan G. Hevesi when he walks around New York City these days.
He draws a crowd.
After months of drawing blank stares, Mr.
Hevesi is now basking in the glow of his first-place finish in the Democratic primary for city comptroller.
B3.
Hevesi and Holtzman challenge each other's ethics in a debate.
B3


Juilliard Ensemble to Focus on the New
It takes either unbounded foolishness or extravagant idealism to form a new contemporary-music group in today's cultural climate.
When long-established groups like Parnassus and Speculum Musicae must wrestle for attention, audiences and funds, and when even the contemporary-music world is splintered into small camps of competing interests, what role could a new group hope to play?
But the New Juilliard Ensemble, which made its debut on Tuesday night at the Juilliard Theater, is protected from buffeting winds by being part of the Juilliard School.
Its founder is Joel Sachs, who has directed the school's annual Focus festival of new music; with a co-director, Cheryl Seltzer, he has also made the group Continuum an important part of the New York new-music scene.


Florio Attacks Tax-Cut Plan By Whitman
Standing on a construction site, Gov.
Jim Florio began tearing away today at the economic plan proposed by his Republican gubernatorial rival, Christine Todd Whitman.
"This isn't a plan -- it's a voodoo redo, said Mr. Florio, alluding to George Bush's phrase, "voodoo economics," his 1980 campaign criticism of the supply-side economics of Ronald Reagan on which Mrs. Whitman's plan is based.


Boggs Says Yankees Are Not Paper Thin
If someone had told Al Harazin and Jeff Torborg last spring that the Mets would lose more than 100 games this season, they would have called for the men in the white coats to take that someone away.
If someone, on the other hand, had told the Yankees they would contend for the division championship until the waning games of the season, would they have reacted in a similar manner?
They wouldn't admit it now even if they thought they would have, but the chances of the Yankees' finishing first or being alive in the race with less than two weeks to play were as remote as the likelihood of the Mets' losing 100-plus games.


Nafta Maintains U.S. Environment Standards; Garment Workers' Risk
To the Editor:
The Nafta treaty jeopardizes the livelihoods of a quarter-million women who work in the 80 to 150 garment plants in 1,800 small towns in back areas of this country.
They bring home modest incomes by urban standards, but these strengthen families and indeed often are the primary support of their homes and children.
And their wages undergird countless local businesses.


DOZENS ARE KILLED IN WRECK OF TRAIN IN ALABAMA BAYOU
More than 40 people were killed early today when part of an Amtrak train hurtled off a 12-foot-high trestle into a bayou and caught fire, trapping sleeping passengers in black water up to 30 feet deep.
The accident, one of the worst on American rails since World War II and the deadliest in Amtrak's 23-year history, occurred about 3 A.M., when the Sunset Limited from Los Angeles was crossing Big Bayou Canot at 70 miles per hour on its way to Miami with 189 passengers and a crew of 17.


Keenan's Patience Is Tried By Hirsch
After the third Pittsburgh goal slid into the net, not that far along in the second period, a tiny tremor of fear shuddered through Corey Hirsch.
It is only the preseason, and he was promised a whole game in the net on this evening, but Hirsch knows what Rangers' Coach Mike Keenan is like.
Goalie mistakes are not often tolerated.
Goalie yanks are frequent and fast.
And so Hirsch didn't dare look to the bench, didn't dare check to see if Keenan's hands were wildly waving his dismissal.
They were not.
The hands were safely stored away in his pockets, mouth closed in a firm line, his head turned the opposite way.


President's Nominee As Head of Military Backs Bosnia Force
Gen.
John M. Shalikashvili, President Clinton's choice to be the top officer of the armed forces, gave strong support today for sending 25,000 American troops to Bosnia to help enforce any peace settlement reached there, but said the overall operation would cost $4 billion in the first year alone.
General Shalikashvili, a Polish-born artillery officer named to succeed Gen.
Colin L. Powell as Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, said in testimony before the Senate Armed Services Committee that a force of 50,000 heavily armed NATO troops would have a good chance of success in such a mission, if the proper command structure was established and the warring factions committed themselves to observe an agreement.
A 'Tragic Association'
The general also said he had been shocked to learn that his father fought in World War II in a Nazi-organized unit commanded by the Waffen SS.
The general said he learned about his father's ties with the SS unit only last month from news reports.


Controversy may sell, but only a few marketers took a chance with 'N.Y.P.D. Blue.'
THE series is called "N.Y.P.D. Blue," but the few advertisers that handed over their greenbacks to ABC may well be tickled pink.
The premiere episode of the controversial police melodrama, broadcast at 10 P.M. on Tuesday, carried 14 national commercials from only 8 advertisers -- known for being bottom-feeders because they eagerly buy commercial time during programming shunned by most other marketers anxious to avoid a consumer backlash.


Anheuser-Busch Will Cut Salaried Work Force 10%
With the beer market flat and many beer drinkers searching for less expensive brands, the Anheuser-Busch Companies announced yesterday that it would take a $565 million charge against earnings and cut its salaried work force in the United States by 10 percent.
The moves, part of an extensive program to reduce costs and improve efficiency, follow what has become a pattern among large consumer product companies when buyers have more choices than ever and consumer confidence has not returned to freer-spending ways of the 1980's.


Pool of Jurors Is Whittled Down in the World Trade Center Bombing Trial
The task of picking an impartial jury in the World Trade Center bombing trial advanced to a new stage yesterday with the first chances for the defense and the prosecution to challenge 12 prospective jurors qualified earlier by the judge.
Jury selection is particularly sensitive in the trial because of the overwhelming publicity surrounding the attack late in February and the risk of a biased jury.


Corrections
A report in the Food Notes column of The Living Section yesterday about the annual Hudson Valley Garlic Festival misstated the date.
The event will be held on Sunday, not Saturday.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Companies
Primerica wants to buy Travelers for $4 billion.
The combined companies, which would use the Travelers name, would be the country's largest financial services company and would expand the empire of Primerica's Sanford Weill.  [ Page D1. ]
Viacom said it was not looking for partners in its bid for Paramount, rejecting suggestions that a telephone company may join the deal.  [ D1. ]  Money managers invested in the companies involved in the bidding seemed dispassionate.  [ D5. ]


Why Stocks Swing on World Events
Boris Yeltsin orders the Russian legislature dissolved, and 4,683 miles away, the Dow Jones industrial average sells off 38.56 points.
A knee-jerk reaction?
You bet.
As happens in connection with so many news events unrelated to the immediate stock market or economy, by yesterday the Dow had already begun to bounce back, gaining 9.78 points.
Traders tend to lose their collective cools when stunning news is announced, and, when the news can be linked to the market or economy, the reaction frequently makes sense.


Understanding the Package


Officer Charged in Beating
A New York City police officer was indicted yesterday on charges that he beat and injured a Brooklyn man while on patrol last year, the Brooklyn District Attorney's office said.
The officer, Gerard Pitti, 30, faces charges of second- and third-degree assault and two counts of fourth-degree criminal possesion of a weapon for the attack on Victor Medina, 21, who was beaten with a nightstick on his head and body, prosecutors said.
Officer Pitti, a seven-year veteran of the police department, was suspended without pay yesterday, said a police spokesman, Officer Andrew McInnis.


No Headline
"It makes our aid all the more imperative, because Yeltsin is wrestling with the remnants of the old order in the Congress, and one of their allies is continued economic turmoil and confusion." -- DAVID OBEY, chairman of the House Foreign Affairs operations subcommittee.  [ A13:2. ]


New York State Dormitory Issue
The Dormitory Authority of the State of New York yesterday priced for sale to the public $428.6 million in tax-exempt bonds for a City University of New York bond refunding through underwriters led by Morgan Stanley &amp; Company.
Underwriters said the offering was initially priced to yield a maximum 5.675 percent for issues due in 2015 and 2020.
For investors in a 31 percent tax bracket, the bond equivalent yield would be about 8.22 percent.


P.L.O. Buries a Slain Leader in a Divided Gaza
Shrouded in a Palestinian flag, carried on a sea of chanting mourners, Muhammad Abu Shaaban was buried today like hundreds of other "martyrs" of the six-year-old uprising against Israel.
But Mr.
Abu Shaaban, a lawyer and a local leader of the mainstream Al Fatah movement in the P.L.O., had not been killed by Israeli troops.
He was shot Tuesday evening by gunmen believed here to have been his rivals in a power struggle within the local Fatah organization.


For Feet, A Light Touch
STEP into the new Christian Louboutin shop at 30 East 67th Street to be lifted out of the end-of-summer doldrums.
It helps if shoes are your weakness, but in any case the red carpeting, the 19th-century fabric room divider and the antique sofa from a Paris flea market provide a dose of fantaisie.
The 29-year-old designer, above center, based the new shop's decor on his Parisian boutique.
The wall of niches, in which single shoes are displayed like icons, was inspired by French pigeon houses.
The bird theme also takes wing in plaster doves that hold shoes Mr.
Louboutin calls "lovebirds." (They are sold in pairs, with each shoe slightly different from its mate).


'Alan Who?' Is Now Signing Autographs
Something funny happens to Alan G. Hevesi when he walks around New York City these days.
He draws a crowd.
After months of trailing in the polls and drawing blank stares, Mr.
Hevesi is now basking in the glow of his first-place finish in the Democratic primary for New York City's Comptroller.
People do not ask "Alan who?" anymore.
Calls are actually returned to his campaign office.
Children ask for his autograph.


Hevesi and Holtzman Raise Ethics Questions in Debate


Nafta Maintains U.S. Environment Standards; Good Idea, Bad Time
To the Editor:
In the debate over the Nafta ratification campaign, everyone seems to have overlooked one possibility: that Nafta is a good idea that's come along at the wrong time.


Franco Hurls His Stool; No Runs Score
John Franco is not only a man without a fastball, he is a man without a clubhouse stool.
Tonight, the Mets reliever botched his fourth save this month and took it out on the dressing room.
He tossed his aluminum locker stool about 40 feet and also dented three others beyond repair.
By the way, he was the winning pitcher.


Europe Sees a Plot: 'Anglo-Saxons' Ruin Currency Plans
Here at the headquarters of the 12-nation European Community, where Europe's recession and political disarray have put many officials in an irritable mood, there is a new dirty word: Anglo-Saxon.
The term, employed scathingly in recent weeks by politicians, including the president of the community commission, Jacques Delors, and the Belgian Foreign Minister, Willy Claes, does not form part of some abstruse historical debate.
Rather, in phrases like "Anglo-Saxon plot" or "Anglo-Saxon movement," it has come to denote the perceived maneuverings of financiers in New York and London intent on destroying Europe's faltering attempts at creating a single currency by 1999.
Against a Strong Europe?
"There is a kind of plot," Mr.
Claes, who is currently president of the community's Council of Ministers, told the French weekly magazine Le Point last week.
"In the Anglo-Saxon world, there exist organizations and personalities who prefer a divided Europe, condemned to a secondary economic role, rather than a strong Europe with its own monetary and foreign policy."


Ex-East German Spy Chief Says He Expects Conviction
Markus Wolf, the former head of East Germany's spy service, said today that he expected his trial to end in December with a conviction on charges of bribery and treason.
"It's only a question of how long the sentence will be and whether it will be suspended when my lawyers appeal," the 70-year-old defendant said during a break before testimony by Klaus Kinkel, the German Foreign Minister and a former head of West Germany's foreign intelligence service.


Nike, Thanks but No Thanks
While dozens of the nation's top high school basketball players may have compromised their eligibility by playing in an all-star tournament in Oregon earlier this month, it appears that the three players from New York City may not suffer serious consequences if they return a gift they received.
Nike sponsored the event and said it was unaware it might have jeopardized any player's eligibility by giving each participant a $100 gift certificate.


Jacobina Caro, Coach And Dancer, 90, Dies
Jacobina Caro, a dancer, choreographer and acting coach, died on Sept. 13 at her home in Santa Monica, Calif.
She was 90.
The cause was a stroke, a family member said.


Small-Cap Nasdaq Stocks
A complete listing of Nasdaq small-capitalization stocks now appears in The New York Times on Sundays.
The partial listing of those stocks, formerly published daily, has been discontinued to provide space for expanded mutual fund tables.


Aboard Flight, Demjanjuk Hears Different Verdict
John Demjanjuk took his last steps on Israeli soil early yesterday in handcuffs.
They were removed by Israeli prison officials at the door of the El Al jumbo jet that carried him back to the United States, where, on landing at Kennedy International Airport in New York, he was whisked onto a small private plane and flown to an undisclosed hideaway in Ohio, presumably not far from his home in the Cleveland suburbs.


Essay; Yeltsin Planned His Coup
Two weeks ago, the President of Russia had a long telephone conversation with the President of the U.S.
The Russian, who gave no hint of an intent to dissolve Parliament, wanted to know in detail about the progress of the aid package and repeal of trade restrictions; in turn, the American asked him to increase pressure on the Serbs and to withdraw troops from the Baltic States.
A few days later, asked to assess Boris Yeltsin's political position, Bill Clinton said: "He is in a weaker position than he was, politically, right after he was elected -- because of his inability to work through an effective political compromise with his opponents." Should the U.S. be talking to his rival, Aleksandr Rutskoi?
"I don't think we should be hedging our bets," replied Mr.
Clinton.


Last Chance
Here is a sampling of shows in New York City that are to close soon: Closing This Weekend  "ELIZABETH STREB RINGSIDE," Creative Time at the Brooklyn Bridge Anchorage, at the foot of the bridge, Cadman Plaza West and Old Front Street, Brooklyn.
A site-specific work for the vaults of the Brooklyn Bridge anchorage featuring dancers descending a 40-foot wall.
Through Saturday.
Performances: Today and tomorrow at 8 P.M.
Free.
Information: (212) 206-6674.
"ANTE AMERICA (REGARDING AMERICA)," Queens Museum of Art, New York City Building, Flushing Meadows-Corona Park.
Contemporary Latin American art by 27 artists.
Through Sunday.
Hours: Today, 10 A.M. to 5 P.M.; tomorrow and Sunday, noon to 5 P.M.
Admission: $3; $1.50 for students and the elderly.
Information: (718) 592-5555.
Closing Next Weekend  "BLACK COMEDY/WHITE LIARS," Roundabout Theater, 1530 Broadway, at 45th Street.
A revival of Peter Shaffer's 1967 one-act comedies.
Through Oct. 3.
Performances: Tuesday, Thursday and Friday, 8 P.M.; Wednesday and Saturday, 2 and 8 P.M; Sunday at 2 P.M.
Tickets: $38 to $42.
Information: (212) 869-8400.
"IN THE SPIRIT OF FLUXUS," Whitney Museum of American Art, 945 Madison Avenue, at 75th Street.
Approximately 400 objects and documentary material, by some 40 artists, trace the genesis and resilience of this irreverent, anarchic art movement.
Through Oct. 3.
Hours: Wednesday, Friday, Saturday and Sunday, 11 A.M. to 6 P.M.; Thursday, 1 to 8 P.M.; closed Mondays and Tuesdays.
Admission: $6; $5 for students and the elderly.
Information: (212) 570-3676.


Traffic Alert
TOMORROW PEARL STREET will be closed tomorrow and Sunday between Park Row and Centre Street from 6 A.M. to 7 P.M.
SUNDAY AMERICANA FESTIVAL 47th Street will be closed between Lexington and Seventh Avenues from 11 A.M. to 6 P.M.
AFRICAN AMERICAN DAY PARADE Adam Clayton Powell Boulevard will be closed from 111th to 142d Streets starting at 1 P.M.
McBURNEY'S SIXTH AVENUE FAIR Avenue of the Americas will be closed between 14th and 23d Streets from 10 A.M. to 7 P.M.
THIRD AVENUEMERCHANTS Third Avenue will be closed between 14th and 34th Streets from 10 A.M. to 6 P.M.
Also, President Clinton will arrive at KennedyInternational Airport mid-morning on Sunday for a stop in Queens at an undisclosed site and a fundraiser in midtown Manhattan that evening.
The New York city Transportation Department advises vehicle operators to avoid the airport area.





Corrections
An article in some editions yesterday about a debate between the Democratic candidates for New York City Comptroller misstated Alan G. Hevesi's position on the decisions from which he would disqualify himself, if elected.
He said he would recuse himself from decisions relating to school bus contractors, not from all decisions regarding organizations or individuals who contributed to him.
Developments in the campaign are reported today on page B7.


Market Place; Nike stumbles amid a pack of troubles in its market.
HALFWAY through the 400-meter final at the world track and field championships last month in Stuttgart, Germany, Quincy Watts's left shoe fell apart.
With his heel flapping, the American runner finished fourth in the race.
While this was bad enough for Mr.
Watts, the 1992 Olympic champion, it was ghastly luck for Nike Inc., the athletic apparel company that made his shoes and prides itself as being the worldwide leader in marketing shoes for runners.


2000 Olympics Go to Sydney In Surprise Setback for China
In a major political setback for the Chinese Government, the International Olympic Committee tonight unexpectedly rejected Beijing's bid to hold the 2000 Summer Olympics and instead picked Sydney, Australia, to be the site of the millennium Games.
Three other cities were also in the running -- Manchester, England; Berlin and Istanbul, Turkey -- but no country placed its prestige more on the line than China by orchestrating widespread support for the Games at home and organizing a fierce lobbying campaign of the Olympic committee.


Decrees and Counterdecrees Keep Foes at Bay in Russia
President Boris N. Yeltsin moved today to isolate the defiant Parliament and tighten pressure on the maverick deputies.
Parliament attempted to fight back by convening an emergency session of the full Congress of People's Deputies.
Mr.
Yeltsin, moving to consolidate his power after dissolving Parliament Tuesday night and calling elections for a new legislature in December, issued a decree taking control of all parliamentary newspapers, radio and television programs and rescinding the lawmakers' diplomatic travel passes.
He also set a date for new presidential elections six months after the voting for a new legislature.


GPA and Its Lenders Agree On a Rescue by GE Capital
The GPA Group, the debt-ridden Irish aircraft-leasing company, said today that after months of negotiations, it had reached agreement with its lenders and other financial backers on a previously announced rescue plan.
The plan would leave GPA under the effective control of the General Electric Company's GE Capital subsidiary, which would hold an option to buy a stake of about two-thirds of the leasing company.


Why C.E.O.'s Really Want to Downsize
To the Editor:
Russell Baker just doesn't get it ("The Big Sizing Down," column, Sept. 7).
He thinks corporate America is frantically "downsizing" just because it's one of the latest fads to sweep through the business community, along with "process re-engineering"; and because no self-respecting chief executive officer wants to show up at the C.E.O. club without being able to cite the number of armored infantry division equivalents she's deactivated recently.


Clinton Stirs Unease on Medical Malpractice
The subject of medical malpractice merited but one sentence in President Clinton's address Wednesday night on health care.
But even before he unveiled his plan, lawyers, doctors, and patients alike were complaining about the changes the President has proposed for resolving medical malpractice disputes.
In urging everyone to take responsibility for solving the health care crisis, the President mentioned "lawyers who abuse malpractice claims," then quickly moved on.
He left unmentioned his eight-pronged program for changing the current system, perhaps because it has already angered two key constituencies, each bearing the consumerist banner: lawyers and doctors.


COLLEGE FOOTBALL REPORT
Princeton
To see how they run, the place to be tomorrow is Fisher Field in Easton, Pa., where Lafayette and Princeton will meet.
The runners are Keith Elias and Erik Marsh, two of the best in the East and all of Division I-AA.
Elias, the Tiger tailback, began his senior season last Saturday with 259 all-purpose yards gained against Cornell, 188 by rushing, in an important 18-12 victory.


Art in Review
Cheryl Donegan
Elizabeth Koury Gallery  89 Greene Street  SoHo  Through Oct. 2
Cheryl Donegan's first solo show, which consists of five short videotapes and a dozen small paintings, has an air of playful smartness, the kind that first shows can get away with.
Her videotapes, all of which star Ms.
Donegan, are one-line jokes about painting, sex and other bodily functions.
In "Makedream," the artist, using no hands and a lot of pelvis, creates Pollock-like drips with a canister of blue paint attached to a string around her waist.
In "Gracefulphatsheba" she dons a turban and, using only her mouth, attempts to remove a banana from a hole in an orange plastic detergent bottle swinging in the air.
Sitar music provides appropriate accompaniment to Ms.
Donegan's weaving head, which is indeed graceful.


2 Yonkers Youths Arrested in Robbery on Standing Train
Two Yonkers teen-agers have been arrested in the holdup of a Metro-North train last week, in which five youths in ski masks boarded a train at the Glenwood station, robbed six passengers and then jumped off before the train left the station.
Passengers on the 9:20 P.M. run from Grand Central Terminal to Croton-Harmon on Sept. 16 told the police that one of the suspects fired a small-caliber weapon into the floor while the others took cash, credit cards, a commuter pass and a gold chain from the six riders.
The value of all the items taken was put at a maximum of $200.


Art in Review
'Eikoh Hosoe' 'Man and Woman'
Gallery 292  120 Wooster Street (near Prince Street)  SoHo  Through Oct. 16
Staged with Butoh dancers, Eikoh Hosoe's "Man and Woman" series uses striking, high-contrast photographs to dramatize the emotional push and pull of sexual relationships.
The nude figures in Mr.
Hosoe's stylized images pose and strut, fight and embrace, in pictures charged with a tense energy.


Dow Slips 7.27 as Other Indicators Climb
Moderately good economic news and a rebound in the bond market combined yesterday to produce a good day on Wall Street.
While the Dow Jones average of 30 industrial stocks lost 7.27, to 3,539.75, broader New York Stock Exchange indicators were up.
And the Nasdaq composite index gained a strong 6.72 to finish at a record high 752.26, partly on the strength of continued gains among technology stocks.
The previous high, 749.71, came on Sept. 3.


Team Members Change; Rivalry Remains
As he walked toward the Nassau Coliseum door this afternoon before tonight's exhibition game between his Rangers and the Islanders, Glenn Healy stopped and chatted with several fans he knew from his four years with the Long Island team.
"What I thought were true-blue Islander fans suddenly come up to me and say, 'You know, I've always been a Ranger fan,' " the veteran goalie said with a smile.


On My Mind; A Charity No More
I had doubts about the Clinton health plan -- too complicated, too much new bureaucracy, and where was the money to come from?
So I went off to a hospital to visit the expert who means most to me.
I made right for his bed in the ward and stood by it.
I did not ask how he felt.
I could see, by his face and the heavy body cast in which he was still lying, so many weeks.


Small-Cap Nasdaq Stocks
A complete listing of Nasdaq small-capitalization stocks now appears in The New York Times on Sundays.
The partial listing of those stocks, formerly published daily, has been discontinued to provide space for expanded mutual fund tables.


Inside Art
Picasso's Turn
Matisse fever gripped the New York art world last season, with the giant Matisse retrospective at the Museum of Modern Art and a flurry of important Matisses setting record prices at auction.
This season, everyone is selling Picassos.
No fewer than 88 go on the block at Sotheby's in New York one night in November, and, as it happens, several important Picasso exhibitions are in the works.
"We seem to be periodically reminded of the singular status of Picasso," said Richard Gray, a Chicago dealer.
"The breadth of interest and curiosity in his work is such that no one can compete."


American Exchange, Sega Name Finalists
Two advertisers conducting reviews on their accounts named finalists yesterday.
Sega of America in Redwood City, Calif., narrowed the review on a new $8 million to $10 million campaign on video games aimed at younger children and their parents to four finalists: Goodby, Berlin &amp; Silverstein in San Francisco, which handles the company's $65 million consolidated account aimed at older video-game players; Lord, Dentsu &amp; Partners in Los Angeles; McCann-Erickson San Francisco, and Young &amp; Rubicam San Francisco.
A decision on the review, which began with 28 agencies, is expected next month.


Clapping for Health Reform
The applause that greeted President Clinton and his wife, Hillary, from both sides of the Congressional aisle Wednesday night signaled more than mere politeness.
It was the sound of an emerging bipartisan consensus for health care reform.
The President has tackled a crisis that's festered for 50 years with a courageous plan, the most ambitious attempt at social engineering since the New Deal.
And that, more than anything else, has forced Republicans out of their shell of opposition and toward a commitment to pass a bipartisan bill before the end of next year.


Penn State to Test How Far Rutgers Is From Big Time
The distance between Rutgers and Penn State, by car, is 204 miles.
In terms of football the distance is at least as great and it does not seem to be growing smaller in spite of Rutgers' expensive efforts toward that end.
The Scarlet Knights trek out to State College, Pa., today for tomorrow night's contest against the Nittany Lions.
Although the two teams are undefeated, that means little.
Penn State has beaten Minnesota, Southern California and Iowa while Rutgers' two victories have come against Colgate and Duke.


Dr. Daphne A. Roe Is Dead at 70; Studied Nutrition-Immunity Link
Dr.
Daphne A. Roe, a dermatologist and nutrition expert, died on Wednesday at a community hospital in Ithaca, N.Y., after having been injured earlier in the day in an automobile accident near Trumansburg, N.Y.
She was 70.
Dr.
Roe was a professor emeritus of nutritional sciences at Cornell University.
Her expertise ranged from the role of beta carotene, a precursor of vitamin A, in protecting the human immune system from sunlight to nutritional deficiencies in the elderly to interactions between drugs and nutrients.


Two Writers Revisit the City Of Promise
Since then, in each generation, similar dreams have drawn writers to New York City, among them Willie Morris and Dan Wakefield, the authors of two recent memoirs about the city.
Like Fitzgerald, both Mr.
Morris and Mr.
Wakefield migrated to Manhattan from the provinces: Mr.
Morris from Mississippi via Texas, Mr.
Wakefield from Indianapolis.
Like Fitzgerald, both men joined the literary racket: Mr.
Morris as the editor in chief of Harper's Magazine; Mr.
Wakefield as a freelance journalist.
And like Fitzgerald, both of them discovered in Manhattan an impossibly exciting world of art and society and adventure.


Hollywood Sees a Suitor Exploring M-G-M Bid
William I. Koch, the chairman of a major supercomputing company and one of the richest men in the United States, has quietly asked the head of a large Hollywood talent agency to explore making a bid for ailing Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer Inc., according to people in the film industry.
In a letter dated Sept. 16, Mr.
Koch authorized Jeff Berg, chairman of International Creative Management, "to solicit information about Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer on behalf of Oxbow Corporation so that Oxbow can evaluate the feasibility of the purchase of all or part of M-G-M."


INSIDE
Yeltsin Presses Legislators
President Boris Yeltsin set a presidential election date and moved to isolate the Russian Parliament, which tried to fight back.
Page A6.
Tracks Intact Before Crash
Investigators said an Amtrak train was not warned about a damaged bridge before a fatal wreck because the tracks stayed intact.
Page A22.
Baby, a Hospital and the Law
A hospital and a mother battle over providing life-sustaining treatment for a baby born 11 months ago with most of her brain missing.
Page A10.
Charges in Smuggling Deaths
Murder charges are to be filed in the deaths of immigrants on a ship that ran aground off Queens.
Page B3.


Mid-September Sales Of Vehicles Rose 20.9%
With almost every auto maker posting gains, sales of cars and light trucks built in North America increased 20.9 percent in mid-September over the corresponding period a year earlier, according to reports released today.
After a weak period early this month, the new figures reassured analysts and dealers that the industry's recovery was continuing.


For Holtzman, Forging Ahead in an Uphill Struggle
Elizabeth Holtzman peered quizzically at her image in the mirror.
As an aide applied layers of makeup to the spreading circles underneath her eyes, she nodded with approval.
"Where did you learn this?"
Her assistant took another dab. "I can make you look like a lion," she parried.


Airline Accord Reached By U.S. and Germany
German and American negotiators preserved their threatened aviation agreement yesterday, but also broke new ground that will ultimately allow American carriers to increase their flights to Germany.
Their compromise, which was being committed to paper in Bonn last night and is expected to be formally announced today, establishes a four-year period in which the German flag carrier, Lufthansa, will get some breathing room from its American competitors.


Tiny Industry Fears Nafta's Reach
At the France Broom Company on the outskirts of this small agricultural town in eastern Illinois, brooms made of corn straw are flying out the door as fast as the 22 broom makers can assemble them.
Sheds behind the factory, which normally hold four weeks' worth of inventory, are nearly empty.
A truer indicator of France Broom's health is the sign outside the plant that reads: "Fr nce Broom o."


Franco Looks for A Missing Ingredient
The outfield fences have moved in on John Franco.
Few saves have been simple.
Few ground balls have failed to have eyes.
When he kicks the rosin bag, cranes his neck and seems to be searching for something in the sky, he is: his father.
James Franco is his pitching coach upstairs.
In this dour Mets season, John Franco has gone running to the Shea Stadium speed gun for affirmation, has rocked himself to sleep watching old game footage and and has heard unsolicited advice on every other New York street corner.


COMPANY BRIEFS
INSTRUMENT SYSTEMS CORP., Jericho, L.I., said its Telephonics unit had received two contracts worth about $40 million for equipment upgrades for Navy helicopters from Federal Systems Co., a unit of I.B.M.
MAGMA POWER CO., San Diego, signed an agreement with the Philippine National Oil Co. and Energy Development Corp. to build and operate a geothermal power plant.


Cartier Quits, Blames Manhattan
VINCE CARTIER said yesterday he had resigned as assistant track coach at Manhattan College because the college reneged on an agreement to provide him with an apartment on campus.
The 40-year-old Cartier had been coaching Manhattan's male and female distance runners.


U.S. IS UNEQUIPPED TO DISARM A-BOMBS
The Federal Government is facing enormous technical challenges in disassembling the nation's nuclear arsenal and is ill prepared for the job, according to a report released yesterday by the Office of Technology Assessment.
The costs of the effort may already have reached $1 billion a year, the study found, but the job has been slowed because there is no more storage space for plutonium.
The office, an arm of Congress, also said the delays were caused by a lack of national policy on what should be done with nuclear fuels -- plutonium and highly enriched uranium -- and by a lack of attention to the problem on the part of the White House.


Travelers Approves Merger Offer by Primerica
The Travelers Corporation accepted the Primerica Corporation's $4 billion merger offer yesterday, which will create one of the nation's largest and most diverse financial services companies.
The merger would give the Primerica financial empire not only a profitable insurance company but also some valuable intangibles, starting with a new name: Travelers.


Pepsico Gets Vice Chairman, But Is He the Heir Apparent?
Pepsico Inc. yesterday named Roger A. Enrico, a hard-driving company veteran of the cola wars of the 80's, to the newly created position of vice chairman.
The move touched off speculation among some analysts about whether Mr.
Enrico was still the heir apparent to the $20 billion food and beverage conglomerate.
In his new post, Mr.
Enrico, 48, who had been chairman and chief executive of the Pepsico Worldwide Foods division, will concentrate on coordinating long-term planning and nurturing the company's executives, said D. Wayne Calloway, Pepsico's chairman and chief executive.
Mr.
Enrico, a member of the Pepsico board, has been with the company for 22 years.


In Microcosm, New Jersey Senate Race Tests Party Power
If any legislative district could stand for all New Jersey, the capital region's 15th is it.
Here, the Trenton poor and the Princeton Ivy Leaguers vote Democratic, the prosperous business suburbanites favor Republicans, and Gerald R. Stockman and Richard J. LaRossa are struggling in a Senate race for the same shifting middle that will probably decide the race for governor as well.
For Democrats like Mr.
Stockman and Gov.
Jim Florio, the 15th was once considered so safe a seat that Mr.
Stockman, then a 10-year incumbent State Senator, was chosen to sponsor Mr.
Florio's $2.8 billion tax increase in 1990.
The next year, Mr.
La Rossa harnessed anger over the taxes to his fame as the man who called the state lottery results on television and won a humbling upset over Mr.
Stockman.
It was a defeat that the state Democrats ardently want to reverse. 'Not Something I Brag About'
"This was the most Democratic district in the state until I lost," Mr.
Stockman, a 57-year-old trial lawyer, said recently as he doggedly worked the sidewalks and front porches of Trenton's West Ward.
"It's not something I brag about." Indeed, Mr.
La Rossa is the first Republican to represent the city of Trenton in the Senate since 1946, the year, he likes to point out, when he was born.


Art in Review
Peter Hristoff
David Beitzel Gallery  102 Prince Street  SoHo  Through Oct. 9
Peter Hristoff's oil-on-wood paintings pack a lot into a small space.
They mix all-over geometric patterns with passages of organic painting that suggest flowing water or banks of clouds.
Dozens of small images -- some meticulously painted, others cut from printed sources and collaged in -- appear to come forward or retreat in a slowly revealed personal narrative.


Mustaf Joins Suns' Practice Sessions
JERROD MUSTAF has joined Phoenix Suns teammates for informal practices, ending a long absence while entangled in an ongoing murder investigation.
The 6-foot-10-inch power forward showed up for practice Wednesday and yesterday.
Although no one has been charged in the slaying of ALTHEA HAYES, whose family says she was dating Mustaf, the police have identified LeVONNIE WOOTEN, Mustaf's cousin, as a suspect. (AP)


Bosnia Calls Parliament To Meet on Peace Plan
The Bosnian Government today summoned the Muslim-dominated Parliament into session on Tuesday to debate an international peace plan that would divide this former Yugoslav republic into three ethnically defined mini-states.
But opposition to the plan among delegates appeared to be building, and senior Government officials said they were far from sure that it would be ratified.
International negotiators who drew up the plan have warned that rejection by the Bosnian Parliament could end hopes for a peace pact before the winter and open a new round of fighting as all three sides sought new territorial gains.


CLINTON'S HEALTH PLAN: Media Watch; Across Networks, a Partisan Battle for the Best Catchwords on Health Care
"Security, universal coverage, responsibility by each American, simplicity -- those will be the issues," the White House chief of staff, Thomas F. McLarty 3d, told "Fox Morning News" yesterday.
"You've got to worry about job loss," the Senate minority leader, Bob Dole, countered on the same program.
"You've got to worry about quality of care."


Review/Film; A Tale of 2 Sisters and Their Quirks
In "Me and Veronica," a tempestuous little drama set in a dingy area of the New Jersey shoreline, Elizabeth McGovern and Patricia Wettig play sisters whose lives are approaching dead ends.
Fanny (Ms. McGovern), the "good" sister, is a divorced parttime waitress with artistic leanings who lives in a bungalow in one of those desolate seaside towns of packed-together houses that look like they could be washed away at any moment.
One day her "bad" sister, Veronica (Ms. Wettig), from whom she has been estranged for five years, comes to visit.
Veronica informs Fanny that she is about to go to jail for welfare fraud.
An unmarried mother of two, she was caught collecting checks from two states at once and has to serve time on Rikers Island.


CHRONICLE
They are stars of the moment, basking in the glow of their critically acclaimed film.
But the women at the heart of "The Joy Luck Club" hope the accolades will have a longer-lasting effect.
TSAI CHIN and FRANCE NUYEN, who play two of the four mothers whose lives are chronicled in the movie, said the other day that the film would open doors both for Asians and for women -- doors that would be hard to shut again.


Review/Film; Apartheid and a Flaw
Morgan Freeman, twice nominated for an Oscar as an actor ("Street Smart" and "Driving Miss Daisy"), now makes a strong directorial debut with "Bopha!," a big, angry, extremely well-acted movie about the powder keg labeled South Africa.
Bopha is a Zulu word meaning either arrest or detention.
Adapted from Percy Mtwa's play, "Bopha!" looks at apartheid from an unusual point of view, that of a black master sergeant in the South African Police, a man who has the pride of corps in his blood.
Micah Mangena (Danny Glover) is the kind of man the military loves.
He's a natural leader, strong, loyal and bright, but not so bright that he questions authority, either his own or others'.


Little Progress in Nets-Coleman Talks
HAROLD McDONALD, the agent for DERRICK COLEMAN, reported little progress yesterday after a two-hour meeting with a Nets lawyer to discuss a new contract for the star forward.
Coleman can become a restricted free agent after this season, then an unrestricted free agent following 1994-95.
Although he is willing to sign a long-term deal, Coleman is seeking either a four-year contract worth around $30.7 million, or a seven-year package worth around $70 million.
He will earn $3.24 million this season.


When Continents Collide, In New Blazers and All
They marched side by side in their new blazers onto the Belfry's ninth fairway today for the opening ceremony, veterans and rookies from two continents looking every bit as civilized as Samuel Ryder would have wanted when he first bankrolled this competition in 1927.
But Ryder's Cup has come a long way from its quiet beginnings at the Worcester Country Club in Massachusetts.
The biennial, match-play showdown between the 12 best professional golfers from each side of the Atlantic has mushroomed into what Nick Faldo, the English star, terms "the fifth major," or if you believe Tom Watson, the American captain, "the Olympics of golf."


Abroad at Home; 'This Is Our Journey'
Once in a rare while we hear passion in a President's speech.
I heard it on June 11, 1963, when President Kennedy spoke from the Oval Office against racial discrimination -- in good part extemporaneously because his text was not ready.
It was there again in President Clinton's speech on health care.
Even many who have doubts about the Clinton plan thought the speech was a tour de force.
Mr.
Clinton brought conviction to the subject, and knowledge so deep that he coped easily with a misfed Teleprompter.


Bozell Gets President Of Martin Davis
Joanne M. Davis, president at Martin Davis Omon &amp; Partners in New York, was named to the new position of executive vice president at Bozell New York, responsible for new business.
Ms.
Davis's appointment yesterday came amid serious problems at Martin Davis that include the departure of its largest client, Toyota Motor Corporate Services of North America, which filed a lawsuit against the agency in New York State Supreme Court, accusing it of breach of contract and fraud.
Ms.
Davis has said Toyota's charges were without merit.


On Stage, and Off
Questions, but No Answers
With an odd mixture of pride and paranoia, the producers Robert Michael Geisler and John Roberdeau announced a new play headed for Broadway, providing a phone-book-sized volume of information about the production.
Then, through a spokesman, they refused to answer any questions about it.
The play, an adaptation of the Japanese film "Sansho the Bailiff," from 1954, is to have a six-week workshop at the Brooklyn Academy of Music beginning Nov. 1, and the producers say it will be ready for a Broadway opening next October.


Review/ Art; The Modern's New Look: From Solo to Symphony
THE players are the same, but the lineup is different.
The new installation of the Museum of Modern Art's permanent collection of paintings and sculpture is more a gloss on the familiar than a wholesale change.
Purists may see even this as corrupting a story leanly and beautifully and, on its own terms, coherently told.
Revisionists who for decades have been questioning the seamlessness of the history of 20th-century art as the Modern portrayed it may complain that it doesn't go far enough.
Realists will recognize the installation, which has just gone on view, for what it is: a prudent, serious, often provocative, overdue self-examination of the richest and by far the most influential presentation of 20th-century art in the world, one that has come to define the canon of modernism.
The reinstallation is certainly messier, less elegant and harder to follow.
But after all, the history of art was not as neat as the museum had suggested.


Art in Review
Willie Birch
Sculpture Center  167 East 69th Street  Manhattan  Through Oct. 2
Willie Birch's lovely installation consists of a one-room wood and papier-mache house, with a single door and several windows that also double as shelves holding dozens of little sculptures.
Its exterior walls are sky blue and its interior beams are painted to resemble trees.
Constellations of stars are cut from its roof.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; "You Have to Stand for Something," So Rapp Collins Changes Name and Adds a Very Pointed Logo.
TO represent itself in the marketplace, the world's third-largest direct marketing agency should portray itself as:
A.) A squiggly smudge.
B.) A giant fist pounding, unheeded, on a closed door.
C.) An abstract figure poised to toss a javelin.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.07
3.14
3.14
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
2.90
2.90
2.88
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.04
3.04
2.91
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
4.99
4.96
5.99
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
6.06
6.09
7.41
TELEPHONE BONDS
7.10
7.14
8.40
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
5.47
5.49
6.41
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


People
*
Paula Drillman, executive vice president and director of strategic planning at McCann-Erickson U.S.A., New York, was named to the additional new positions of executive vice president worldwide and director of new strategic technologies. *
Frederick G. Thompson was named president and a principal at Kerr Kelly Inc., Greenwich, Conn., succeeding Robert A. Kelly, who was promoted to the new position of vice chairman and director of client services.
In hiring Mr.
Thompson, who was previously president at Bozell Public Relations, New York.
The public relations agency is changing its name to Kerr Kelly Thompson Inc.


Reporters Must Show Notes on Gotti Lawyer
A Federal appeals court ruled yesterday that 10 reporters and two television news organizations must give limited testimony about interviews they conducted with Bruce Cutler, the former chief lawyer for John Gotti, the convicted organized crime leader.
In its ruling, the United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit said the reporters could be required to testify and produce unpublished notes about statements made to them by Mr.
Cutler, but not about other matters.


Yankees Look For a Miracle On Blue Jay Way
It started in Arlington, Tex.
Where else?
The agonizing plummet of 1993, the free fall that has dropped the Yankees an imposing distance behind the first-place Blue Jays, began on one of those muggy nights in Texas 18 days ago.
Where else?
The Yankees have always despised playing in Texas.
Now the hate will be even deeper as they reminisce this winter.
Since that evening when Rafael Palmeiro fell about 10 feet short of four homers and settled for two homers and two doubles as the Rangers surged to their first victory in what would become a defining three-game sweep, the Yankees have sputtered as they tried to continue challenging the Jays.
They have lost 10 of their last 15 games and skidded five and a half games out of first.
It has been a futile attempt.


Boy, 12, Is Killed When Gun Goes Off
A 12-year-old boy who was on his way to the corner grocery store for his mother was shot and killed Wednesday night when a gun went off in the lobby of his Washington Heights apartment house, the police said.
Witnesses told the police that the boy, Jovanny Santiago, was shot accidentally by a man who had been standing nearby, tinkering with the slide of his semiautomatic handgun, said Lieut.
Raymond O'Donnell, a police spokesman.


Motive Is Offered In Killing
Robert A. Solimine Jr. became the target of a murder plot after he quit drinking alcohol and began pestering a group of youths to do the same, said one of the three teen-agers who have pleaded guilty in the case.
All three youths have testified this week in the trial of James P. Wanger, who is charged with garroting Mr.
Solimine with an electrical cord on Feb. 16, 1992.
But the witness today was the first to offer a specific reason why five Clifton, N.J., youths plotted to kill Mr.
Solimine.


Don't Rush to Judge Firearms Bureau Head for Waco Tragedy
To the Editor:
I was sorely disappointed by "B.A.T.F., Do It Now" (editorial, Sept. 1) and the needless personal attack on Stephen E. Higgins, director of the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms.


Life Sign Denies Riyadh Crowning Glory
There were 47,152 spectators on hand, as well as carnival tents, giant balloons and Ferris wheels surrounding the half-mile oval at the Delaware County Fairgrounds here today.
But the greatest spectacle was John Campbell driving Life Sign to a record-setting, come-from-behind victory over Riyadh and capturing the $575,000 Little Brown Jug.
The upset victory denied Riyadh the chance to become pacing's first triple crown champion in 10 years.


Free Speech on Campus? It's a Matter of Debate
On an April evening this year, three women stopped outside the student union building at Pennsylvania State University and began throwing thousands of copies of a conservative student-run newspaper into their car, plunging the campus into a debate over free speech and the limits of protest.
School officials say two of the women, who were later identified as Penn State students, objected to a cartoon in The Lionhearted, a conservative newspaper, depicting a female columnist at The Daily Collegian, the campus paper, in a bikini.
In the cartoon, she sits on a bed whose headboard reads, "Feminist at Work."


Giuliana: Burnishing the Crime-Fighting Image
Rudolph W. Giuliani, the Republican-Liberal candidate for mayor, released a new television commercial this week that tries to burnish his image as a hardened crime fighter with a soft touch for the common folk.
The commercial, one of three new radio and television commercials released this week, neatly prefaced a major speech by Mr.
Giuliani yesterday that brought together his anti-crime proposals.
PRODUCER
The Garth Group of New York. ON THE SCREEN
The one-minute commercial has the gritty texture and quick pacing of the 11 o'clock television news.
It opens in a Brooklyn restaurant kitchen where a worker surrounded by collanders and pans waxes nostaglic about times when people weren't afraid to sit outside at night.
In rapid succession, tight shots of people identified as Brooklyn community activists in various locations -- a book-lined room, a city park, an office -- talking about neighborhoods gripped by fear of crime.
Then scenes of Mr.
Giuliani walking under an elevated subway talking animatedly to a young man, bending down to chat with an elderly woman, shaking hands with a woman outside a city housing project.
At the end, underneath a shot of the restaurant worker, are the words: "Rudolph Giuliani -- You know (underlined) he'll be tough on crime." THE SCRIPT
Paul Balsamo, restaurant worker: "I remember when I was a kid, that Avenue N used to be lined with people just sitting out in front of their houses or in front of their apartments at night to cool off. And you don't see that anymore because everybody's afraid to come out at night."
Madge Ford, community activist: "We, as honest, tax-payin' citizens, are really tired of living behind iron bars and the criminals going free."
Carlos Hernandez, anti-drug activist: "You can't even stand out with kids or in front of our stores because we might be afraid there might be a shootout, might be something happening."
Myrtle Whitmore, community activist: "There seems to be no one at the top to say, look guys, this has got to stop. Now Rudolph Giuliani was a U.S. Attorney. He was our lawyer. He's gone to bat for us."
Ms.
Ford: "Rudy Giuliani could bring this city together by first getting rid of the problems that separate us."
Mr.
Balsamo: "That would be a very big help to us. Just to keep the neighborhood a little safer and make it safer for our kids." SCORECARD
The commercial tries to capture Mr.
Giuliani's overarching vision of a gentler city while making a targeted pitch to voters in Brooklyn, where the mayoral battle is expected to be close.
By having speakers who are white, Hispanic and black talk about Mr.
Giuliani's effectiveness as a crime fighter, the commercial tries to convey the message that his support is broad based, that his message cuts across racial lines and that he could be a racial healer -- something he needs people to believe if they are going to vote against the city's first black mayor.
And while touting Mr.
Giuliani as a tough prosecutor, it suggests that Mayor David N. Dinkins has been soft on criminals -- a theme that may resonate with some voters but also may seem hollow to liberals who contend Mr.
Dinkins has expanded the police department at the expense of other city services.


Greyhound Lines
Shares in Greyhound Lines Inc., the bus company, plunged 24.2 percent yesterday after the company said that it had scaled back its earnings outlook for the year because of light summer traffic.
The stock was the most active issue on the American Stock Exchange and had the largest percentage decline.


A Vow to Keep Battling Gambling Laws
The roulette wheel was gone, confiscated by the police last weekend, but Paul Giacobbe sat at a table in his restaurant with a handful of gambling chips made of chocolate and vowed to continue challenging state laws that prohibit gambling.
Mr.
Giacobbe created a stir last week when he announced he would operate a roulette wheel in the banquet room of Jacoby's, the East Main Street restaurant he has owned here for 21 years.


U.S. LAYS OUT RULES FOR A BIG AUCTION OF RADIO AIRWAVES
Kicking off what could be the wildest scramble for public property since the Oklahoma land rush, the Federal Communications Commission announced the rules today for a multibillion-dollar auction of the nation's airwaves to provide a new generation of wireless communication services.
The technology holds rich promise: a broad new family of portable phones and computer services that could be cheaper and more powerful than today's cellular networks.


CLINTON'S HEALTH PLAN: The President; President Hints at Higher Taxes If Health Plan Savings Fall Short
President Clinton said tonight that if the cost savings anticipated in his health plan did not materialize he would either have to slow the introduction of certain benefits or find a way to "raise more money."
Mr.
Clinton made his remarks in resonse to a question from John White, an economist who helped Ross Perot draw up his economic policies during the 1992 Presidential campaign.
Mr.
White challenged the financial underpinnings of the President's health care plan during Mr.
Clinton's appearance at a town hall meeting here televised by the ABC News program "Nightline."


After Big Gains, Angolan Rebel Offensive Is Halted
After months of euphoric advances in which his guerrillas extended their reach over more than two-thirds of Angola's territory, the rebel movement of Jonas Savimbi appears to have been fought to a standstill, and in some places turned back, by a rebounding Government army.
Here on the embattled central plateau that is Mr.
Savimbi's political base and the war's greatest symbolic prize, the Government has expelled the insurgents from several towns conquered during their great surge, and is slowly amassing troops and weapons for a promised major offensive.


TV Weekend; Dramatizing The Battle To Bring Up Baby Jessica
Always eager to cash in on a headline-generating news story, television entertainment rushes this weekend to embrace, with lots of appropriate weeping, the heartbreaking custody battle for a child called Jessica.
"Whose Child Is This? The War for Baby Jessica" is on ABC at 9 Sunday evening.
The word "battle" is evidently too nerdy for television warriors.
The film carries a revealing disclaimer, noting that the dramatization is based not only on court transcripts and published reports but also "on the account of Jan and Robby DeBoer," the child's adoptive parents.
Despite some strained efforts to be evenhanded, the treatment clearly is more sympathetic to the middle-class, warmly affectionate DeBoers than to the lower-class, somewhat flaky Schmidts, Cara and Dan, whose rights as birth parents ultimately prevailed in legal decisions reaching to the United States Supreme Court.


Corrections
A music review in late editions yesterday about the New York Philharmonic's opening-night concert on Wednesday misidentified the occasion last year on which three conductors led the orchestra.
The concert, celebrating the 150th anniversary of the orchestra, was in December; it was not the season's opening.


Jeep in Chase Drags Woman 10 Blocks
In a wild chase through upper Manhattan during rush hour last night, a man driving a stolen Jeep struck a pedestrian, dragged her nearly 10 blocks, careened into a city bus and collided with a police car before he finally came to a halt, the police said.
Police officers began pursuing the driver near 135th Street and Lenox Terrace, but as he headed south in heavy traffic, the police called off their chase to avoid risking injury to pedestrians.
The driver traveled as far south as 106th Street, and once he headed north again on Amsterdam Avenue, it was he, not the police cars, that struck and critically injured a woman.


Jets Clued In on Bledsoe's Strength
If he had been running the New England draft this past spring, Ronnie Lott said today, he would have done the same thing the Patriots did when they selected quarterback Drew Bledsoe over Rick Mirer as the No. 1 pick.
"I thought he was better than Mirer," Lott, the Jets' free safety, said of the former Washington State passer.
"Mirer is a little more mobile, but this kid understands the game."


38 Deported by Mexico In Trade Pact Dispute
Mexican authorities said today that 38 American and Canadian union workers were asked to leave Mexico on Wednesday because they had violated the terms of their tourist visas by distributing pamphlets opposing lower trade barriers.
The pamphlets were handed out in a factory in Tijuana, officials said.
The Americans, however, charged that Mexican authorities had illegally detained them for several hours aboard a bus and had harassed them until they were forced to leave.


Home Video
The Video Wars
Next month the video CD wars will escalate considerably as major combatants drop prices and throw new systems into campaigns to get attention and to position merchandise.
Meanwhile, retailers say, many consumers have been left in the dust.





Books of The Times; Timeless Issues at Century's Turn
Feather Crowns
By Bobbie Ann Mason
454 pages. HarperCollins. $23.
In books like "Shiloh and Other Stories" (1982), "In Country" (1985) and "Love Life" (1989), Bobbie Ann Mason delineated a New South reeling from the dislocations of contemporary life.
Families have fragmented, and family farms have been sold; people move listlessly from one relationship to another, vaguely nostalgic for the old certainties that no longer exist.
They spend their free time sitting in front of the television, or aimlessly haunting the malls and fast-food franchises that now dot the landscape of western Kentucky.


76ers Get Their Man, Graham
The Philadelphia 76ers signed rookie GREG GRAHAM, the Big Ten defensive player of the year who also led the conference in field-goal and three-point-goal percentage.
He is seen as a key to a deal that sent guard HERSEY HAWKINS to the Charlotte Hornets.
Graham, a 6-4 point guard from Indiana, came to the Sixers in the deal which sent Hawkins to Charlotte for forward SIDNEY GREEN, guard DANA BARROS, and a 1994 first round draft pick. (AP)


Choice of Leisurely Ride Proved Fatal for Retirees
Allan and Catherine Renz were afraid to fly.
So the retired couple from Bradenton, Fla., took a leisurely cross-country ride to San Francisco six weeks ago.
The Renzes were among those killed Wednesday when the Amtrak's Sunset Limited crashed into a bayou near here.
Mr.
Renz, 70, and his wife, 72, boarded the Los Angeles-to-Miami train after leaving the home of their daughter, Katherine, in San Francisco on Sunday.


Mercedes to Announce Site For U.S. Plant Next Week
Mercedes-Benz will announce next week where it will build its first automobile assembly plant in the United States, company officials said today.
While for months it has seemed likely the company would settle on North Carolina, along a stretch of Route 85 that has drawn several new manufacturing plants in recent years, company officials insisted today that the board of directors of Daimler-Benz A.G., the parent company of Mercedes, had not yet picked a site.


CLINTON'S HEALTH PLAN: The Generals; Meanwhile, At Scene Of Strategy
Shortly after President Clinton completed his speech to Congress on Wednesday night, he and his wife worked their way to the Old Executive Office Building, where White House employees were gathered in the health care war room.
By the time the Clintons arrived with Vice President Al Gore and his wife, Tipper, former Surgeon General C. Everett Koop, and the high-profile pediatrician T. Berry Brazelton, the high-ceilinged office where the Spanish-American War was planned was crowded with about 75 people celebrating the evening's events.


Art in Review
'Lutz Bacher' 'Playboys'
Pat Hearn Gallery  39 Wooster Street  SoHo  Through Oct. 23
This is a show of paintings based on soft-core illustrations that Alberto Vargas drew for Playboy magazine between 1957 and 1978.
It is notable only for the intellectual hoops through which Lutz Bacher's promoters leap to justify these silly pictures and their sexist captions on supposedly feminist grounds.


Giuliani Gives His Most Sweeping Speech Yet on Crime


Immigrant-Smuggling Case To Include Murder Charges
Federal law-enforcement officials said yesterday that a grand jury has brought murder charges in the case of the Golden Venture, the ship crammed full of Chinese immigrants that ran aground off the Rockaway Peninsula in June.
The indictment, to be unsealed today, charges eight new defendants with involvement in a conspiracy to smuggle the immigrants -- 10 of whom died trying to swim ashore -- and for the first time employs homicide charges in the case, the officials said.


Hevesi Pledges to Set New Standards on Conflicts of Interest
Because he once sponsored legislation that helped school bus contractors and has accepted campaign contributions from them, Assemblyman Alan G. Hevesi said yesterday that he would recuse himself from direct involvement in a study of New York City's bus contracting practices if he is elected city comptroller.
But Mr.
Hevesi said he would not necessarily recuse himself from other decisions involving contributors to his campaign, including investment banks and other underwriters who compete for lucrative city bond business.
He said his decision about the bus contractors study was intended simply to "send a signal that I believe in reform, that I'll be a breath of fresh air."


New Rheumatoid Arthritis Therapy Shows Promise
Scientists report that the painful and often crippling swollen and inflamed joints that are the daily reminder of rheumatoid arthritis may be soothed, at least temporarily, by a benign and readily available remedy.
A new study has found that drinking small vials of protein from the breastbones of chickens seems to quell these symptoms of rheumatoid arthritis.


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY  MURDER CHARGES DUE IN SMUGGLING
Federal prosecutors plan to file murder charges in the case of the Golden Venture, the ship crammed full of Chinese immigrants that ran aground off the Rockaway Peninsula in June, law-enforcement officials said.
B3.
STOLEN DRAGS A WOMAN 10 BLOCKS
In a wild chase through upper Manhattan at the close of rush hour, a man driving a stolen Jeep struck a pedestrian, dragged her 10 blocks, hit a city bus, and crashed into a police car before he finally came to a halt, the police said.
B3.
INVESTING IN A SCHOOL
Annee Kim, a vice president at Lehman Brothers, was looking for a sure-fire investment opportunity.
Sister Ann Veronica Bivona, the principal of financially troubled St.
Margaret Mary elementary school, was looking for an angel.
B6.
GIULIANI OFFERS PROPOSALS ON CRIME
Striking again at what he clearly views as the tender underbelly of the Dinkins administration, Rudolph W. Giuliani gave his most sweeping speech on crime to date, calling for an end to parole for violent criminals and a host of other programs intended to "regain control of everyday life." To some degree, Mr.
Giuliani's position on parole is largely symbolic since such measures must be approved by the State Legislature.
B6.
DINKINS PROPOSES CHANGES FOR SCHOOLS
Mayor Dinkins proposed transferring more functions from the Board of Education to the schools, creating a $200 million endowment fund for educational programs and placing the School Construction Authority in charge of all school maintenance.
B6.
THE WINTER OF LIZ HOLTZMAN'S CAREER
It is hard to be Liz Holtzman.
After more than two decades in public life, this is the winter of her career.
Trailing in the latest Marist College poll and stumping hard for votes in the scant breathing space between the primary and the runoff election next Tuesday for a seat she had once been easily favored to win, she has returned to her safety zone among progressive and minority voters.
B7.
HEVESI SAYS HE WOULD AVOID BUS CONFLICT
Because he once sponsored legislation that helped school bus contractors and has accepted campaign contributions from them, Assemblyman Alan G. Hevesi said that he would recuse himself from direct involvement in a study of New York City's bus contracting practices if he is elected city comptroller.
B7.
REGION  2 ARRESTED IN TRAIN ROBBERY
Two Yonkers teen-agers have been arrested in the holdup of a Metro-North train last week, in which five youths in ski masks boarded a train at the Glenwood station, robbed six passengers and then jumped off before the train left the station.
B4.
CHALLENGE TO GAMING LAWS MOUNTED
The roulette wheel was gone, confiscated by the police last weekend, but Paul Giacobbe sat at a table in his Meriden, Conn., restaurant with a handful of gambling chips made of chocolate and vowed to continue challenging state laws that prohibit gambling.
B4.
Our Towns by George Judson B4
Chronicle B6


An Immovable Barrier In the Fight for Equity
Joan of Ace beat the Prince of Pigs 20 years ago this week in a gender circus that established once and for all that a woman, especially the best female tennis player in the world at the top of her game at 29, could whip a man, especially a 55-year-old has-been almost-was whose best shot was hustling suckers while stroking with umbrellas, Ping-Pong paddles and such household items as frying pans.
At the time, however, Billie Jean King's victory over Bobby Riggs at the Houston Astrodome did not have so many qualifying clauses; the women's movement in sports was merely a fawn in the side of the athletic establishment and Federal Title IX regulations mandating (womandating?) fair play were less than a year old.
Mrs.
King, as she was referred to in this paper's report of her triumph, was said to have "struck a proud blow" for "women around the world."


California Players Spared Sanctions
The California Scholastic Federation decided yesterday not to punish eight high school basketball players who attended an all-star tournament sponsored by Nike earlier this month, even though a violation was committed.


Israel's Parliament Backs P.L.O. Accord, 61 to 50
The Israeli Parliament approved the Labor Government's peace agreement with the P.L.O. today by a vote of 61 to 50.
The tally, after three days of rancorous debate, represented an expansion of the Labor Party's initial razor-thin edge, and thus of the credibility of the agreement itself with the Palestine Liberation Organization.


Review/Film; Filling Up on Food and Sex
"Jamon Jamon" ("Ham Ham"), Bigas Luna's melodramatic Spanish comedy, means to satirize a number of things about the Spanish character, including the confusions that sometimes arise when food and sex somehow become so closely related that one becomes an extension of the other.
This isn't exactly unique to his countrymen; think of the eating scenes in Tony Richardson's "Tom Jones," which is as English as the raglan sleeve, and in Juzo Itami's "Tampopo," which is quintessentially Japanese.
Sex as an act of ingestion is a gloriously universal concept, which is only one of the reasons "Jamon Jamon" seems so much less funny and outrageous than it intends to be.
The film, which won the Silver Lion award at the 1992 Venice Film Festival, opens today at the Paris Theater.


Russian Army Is Seen As a Two-Sided Sword
The danger of a rift within the Russian military makes it unlikely that supporters of President Boris N. Yeltsin will ask the armed forces to intervene in his current struggle with Parliament, Russian military experts and Western diplomats say.
For now, even a military that is neutral appears sufficient to help Mr.
Yeltsin, who says he has no intention of using force to subdue the Parliament.
But Russian scholars and Western diplomats said that Mr.
Yeltsin's restraint could also reflect concern about the risk of an open battle for their loyalty.


Royals Get a New Chairman
DAVID D. GLASS, president and chief executive officer of Wal-Mart Stores Inc., was elected chairman of the Kansas City Royals yesterday.
He will be the team's designated representative at major league baseball owners' meetings and will serve as the team's chief executive officer.
The move follows the wishes of Ewing Kauffman the Royals' founder who died Aug. 1 at the age of 76. (AP)


Teleway Shifts Accounts to McCann
Teleway Inc., a flower and gift delivery service company, said yesterday that it had dismissed CME KHBB Advertising in New York, its agency for the last three years, and moved its $15 million to $20 million advertising and marketing accounts, without a review, to McCann-Erickson New York.


N.C.A.A. to Investigate Alabama Program
The National Collegiate Athletic Association will investigate Alabama's football program over allegations that former player GENE JELKS was paid to play for the school.
DAVID BERST, the N.C.A.A.'s assistant executive director for enforcement, wrote university president ROGER SAYERS.
Sayers received the letter yesterday in Tuscaloosa and said the school will cooperate.


Claire Bloom to Open Great Performers Series
Claire Bloom is to offer readings from Shakespeare as part of the American Symphony Orchestra's program of music inspired by his works, on Sunday afternoon at 3 at Avery Fisher Hall.
The program of music by Dvorak, Tchaikovsky, Strauss, Berlioz and Paine, conducted by Leon Botstein, opens the 1993-94 Great Performers series presented by Lincoln Center.
Tickets: $18 to $35.
The series, which runs through May, includes concerts with orchestra by Jessye Norman, Kiri Te Kanawa, Barbara Hendricks and, jointly, Mirella Freni and Nicolai Ghiaurov.


For the Aged: Holmes and Foreman
Now, this is more like it: GEORGE FOREMANand LARRY HOLMES, paunchy punchers past 40, may finally fight someone their own age -- each other.
Holmes disclosed yesterday that he has an offer to fight Foreman in January or February, perhaps in China or Las Vegas, perhaps for $5 million apiece.
"That's the reason I haven't retired," said Holmes, who announced he was quitting after winning his last bout in May.
Instead, he returns to meet JOSE RIBALTA next Tuesday night in Bay St.
Louis, Miss.


Reviews/Film; Beneath a Cute Exterior Resides a Deadly Brat
Macaulay Culkin is not too young to need career advice.
It's a triple mistake for him to have appeared in "The Good Son" as Henry Evans, a disturbed and malicious little boy.
First of all, this character's brattiness is deeply unappealing.
Second, a role as solemn as this one makes it clear that wisecrack-filled comedy is what Mr.
Culkin does best.
And third, his co-star is Elijah Wood, the second hottest child star of the moment (whose credits include "The Adventures of Huckleberry Finn"), and a fine little actor who is much more comfortable with dramatic material.
Although Mr.
Culkin has top billing, Mr.
Wood serves as the hero of this story.
As directed by Joseph Ruben ("Sleeping With the Enemy," "The Stepfather") and written by the novelist Ian McEwan, "The Good Son" has more interesting ambiguity in its title than it does anywhere else.
Mark Evans (Mr. Wood) is grief-stricken by the death of his mother and feels somehow responsible for her illness.
And then, just after his mother dies, Mark is left behind while his father goes on a two-week business trip to Tokyo.


Dinkins Lists Proposals For Schools
Mayor David N. Dinkins made a number of proposals yesterday to enhance New York City's schools, including transferring more functions from the Board of Education to the schools, creating a $200 million endowment fund for educational programs and placing the School Construction Authority in charge of all school maintenance.
In an address at the Jefferson Market Library, Mr.
Dinkins proposed that an outside group issue reports cards that grade the city's more than 1,000 schools.
The cards would be issued to parents.
He did not name what outside group would do the reports.


CLINTON'S HEALTH PLAN: New York City; Big, Busy and Burdened by the Poor, a Municipal System Is Hoping for Relief
For the corporation that operates New York City's municipal hospitals, the health plan unveiled Wednesday by President Clinton holds out the promise of relieving one of its biggest burdens: the high cost of caring for those who cannot pay for it.
And yet the plan has also raised concerns that despite the benefits the city's Health and Hospitals Corporation will still face problems that could undermine its financing and leave it at a disadvantage in a new health care system.


CLINTON'S HEALTH PLAN: Principles; Experts' Grades: 'A' in Security, 'C' in Simplicity, 'D+' in Savings
In proclaiming six principles as "guiding stars" on the journey to health care reform, President Clinton set forth a benchmark to measure the plan he presented to Congress on Wednesday.
By those standards, he is being given high marks for some parts of his health plan and low marks for others.
Consumer advocates, economists and health policy experts said today that they generally accepted Mr.
Clinton's principles as criteria by which to judge health care legislation.
The six principles, in the shorthand used by Mr.
Clinton, are security, simplicity, savings, choice, quality and responsibility.


Volunteers Kick Off Another School Year


Art in Review
Nancy Burson
Jayne H. Baum Gallery  588 Broadway (near Prince Street)  SoHo  Through Oct. 16
In her new photographs, of children who suffer from extreme facial abnormalities, Nancy Burson uses none of the techniques of computer manipulation for which she has become best known.
But she does use such traditional photographic devices as blur, shallow focus and unusual cropping.


CLINTON'S HEALTH PLAN: The Insurers; Health Professionals Brace for a New Age
No group was listening more intently to President Clinton's appeal to the nation to adopt a sweeping program that would guarantee all Americans health insurance than the professionals in the health care fields.
Mr.
Clinton is proposing nothing less than an upheaval in the way one-seventh of the American economy operates.
These are some of the immediate reactions to the President's speech on Wednesday night from doctors with a health maintenance organization, insurance company executives and medical students.
Copious Notes On Legal Pads
There was little dread in the bright, green-carpeted employee lounge of the Cigna Corporation as executives of the insurance giant gathered here watch President Clinton's health care speech on Wednesday night.
Disagreement, yes: Lawrence P. English, the president of the company's health care unit, shook his head and grimaced at some points, and raised his hands and shrugged at other moments.
And with every reference to price controls, however oblique, nearly every pen in the room leaped to attention, scribbling hostile notes on legal pads.
But ultimately the insurance executives had more suggestions about fine-tuning the President's plan than fundamentally changing it.


Review/Film; Blocking, Tackling, Matriculating
"The Program" is a routine Joe College movie, with the added twist that Joe College is Joe Kane (Craig Sheffer), a prime contender for the Heisman Trophy.
So his school buddies are other members of the football team at Eastern State University, where Coach Winters (James Caan) is on hand to guide them to glory.
The film's title is used to refer to football whenever possible, as in: "I'm concerned about our program. It's always been a source of pride to our students and our alumni."
Joe has a drinking problem that makes him a daredevil, as when he lies down on a busy highway as the cars and trucks whiz by. (The film's optical effects aren't persuasive enough to make it look as if Joe is in real danger.) He is also oppressed by all "the adulation," as he sometimes calls it, of having been on the cover of Sports Illustrated.
Joe grouses so much about this that the audience isn't likely to be holding its breath about whether he comes up a winner.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
The F.C.C. announced rules for an auction of the nation's airwaves to provide a new generation of wireless communication services.
The Government hopes to raise $10.2 billion in auctioning off as many as seven new wireless services in every American city and town, each of which could be a potential competitor to today's cellular companies by providing a broad new family of portable phones and computer services.  [ Page A1. ]
Sales of cars and light trucks built in North America increased 20.9 percent in mid-September, with almost every auto maker posting gains over the same period a year earlier.  [ D3. ]


Nicholas J. Sciarra; Neighborhood Official, 41
Nicholas J. Sciarra, district manager of Community Board 7 in Sunset Park, Brooklyn, died on Wednesday during a meeting at the board's offices at 44th Street and Fourth Avenue.
He was 41.
He died apparently after choking while eating a sandwich, said people who were at the meeting and staff workers of the Brooklyn Borough President, Howard Golden.
The cause is still under investigation, the Medical Examiner's Office said.


A Church School in Need Gets Help From an 'Angel'
Annee Kim, a vice president at Lehman Brothers, was looking for a sure-fire investment opportunity.
Sister Ann Veronica Bivona, the principal of financially troubled St.
Margaret Mary elementary school, was looking for an angel.
The angel and the investment opportunity appeared in a potholed playground ringed by crumbling walls and steps in the South Bronx.


Reviews/Film; Nervously Contemplating Life After High School
Richard Linklater, the 31-year-old director of "Slacker" and now "Dazed and Confused," is a contemporary of the high school-age characters who appear in his new film.
And Mr.
Linklater remembers exactly how things looked and felt and sounded on May 28, 1976, the date on which his story unfolds.
It is the last day of school in the nameless Middle American community where the film takes place, and a couple of dozen characters are dealing with their hopes and fears.
The film has a large cast and a microscopic scale, since many of the matters it addresses are deliberately small.
The school's seniors-to-be, for instance, have embarked on a hazing campaign aimed at next year's freshmen.
And the hazing is nasty; there are pretty teen-age girls in this film who sound like drill sergeants in the Marines.
Mr.
Linklater understands how silly this would look to anyone except an incoming freshman, who might live in terror of being hit with a paddle or coated with ketchup and mustard.
He is charmingly aware that his characters see their troubles as silly and earth-shaking at the same time.


More on the Plan
CHANGING ROLES Medical students, insurers and health care providers glimpsed their future and expressed qualms and satisfaction.
Page A19.
GRASS ROOTS Competing citizen armies appear to be emerging as lobbying efforts on health care pick up speed.
Page A20.


Doctors Perform More Surgery on Farr
Surgeons yesterday performed a highly delicate procedure aimed at destroying a cancerous tumor at the top of HEATHER FARR's spinal cord.
The 28-year-old Phoenix resident was being treated at the University of Arizona's University Medical Center in Tucson, with precisely focused X-ray radiation called spinal sterotactic radiosurgery.
The surgery began in the morning and was expected to continue into the evening, said a hospital spokesman, GEORGE HUMPHREY.
Farr faces still further treatment soon, a second bone marrow transplant.
In the procedure yesterday, she could face paralysis if the spinal cord were damaged, Hamilton said.


Jonathan Schenker; Executive, 42
Jonathan Schenker, an executive with Ketchum Communications, died yesterday at St.
Vincent's Hospital in Manhattan.
He was 42.
The cause was complications from AIDS, said his companion, Peter Carzasty.


RJR Nabisco Bonds Are Hit Hard
he bonds of RJR Nabisco Inc. were hit hard yesterday in the aftermath of a decision by the Standard &amp; Poor's Corporation to put the company on its credit watch list with the possibility that its credit rating for senior debt could be cut to below investment grade.
In trading in the secondary market, the spread between the yield on RJR bonds and comparable Treasury securities widened significantly, as the price of the Nabisco bonds fell.
The spread on the 8.75 percent 12-year notes due in 2005 widened to about 400 basis points, or hundredths of a percentage point, from about 380 basis points Wednesday, traders said.


It's Advantage, Bahamas, As Agassi Fires First Shot
Whenever Andre Agassi takes on the role of the straw, the drink he's stirring is probably a Molotov cocktail.
This time he has infused what looked to be a dull Davis Cup affair between the powerful United States and the underrated Bahamas with a swirl of controversy.
This was supposed to be a simple relegation match between the United States and the Bahamas, but it has begun to sound like a grudge match thanks to a little joke spun out by Agassi upon learning the identity of his opponents for what could become a very consequential weekend.


Hospital Appeals Ruling on Treating Baby Born With Most of Brain Gone
In a case raising timely issues of health care policy as well as profound questions of medical ethics, a hospital in suburban Virginia is appealing a Federal District Court's ruling that it must continue to provide life-sustaining treatment for a baby born there 11 months ago with most of her brain missing.
The condition, a congenital defect known as anencephaly, is incurable and quickly fatal without medical intervention.
An anencephalic baby has a brain stem, which keeps the heart and other organs working for a time.
The baby does not meet the legal definition of brain death.
Lacking a cortex, it is permanently unconscious, without sensation or cognitive functions.


South Africa's Parliament Votes For a Black Role in Government; De Klerk Visits U.N.
Paying the first visit ever by a South African head of state to the United Nations, Mr. de Klerk today called on Mr.
Mandela to back the lifting of sanctions against South Africa when he speaks here on Friday.
If Mr.
Mandela makes such an appeal, as he is expected to do, the United Nations is likely to respond by lifting an array of restrictions on trade and financial ties with South Africa.


RESULTS PLUS
COLLEGE FOOTBALL  Kentucky Rallies  Randy Wyatt's 64-yard touchdown run began a fourth-quarter comeback that gave Kentucky a 21-17 victory over South Carolina last night in Columbia, S.C.
The Wildcats (2-2 over all, 1-1 in the Southeastern Conference) followed with an 81-yard scoring drive consisting of 13 running plays, the last a 1-yard burst by Michael Woodfork with 4 minutes 50 seconds left.
The Gamecocks (2-2, 1-1) got a pair of 1-yard touchdown runs by Brandon Bennett. (AP) GOLF  Two Share Early Lead  Donna Andrews, who nearly withdrew at the last minute because of a back ailment, shot a six-under-par 66 yesterday to tie Kris Monaghan for the first-round lead of the Kyocera Inamori Classic in San Diego.
The leaders held a one-stroke advantage over Tina Barrett and Gail Graham on the flat, 6,200-yard course at the Stardust Country Club, hosting its first L.P.G.A. event since 1974. (AP)


South Africa's Parliament Votes For a Black Role in Government
After a rollicking debate in which white separatists denounced President F. W. de Klerk's chief negotiator as a "despicable traitor" to his race, the South African Parliament bowed to the inevitable today and approved a law giving blacks their first official say in the running of the country.
The legislation authorizes creation of a transitional executive council, including one representative each from all the major political parties and jurisdictions, to oversee Mr. de Klerk's Government in the months leading up to the first universal election next April.


Seven Hills Journal; On Demjanjuk's Street, Support Meets Outrage
Pink "no trespassing" signs hung in windows today on the street that John Demjanjuk has fought so hard to return to for seven years.
His neighbors put up the signs, not as messages to him, but rather to ward off the demonstrators who have picketed Mr.
Demjanjuk's house here for two days.


There's No Joy in Beijing as Sydney Gets Olympics
In an enormous case of mistaken identity, millions of Chinese this morning thought that Beijing had won the competition to hold the 2000 Olympic Games, setting off a citywide celebration of fireworks and cheers that collapsed in disappointment minutes later.
On the campus of Beijing University, about 400 students had gathered in Dining Hall No. 3 to watch the televised announcement, which came just before 2:30 A.M.
A celebration erupted as Juan Antonio Samaranch, president of the International Olympic Committee, in thanking the five contestants uttered "Beijing" before any other city's name.


Editorial Notebook; In Defense of 'Bloody' Red Hook
The Red Hook section of Brooklyn is known for razor wire, gunfire and death, the latter reputation earned most recently by the crossfire killing of Patrick Daly, patron saint and principal of Public School 15, the elementary school that now bears his name.
The shooting has abated, but the razor wire remains.
It snakes in ominous garlands along fences and ledges, and glimmers like a crown of thorns around the public library's roof.
P.S. 15 catches the first-time visitor by surprise.
Though it's only a block from the library, there's no razor wire or graffiti.
The flower beds are ablaze with marigolds.
Most striking of all are the brightly colored murals that cover the walls of the kindergarten playground.
The murals, painted by the students, are beacons of hope, filled with sunshine and optimism.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article on Sept. 13 about curbs on the Japanese bureaucracy omitted a word from a remark by Kazuo Ogura, a senior Foreign Ministry official.
He said "some" members of the governing coalition -- not all -- were hostile to the country's career civil servants.


Pop/Jazz; A Brooklyn Festival Thrives on the Variety of Heritage
For 15 years, from 1976 to 1990, the Ethnic Folk Arts Center gave a party that could only happen in New York.
Held at a beer garden in Queens, it was the ultimate pan-ethnic fiesta, bringing together Greeks and Dominicans, Bulgarians and Central Asians, Irish and Turks and outsiders.
Bands that usually performed for private events -- Greek weddings, Jewish bar mitzvahs, Irish ceilis (jam sessions) -- met a wider public that invariably turned the patio into a busy dance floor.
To make the general public welcome, the festival included workshops to help people learn the steps.
But after 1990, when there were cutbacks in city and state arts funds, the money ran out; with between 1,000 and 3,000 people attending each year, the festival was still too small for many kinds of grants.
Not wanting to give up what the center's artistic director, Ethel Raim, calls "everyone's favorite event," the center scrambled for two years and worked out a collaboration with the Prospect Park Alliance.


Art in Review
'Alexander Liberman'  'The Circle Paintings'
Gagosian Gallery  980 Madison Avenue (near 77th Street)  Through Oct. 2
As the editorial director of Conde Nast Publications, Alexander Liberman is one of the most important employees of one of Larry Gagosian's most important clients, S.I.
Newhouse Jr., a fact that made it hard to approach this exhibition with anything but profound skepticism.
Nonetheless, the 26 paintings on view resurrect the best and most overlooked phase of Mr.
Liberman's career as an artist, and they earn him a small but definite place in the history of American painting.


Corrections
An article in Business Day yesterday about a new marketing effort by the Polo Ralph Lauren Corporation misidentified Peter Strom.
He is the company's vice chairman, not its president.


Review/Theater; New Cast for 'Sisters Rosensweig'
Now that the women involved have moved on to other things, the question can be asked politely: Did you ever believe, for a second, that Jane Alexander, Madeline Kahn and Christine Estabrook could be siblings?
As the original sisters Rosensweig in the Broadway production of Wendy Wasserstein's vastly popular comedy, the three women were more like an additional trio of college alumnae from Ms.
Wasserstein's earlier work, "Uncommon Women and Others," school chums of disparate backgrounds who had drifted into very dissimilar lives (perhaps attending different acting schools along the way).
There was little reflexively familial physical comfort among them.
And whenever Ms.
Alexander's coolly poised Sara stroked Ms.
Kahn's outlandishly flamboyant Gorgeous in a gesture of affection, it was a little as if she were petting E.T.


Depression and Unhappiness Are Not the Same; Overcoming Stresses
To the Editor:
Depressions are not diseases; Dr.
Peter R. Breggin is correct (letter, Sept. 11).
They are nonspecific reactions, like running noses or fevers, which animals can experience as well as humans.


As Ryan Departs, an Era Ends
As the 1993 season progressed, it seemed that nature had finally caught up with 46-year-old Nolan Ryan.
He suffered from assorted leg and back injuries and spent more than 100 days on the disabled list.
Yet when Ryan walked off the mound in the first inning in Seattle Wednesday night, his right arm cradled gently at his side, his distress obvious, it seemed to many a shocking thing had happened.


At the Bar; Raymond Burr's Perry Mason was fictional, but he was surely relevant and, oh, so competent.
Da-da, da-DA! Da-da, da-DUM-DUM!
From the time the opening chords of its familiar theme song first sounded and a pensive figure could be seen sitting alone in an empty courtroom, lawyers have loved to patronize Perry Mason.
With all the smugness of the initiated, they have carped about how unrealistic and simple-minded the program was.


Miami Violence Leads to Racial Stereotyping; Smashed Platitudes
To the Editor:
"The Warning Shots in Miami" (editorial, Sept. 13), reflecting on the well-publicized murder of a German tourist an hour after he and his wife landed in Miami, says: "An obvious cause is the desperation of a jobless underclass," and praises Secretary of Housing and Urban Development Henry Cisneros for promising to "address these problems."


Morris Levinson, 79, Industrialist And Force in Jewish Philanthropy
Morris L. Levinson, a retired industrialist and lifelong philanthropist, died yesterday at his summer home in Townshend, Vt.
He was 79.
The cause was lung cancer, said a spokesman for the family.


Kasparov Survives a New Onslaught, but Just Barely
One lightning bolt after another from Nigel Short's sinister laboratory struck Gary Kasparov's formation in Game 8 of their world championship match yesterday in London, but though the Russian bent dreadfully, he did not break.
In the end, Kasparov struggled to a draw by perpetual check.
All the Englishman's scintillating pyrotechnics amounted to a moral victory, but the bottom line is that he still trails by 4 points, with the score now at 6-2.
And he has yet to win a game.
It takes 12 1/2 points to win the $1.43 million prize, with $861,000 going to the loser.


CLINTON'S HEALTH PLAN: Interest Groups; Lobbyists of Every Stripe Turning to the Grass Roots on Health Care
Anheuser-Busch is outfitting its trucks with placards urging Bud drinkers to dial 1-800-BEER-TAX.
Thousands of consumers have responded and then received pamphlets describing how the Clinton health care overhaul could drain their pockets if it includes "sin taxes."
IVAC Corporation, a San Diego-based company that manufactures intravenous pumps, has set up a telephone bank staffed by 20 employees to call other health industry workers and urge them to write to their representatives to oppose proposals to limit hospitals' access to medical technology.


Marines Grounding Planes and Copters After Fatal Crashes
After a string of fatal accidents in the past six weeks, the Marine Corps has ordered airplane and helicopter flights suspended for 48 hours to review safety and training procedures, the Pentagon said today.
The order, issued late Wednesday by Gen.
Carl E. Mundy Jr., the Marine Corps Commandant, covers virtually all of the corps' 1,150 helicopters and airplanes.
Most aircraft will be grounded next Monday and Tuesday.
Until then, only flights that commanders say are essential will be allowed.


Good News For Globex
Globex, the computerized system for trading futures contracts that has struggled to gain recognition, got some encouraging news today when the Chicago Board of Trade announced it had relinquished the exclusive right to trade and list the German Bund futures and options contracts on Globex.
The decision clears the way for the London Financial Futures and Options Exchange to reconsider joining Globex.


For Children
Medieval Festival at Fort Tryon Park
Fort Washington Avenue and 191st Street  Washington Heights  (212) 544-1180  Recommended for all ages  Sunday
In the Middle Ages, holding a tournament elevated an ordinary party into a major social event, as if a barbecue were transformed into a banquet.
Indeed, the joust was the most breathtaking event, with chevaliers brandishing shields and blunted swords, while maids, other knights and revelers swooned over this roughest of sports.
At this festival in Fort Tryon Park, knights on horseback will re-enact a joust.
And you could say you've been there.


CLINTON'S HEALTH PLAN: Faxes; Everybody's Got a Machine, and a Message
Apres Clinton, the deluge.
The health care debate began in earnest today with a high-pitched whine that signaled one of the biggest, most alarming disgorgements of faxes in Washington history.


Westchester Approves Airport Garage Plan
The County Board of Legislators ended a political stalemate over the construction of a garage at the Westchester County Airport today by approving a plan that would allow a private developer to build the 1,100-space garage and share the profits with the county.
Proponents of the construction, part of an airport modernization plan sponsored by the County Executive, Andrew P. O'Rourke, needed 12 votes in the 17-member legislature, or a two-thirds majority, for approval.
The vote was 12 to 5.


Review/Film; Conscience And Images: A Wordless World Tour
Film technology and global consciousness have both come a long way since the quaint old days when "This Is Cinerama" was the leading edge of wide-screen film spectacle and the Seven Wonders of the World were touted as the hit parade of international tourist attractions.
Just how far things have progressed is demonstrated by "Baraka," an awesome cinematic world tour directed and photographed by Ron Fricke, which opens today at the Plaza.
Shot on 6 continents and in 24 countries, the 70-millimeter film, which has a portentous world-music score by Michael Stearns and no dialogue, is an aggressively spectacular exercise in planetary consciousness-raising.


Corrections
A headline in some editions on Wednesday about Empire Blue Cross and Blue Shield referred incorrectly to its use of incorrect financial data.
The company admitted having filed incorrect data with New York State regulators, but said that the data were not used to obtain rate increases.


Dead Heat Seen In Mayor's Race
Two recent polls show the New York City mayoral race growing tighter, with Mayor David N. Dinkins in a virtual dead heat with his challenger, Rudolph W. Giuliani.
The polls, one by the Marist Institute and the other for New York Newsday / WABC-TV, showed Mr.
Dinkins gaining ground on Mr.
Giuliani since a Daily News / WNBC-TV poll two weeks ago that showed the Mayor 10 points behind.


Review/Art; Robert Ryman Derives Poetry From White on White
Robert Ryman's retrospective at the Museum of Modern Art is too perfect for words, and this is mostly good.
The exhibition, which opens to the public on Sunday and occupies nine specially built galleries on the museum's second floor, is the largest devoted to Mr.
Ryman's quietly ravishing white-on-white paintings in this country.
Its 83 works span almost 40 years, from the mid-1950's, when the artist was exposed to the tenets of Abstract Expressionism while working as a guard at the Modern, to the present, when he is widely considered one of the most important painters of the postwar period.
But contrary to the usual display methods at major museums, there's not a single label or text panel in sight, a condition that even the most seasoned art viewer may find a bit disorienting.
It's akin to being tossed into the deep end without one's water wings.
The only typeface visible will be found in the hands of those visitors who pick up a checklist and exhibition map at the beginning of the show.


Nunn Says He Wants Exit Strategy Before U.S. Troops Go to Bosnia
As President Clinton's top national security advisers traveled to Capitol Hill to test Congressional support for sending American troops to enforce a cease-fire in Bosnia, a leading Senate Democrat said today that the Administration would have to prove that it had an exit strategy before deploying troops.
Reflecting deep anxiety among lawmakers over American involvement in Bosnia and Herzegovina, Senator Sam Nunn, the Georgia Democrat who is chairman of the Senate Armed Services Committee, said, "My big question will be not how do we go about it, what our goals are, but how do we get out if the parties begin fighting again?"


CLINTON'S HEALTH PLAN: The Students; Health Professionals Brace for a New Age
No group was listening more intently to President Clinton's appeal to the nation to adopt a sweeping program that would guarantee all Americans health insurance than the professionals in the health care fields.
Mr.
Clinton is proposing nothing less than an upheaval in the way one-seventh of the American economy operates.
These are some of the immediate reactions to the President's speech on Wednesday night from doctors with a health maintenance organization, insurance company executives and medical students.
Marcus Welby Is Disappearing
They cheered on President Clinton for pledging to extend health insurance to all, to simplify paperwork, to crack down on malpractice lawsuits.
That was all good.
But for two dozen young medical students here, the President's speech on health care offered a glimpse into their own future as doctors, and many came away profoundly nervous.
"We're going to have a nation of Doc-in-the-Boxes," said 24-year-old Richard Gardner, a fourth-year student at Baylor College of Medicine here.
"His idea seems to be that all doctors are going to go right into H.M.O.'s."


Choking and Snooping to Increased Ratings
During a weekend of forays to the Magic Kingdom in Orlando, Fla., two years ago, my quality TV time spent with the Ryder Cup was more exciting than anything on Uncle Walt's premises.
Watching Bernhard Langer choke and Mark Calcavecchia and Colin Montgomerie crumble was better than Mr.
Toad's Wild Ride.
The 1991 Ryder Cup victory by the United States was a gift to NBC, the equivalent of giving Don Knotts a Big Bertha driver.
It resuscitated the biennial event for network TV after a hiatus in 1989 when it was shown only on the USA Network.


Day Care May Cut Risk of Leukemia, Study Says
Children who attended a day care center for at least three months before the age of 2 were found to have a lower risk of developing childhood leukemia than children who were not placed in such an environment, a study to be reported Saturday in the British Medical Journal says.
In the study of 136 children with childhood leukemia and a slightly larger number of healthy children, conducted in Greece, children who attended a day care center before the age of 2 had a 70 percent lower risk for childhood leukemia than children who had never been in day care.
Children who had been in day care at any age had a 30 percent lower risk.
The statistical association was "startlingly strong," the authors of the study said.


2 Leaders Reach Turning Points


Stanley J. Harte, 83, Builder in New York And Eastern Florida
Stanley J. Harte, a lawyer and real-estate developer in New York and Florida, died on Tuesday at his home in Palm Beach.
He was 83.
The cause was heart failure, said Alisan Harte Shenberg, his daughter.


Art in Review
Cornelia Hesse-Honegger
Swiss Institute  35 West 67th Street  Manhattan  Through Oct. 30
Cornelia Hesse-Honegger's first New York show is a lot stranger than it looks.
The Swiss-born artist was trained as a scientific illustrator, and her depictions of plants and insects in watercolor and gouache have a crisp, textbook perfection.
They are also remarkably pretty, as in her arrangement of a half-dozen poplar leaves painted in silhouette on a page, each offering a graceful variation on a basic shape.


Traffic Agents Battle for Respect; Can Blue Uniforms or Positive Ads Protect a Battered Force?
Many New Yorkers seem to view traffic-control agents as sinister troublemakers in ugly brown uniforms who exist solely to harass upstanding citizens and feather the public nest.
It seems to matter little that without parking enforcement, there would be even fewer places to park.
It is but a trifling detail that without traffic tickets, lanes would be hopelessly clogged to ambulances and fire trucks.
The bottom line to many New Yorkers is that parking is warfare and the enforcers are the enemy.


No Headline
"It's the largest mobilization since the establishment of Social Security." -- FRANK MANKIEWICZ, on the battle lines forming in the health care debate.  [ A1:2. ]


Art in Review
Neil Winokur
Janet Borden Gallery  560 Broadway, at Prince Street  SoHo  Through Oct. 16
Three bands of photographs line the walls of this gallery, converted by the portraitist Neil Winokur into a shrinelike memorial to Bill Jacobson, a writer and friend of Mr.
Winokur, who died of AIDS in December 1992.


HOUSE TO ADDRESS CAMPAIGN FINANCE
House Speaker Thomas S. Foley said today that the House would take up and pass campaign finance legislation this fall.
But he said "we will have a very hard time" getting the votes to include public financing of elections in the bill because the American public deeply opposed that concept.
The Speaker, in a general discussion of "reform" in the House, said he would continue to try to win support for public financing.
But he said he expected that the bill passed by the House would include voluntary spending limits and limits on how much money candidates could accept from political action committees, as well as limits on how much they could take in large contributions from individuals.


Flute Club Concert
The New York Flute Club is to present a concert by the winners of its 1993 competition, on Sunday at 6:30 P.M. at CAMI Hall, 165 West 57th Street, Manhattan.
The performers, Christina Jennings, Sungyoon Kim and Elizabeth Anne Ostling, will play works by Andre Jolivet, Alphonse Duvernoy, Jean Louis Tulou, J. S. Bach, Lukas Foss and Frank Martin.
Tickets are $8.
Information: (212) 397-6900.


MOSCOW SIDESTEPS A ROLE IN GEORGIA
As the battle between Georgian defenders and Abkhazian rebels for control of Sukhumi enters its second week, one victim has been Russia's reputation as a neutral and credible peacekeeper on the territory of the former Soviet Union.
By opening a surprise offensive against the Georgian-held city last Thursday, the Abkhazian separatists, long suspected by Georgia to have the blessing of elements in the Russian Government, blew apart a six-week-old cease-fire.
The agreement had been signed on July 27 in Sochi, Russia.


CLINTON'S HEALTH PLAN: The H.M.O.'s; Health Professionals Brace for a New Age
No group was listening more intently to President Clinton's appeal to the nation to adopt a sweeping program that would guarantee all Americans health insurance than the professionals in the health care fields.
Mr.
Clinton is proposing nothing less than an upheaval in the way one-seventh of the American economy operates.
These are some of the immediate reactions to the President's speech on Wednesday night from doctors with a health maintenance organization, insurance company executives and medical students.
The Faithful Hear the Sermon
Sixteen years ago, newly married and embarking on their life's work, Dr.
Sharon Levine and Dr.
Jay Crosson decided to abandon the prestige and perquisites of East Coast medicine and head for Northern California, where the modern health maintenance organization was born.
"The question for the next two decades was not going to be what was the newest therapy," said Dr.
Crosson, who was one of 50 executives and policy analysts from the nation's largest H.M.O. who gathered here on Wednesday to watch President Clinton address Congress.
"The major question was going to be how were we going to deliver the health care we already had."


Pentagon Is Found to Have Ignored Congress on Spy Satellite
The Pentagon's secret reconnaissance office ignored specific Congressional instructions in May and signed a new multibillion-dollar contract for a classified espionage program for a spy satellite, the House Appropriations Committee has reported.
The Pentagon had not obtained the permission of Congressional committees for the contract.
In an unusually blunt, if guarded, discussion in a report accompanying the military budget bill for the fiscal year 1994, the Appropriations Committee said it was "dismayed" that the Defense Department had ignored its instructions to keep Congress informed about the program.
The report called for a comprehensive review of how spy satellites and other costly intelligence programs are being managed.


Now It Will be Judge Antuofermo
VITO ANTUOFERMO, the 40-year-old former middleweight champion, showed some "old trauma" -- not considered dangerous -- on a brain scan examination for his comeback attempt and has been denied a New York State license.
So instead of ending an eight-year retirement next Friday night at the Ramada across the street from Madison Square Garden, he will make his debut as an apprentice judge.
"We're going to train him," said Commissioner RANDY GORDON.
JULIO CESAR GREEN of Brooklyn, a rising fighter, instead will face JAMES GATLIN of Atlanta.


Diner's Journal
Cafe for the Sony Building
City Bakery, at 22 East 17th Street in Manhattan, a place known for the high quality of its baked goods, especially its tartlets, plans to open a cafe-bakery uptown in the Sony Building at Madison Avenue and 55th Street in November.
It will occupy the space that was formerly the Quilted Giraffe and will have 220 seats at cafe tables in the plaza of the building, an area that was originally an open arcade but is being enclosed.
In keeping with Sony's entertainment theme, Maury Rubin, the owner of City Bakery, plans to install a giant popcorn machine.
He said that ready-made salads and sandwiches would be available cafeteria style and that there would also be a coffee bar, a juice bar and a cocoa bar.
It's midtown's gain.
Meanwhile, Baked From Scratch, which operates two pastry and sandwich kiosks, will continue to operate in the plaza.
Its lease runs 11 more years.
A Far-Flung Family


Al Karakra Journal; The Villages of Egypt Relish the Fruits of Peace
In the 1970's there was no electricity and just one hand-crank telephone in this bedraggled village, deep in the rushes of the Nile Delta.
Nearly all the houses were made of mud brick, and the streets sometimes overflowed with the sewage from ancient cesspits.
Today, if you ask Yusri Abdel Gaween if life is better in Al Karakra, the village elder beams broadly and uses his fingers to count off the march of progress.


QVC Sued By Viacom To Halt Bid
One of the most powerful men in the cable-television business thinks his biggest rival has abused his power; yesterday, he appealed to the courts and Washington to step in and stop him.
In a legal ploy aimed at salvaging his company's $7.65 billion bid for Paramount Communications Inc., Sumner Redstone, Viacom Inc.'s chairman, filed an antitrust lawsuit against QVC Network Inc. and two companies controlled by the cable magnate John C. Malone.
The QVC group made a counteroffer for Paramount Monday that is worth $9.5 billion at current prices.
Joined by Martin S. Davis, Paramount's chairman, Mr.
Redstone also spent much of yesterday in Washington calling on Congressmen to discuss his and the rival deal.
Damages and Injunction Sought
The Viacom suit, filed in Federal District Court in Manhattan, seeks damages and an injunction against the two companies controlled by Mr.
Malone: Tele-Communications Inc. and Liberty Media, which has extensive interests in cable programming channels.
The suit charges those companies with monopolistic practices, including QVC's bid for Paramount.
It argues that such a buyout would "allow Malone to secure another ingredient in the defendants' scheme -- the product needed to bypass programmers like Viacom."


Review/Photography; Another Side of a Life's Work, Elegantly Revealed
In the 1930's and 40's, George Platt Lynes achieved both fame and commercial success with cool, Surrealist-influenced photographs of fashion and dance, as well as portraits of such artists and writers as Jean Cocteau, E. M. Forster and Dorothy Parker.
But it was another side of Lynes's work that attracted the attention of Dr.
Alfred E. Kinsey, the pioneering sexologist: his sensuous male nudes.
Between 1949 and 1955, when Lynes died at the age of 48, Kinsey collected more than 600 prints and several hundred original negatives by Lynes.
A provocative exhibition now at the Grey Art Gallery at New York University presents an extensive selection of those pictures, including not only nudes, both male and female, but also portraits, fashion shots and dance images.


Critic's Notebook; Adult Sounds From (Way) Off the Charts
WHEN Jane Siberry, a Canadian singer and songwriter, released her brilliant and moving new album, "When I Was a Boy" (Reprise), early last month, the world hardly noticed.
Ms.
Siberry, who has a cult following in the United States and in Canada, had received some favorable notice in the 1980's when she released her first two albums of folk-flavored art-rock.
At the time, critics described her as a cross between Joni Mitchell and Laurie Anderson.
But once Ms.
Siberry had been appreciatively taken note of, interest in her diminished.
She was relegated to the critical category of known quantity.
"When I Was a Boy," which is Ms.
Siberry's fifth album, happens to be a stunning artistic breakthrough.
But outside of her following, the existence of this rhapsodic song cycle about spiritual and earthly love is likely to go unnoticed.
Were Ms.
Siberry as famous as Peter Gabriel, whose music is only marginally less adventurous, her record might be able to crash the barriers of top-40 radio and MTV.
But she's not.


Corrections
An article in the Arts and Leisure section on Sunday about an exhibit of the manuscript and original illustrations for Antoine de Saint-Exupery's "Little Prince" omitted the location of the 28th Street Theater, where an Off Broadway production based on the book will appear.
It is 120 West 28th Street.


Restaurants
When you walk into Madeo, you can't help falling a little bit in love.
This is surely one of the most comfortable and attractive restaurants to open in quite some time, a place for grown-ups to go for quiet conversation and civilized service.
Unfortunately, this is a fast romance, over before you even make an exit.
Madeo may have an appealing Italian accent, but it is a restaurant best suited to major meat eaters.
People who are entranced by encounters with huge haunches of meat will be happy here; those in the mood for interesting appetizers and delicate plates of pasta will not.
The cool beige restaurant, which has just arrived on West 55th Street, is already filled with an international crowd of extremely attractive people.
That may be because it is the third member of the Madeo family.
The original is in Forte dei Marmi, a Tuscan seaside resort.
The second occupies a basement in the former International Creative Management building in Los Angeles.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-8  ISRAELI PARLIAMENT BACKS PEACE  Israel's Parliament approved the peace agreement with the P.L.O by a vote of 61 to 50, expanding the Labor Party's original narrow edge and helping to strengthen the credibility of the agreement.
A1  SOUTH AFRICA BACKS BLACK ROLE  The South African Parliament approved a law for a council to give blacks their first official say in running the country, clearing the way for Nelson Mandela to call for an end to economic sanctions.
A1


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt  *
Federal National Mortgage Association, Washington, known as Fannie Mae, is offering $800 million of 4.95 percent debentures due in 1998 at a price of 100 through various securities dealers.
The issue is callable in five years.


The Delicate Balance In a Real Country Town
POUND RIDGE is very nearly the perfect country town, though the notion that a country town can or should be perfect is not entirely logical.
Perfect country towns have lots of money and lots of quiet good taste.
They have antique shops rather than farms.
Their idea of a migrant worker is a commuter into the city.
They have village centers that provide the essentials of life, which for some people here includes the $30 prosciutto and porcini pizza at DiNardo's.


Burned 'Samaritan' Draws Support, and Questions
As townspeople rallied today to support a man who said he was set ablaze by the motorists he tried to help, the police said they had turned up some perplexing evidence but no suspects.
The man, Milton Metcalfe, had improved "a tad" since the Tuesday morning incident, said officials at University Hospital in Cincinnati, but was still in critical condition today with serious lung damage and second- and third-degree burns over 75 percent of his body.


Miami Violence Leads to Racial Stereotyping
To the Editor:
In your Sept. 12 news article on the killing of a German tourist in Miami, you mislead and encourage the worst kind of discrimination in reporting that "three-quarters of all assaults on tourists are committed by black men age 18 to 24."


Review/Music; Orchestra's Dual Nature At Opening Festivities
In the last two seasons, gala concerts have not generally displayed Kurt Masur and the New York Philharmonic at their best.
Two years ago, opening night was Mr.
Masur's debut as music director of the orchestra, and sweaty palms and intense pressure may have slackened the playing.
Last year, the highlight of opening night was a little more than a minor entertainment -- Leonard Bernstein's Symphonic Dances from "West Side Story" -- and for the major celebration of the season, the 150th-anniversary concert in December, the orchestra was led by three different conductors, with widely varying success.
On Wednesday night, finally, one hoped for some sign of settling into a normal season, even in the midst of festivities that included a cocktail party before the concert, a black-tie dinner after, a television broadcast on "Live From Lincoln Center," a local radio simulcast on WQXR, and ticket prices that, at a high of $90, were to benefit the orchestra's pension fund.


Scrabbling for a Role In Battle for Paramount
It's not exactly "Barbarians at the Gate, Part II," but the battle for control of Paramount Communications Inc. is the best show Wall Street has seen in years.
And the list of fee-hungry investment bankers, lawyers and public relations firms anxious to get up on stage continues to grow.
"This is a signature deal, and it's a competitive deal," one investment banker, who asked not to be identified, said.
Given those parameters, "Wall Street's macho madness comes into play," the banker said.
"Everybody wants to win."


Giuliani Calls for Denying Parole to Violent Criminals
Striking again at what he clearly views as the tender underbelly of the Dinkins administration, Rudolph W. Giuliani yesterday called for an end to parole for violent criminals, but his proposals were criticized by Democratic leaders as unrealistic.
To some degree, Mr.
Giuliani's position on parole, like his support of a state death-penalty law, is largely symbolic since such measures must be approved by the State Legislature.
But Mr.
Giuliani, the Republican-Liberal candidate for mayor, has said he would use the mayor's office as a bully pulpit to push such measures.


Tracks Apparently Remained Intact When Barge Hit Bridge Before Wreck
Investigators said tonight they had concluded that the rails on a bridge over an Alabama bayou were intact before Wednesday's fatal train crash, thus preventing a warning system from alerting the train crew of possible damage to the span.
Coast Guard officials said earlier today that the derailment of Amtrak's Sunset Limited, with 210 people aboard, occurred after a towboat pilot, apparently disoriented in late-night fog, strayed from the Mobile River and lost control of his barges.


Out With an Injury: Game, Season, Career
"Twenty-four, seven."
That's how Dan Conley described the pain in his right knee.
Twenty-four hours a day, seven days a week.
He has recently fallen down on his way out of bed in the morning.


Depression and Unhappiness Are Not the Same; Unmet Expectations
To the Editor:
Peter R. Breggin, M.D., states that "unhappiness, characterized by hopelessness, self-blame and self-destructiveness is a serious problem; but psychiatry's claims for curing it are not supported by scientific evidence." Psychiatry cannot cure unhappiness unless it defines it properly, not by characterizing it by its symptoms, but by defining it as "occurring when expectations are not met."


Depression and Unhappiness Are Not the Same
To the Editor:
Dr.
Peter R. Breggin makes several statements about psychiatric illness in "Psychiatry Doesn't Cure Unhappiness" that need correction (letter, Sept. 11).


Colt Gets Name; Now, to Make One
And he will be called: Genuine Reward.
That's the name picked by Diana and Bert Firestone for the colt who became a national celebrity when he was born on May 15 to the renowned mare Genuine Risk.


U.N. Council Votes to Send Peacekeeping Force to Haiti
The United Nations Security Council voted unanimously today to send a peacekeeping force of 1,200 soldiers and police officers to Haiti to help restore democracy there.
The Council also called on all Haitians to renounce violence and smooth the path for the return to Haiti of the country's first democratically elected President, the Rev.
Jean-Bertrand Aristide, on Oct. 30.


The Olympics Are in Good Hands
The Olympian competition to host the 27th modern Olympiad has ended with a happy choice -- the spectacular city of Sydney in sports-crazed Australia.
Equally important, the International Olympic Committee avoided a bad choice -- Beijing -- that would have mired the Games in years of controversy.
Australia was host to the 1956 Olympics in Melbourne, before the ascendancy of professional athletes, commercial sponsorship and global politics that now color the Games.
At the Sydney Games in the year 2000, thousands of paid and subsidized athletes will compete along with the world's best amateurs, and the Games themselves will be backed by the best sponsorship money can buy.
But politics will probably be subdued, which would not be the case if Beijing had been chosen.


City Opera Chief Takes Leave of Absence
Christopher Keene, the general director of the New York City Opera, told members of the company's board on Wednesday evening that he would take an immediate leave of absence to be treated for alcoholism at the Betty Ford Center in Rancho Mirage, Calif.
Mr.
Keene flew to California yesterday.
Susan Woelzl, the company's spokeswoman, said that there was no firm date for his return, but that he expected to be in New York to conduct the New York Philharmonic in the first week in November.


Review/Music; The New Philadelphia Starts Its Experiment
With fatter paychecks in one pocket and a $12 million gift in another, the Philadelphia Orchestra came to Carnegie Hall last night looking the picture of prosperity.
This concert of Rorem, Sibelius and Brahms opened Carnegie Hall's season, and it also introduced Wolfgang Sawallisch to New York in his new job as music director.
Preconcert suspense (would this concert happen at all?) disappeared as the orchestra's players and management came to a contract agreement on Sunday.
The $12 million -- a matching grant from Sidney Kimmel, the apparel tycoon -- will go toward a concert hall to replace the acoustically suspect Academy of Music on Locust Street, a project that has stubbornly resisted financing in the last few years.


CHRONICLE
SALMAN RUSHDIE, the writer who lives in hiding in Britain because of a death threat against him from Islamic fundamentalists, was not present at the Williams Club in Manhattan yesterday, but his voice was there thanks to a speakerphone.
The occasion was a news conference held to announce the formation of an American group, the Rushdie Defense Committee USA.
Its goal is to reawaken public concern over the death threat.


NATO Prepares For a New Role: Policing Bosnia
Haunted by its failure to stop the bloodshed in the Balkans over the last two years and still uneasy about its relationship with the United Nations, NATO is preparing for the possible dispatch of 50,000 troops to Bosnia next month in a mood of determination but lingering uncertainty over its role in a changed world.
In an interview, the NATO Secretary General, Manfred Worner, expressed confidence in NATO's ability to succeed in what would be the 44-year-old alliance's first experiment in a new post-cold-war role of peacekeeping beyond the borders of its member nations.
But he insisted that a NATO operation in Bosnia would have to be markedly different from the current United Nations operations there and in Somalia.


MARCOS CONVICTED OF GRAFT IN MANILA
Imelda R. Marcos was found guilty of corruption this morning and sentenced to 18 to 24 years in prison.
The conviction came seven years after she and her husband, Ferdinand Marcos, were hounded out of the Philippines in a popular uprising.
Mrs.
Marcos clutched a rosary as her sentence was read in a special anti-corruption court.
Outside the packed courtroom, crowds of her supporters held a vigil; opposite them, hundreds of anti-Marcos protesters cheered the former First Lady's conviction.


Sports of The Times; Now Beijing Must Wait 4 More Years
CHINA is not going anywhere.
There it sits, one fifth of the world's population, hurtling toward the next century, the next millenium, when it will surely be host to the Summer Games, sooner rather than later.
It is inevitable.
It is China.
But Beijing will not hold the Games in the year 2000 because yesterday they were awarded to Sydney, Australia, a cosmopolitan city on the southern half of the world, close to Asia, and a very acceptable choice.


Grand Met Promotes an Executive to Chief
Grand Metropolitan P.L.C., the British food and liquor company that owns Pillsbury and the Burger King Corporation in the United States, said today that it had chosen George J. Bull as chief executive, succeeding Sir Allen J. G. Sheppard, who remained chairman.
Mr.
Bull, a 57-year-old veteran of Grand Met's liquor business who for the last 15 months had overseen the food division, won the job over Ian A. Martin, the chief operating officer.
Mr.
Martin had spearheaded the company's rapid expansion into the United States in the 1980's and had overseen the acquisition of Pillsbury in 1989 for $5.8 billion.


Water Use Curbed For 4 Communities
Four shoreline communities in Westchester County were placed on an upgraded drought alert today that will bar their residents from watering their lawns, filling their swimming pools and washing their cars.
The County Executive, Andrew P. O'Rourke, declared what is known as a "Severe Drought Emergency" for the town and the city of Rye and the villages of Port Chester and Rye Brook, all of which are served by the New York American Water Company.
Most of the rest of Westchester -- about 85 percent of the county -- is served by the New York City reservoir system and remains under a "drought watch," a lower level of alert that recommends the taking of showers instead of baths and other comparatively mild measures.


Europeans Shake Off Fog, Then Shine
The Europeans held the lead after the first day of the Ryder Cup, but the real winners today were the 30,000 connoisseurs of golf who lined the Belfry's serpentine paths from foggy dawn to clammy dusk.
If Tom Kite wasn't whipping out a 3-wood and brazenly driving to within whispering distance of the perilously isolated 10th hole, Nick Faldo was chipping in from the fringe or Corey Pavin was snaking in yet another middle-range putt or those two familiar Spaniards, Seve Ballesteros and Jose Maria Olazabal, were wearing their stout hearts on their sleeves and matching each other birdie for birdie.


U.S. Leads Davis Cup After Rout And Luck
The weather was Caribbean, and so was the soundtrack, a blend of calypso and Mardi Gras that was provided for this Davis Cup relegation round by a vigorous contingent of visitors backing the team from the Bahamas.
Like a politician on the stump, Bo Driskill, the Americans' Davis Cup chairman, countered by handing out American flags.
But of the 4,300 spectators on hand to watch the United States try to cling to its World Group status, it was the assemblage of drum-banging, horn-blowing, maracas-shaking patriots who set the mood with music called Junkanoo -- available here on compact disk.


The Do-It-Yourself Will: Good Idea, Sometimes
LANNY SCHWARTZ figured he could write his own will.
After all, he had won an award as the best student in trusts and estates at the New York University Law School and had practiced corporate law for a decade.
A few hours at his home computer, $120 of self-help books at his side and the future of his wife and 4-year-old daughter in his heart, Mr.
Schwartz gave up.
The guidebooks "made me nervous," he said, adding: "Who knows if they're current? Who knows if the author knew what he was doing?"


Government Rejected Sensor System On Nation's Railroad Bridges in 1981
The Federal Railroad Administration more than a decade ago decided against installing sensors on railroad bridges that could have detected the damage that apparently resulted in the Amtrak crash that killed at least 47 people here on Wednesday.
After a 1979 freight train derailment on a damaged bridge in Devils Slide, Utah, the railroad agency considered placing detection devices on the nation's 85,000 railroad bridges.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article on Thursday about the Congressional reaction to President Clinton's address on health care misstated the writer's observation, in some copies, about a standing ovation.
The passage should have read: "Mr. Clinton got several standing ovations from both sides of the aisle. Some were amused that in a body that is not known for its fitness or abstinence, one ovation came when he offered a list of services that would be covered under his plan and ended with 'cholesterol tests, substance abuse and mental health treatment.' "


Croatia Sets Conditions for Allowing Peacekeepers to Remain
The Croatian Parliament voted late Thursday to ask the 15,000 United Nations troops that serve as a buffer between the Croatian Army and Serbian forces here to leave by the end of November if they do not meet several new conditions.
The troops arrived early last year under a peace plan accepted by both sides.
The peacekeepers were supposed to disarm the Serbs, who seized about one-third of Croatia's territory in a 1991 uprising, and assist in an eventual restoration of Croatian control, but the armed standoff persists.
If they depart, clashes would probably resume and perhaps lead to a resumption of full-scale warfare.


What Care Would Cost in Clinton's Plan
As a tidal wave of health care policy talk swept across the nation this week, Americans were left groping to understand exactly how the President's plan might affect their medical care and their finances.
Of course, no one will be certain about the impact before Congress and lobbyists join battle in what might be a yearlong fight over the final form of any health care bill.


Japan's Premier Stands Firm on Trade
Preparing for his first visit to the United States since taking office, Prime Minister Morihiro Hosokawa suggested today that despite sweeping changes he was seeking in his country's political and economic systems, Japan would continue to take a hard line on trade disputes with Washington.
Two months after ousting Japan's aging and corrupt leadership in elections, Mr.
Hosokawa said that he and his Cabinet were leading "a revolution in peacetime" in Japan, but he staked out a position showing that his Government would take much the same approach as past Governments on closing the trade surplus.


Hurricanes' Year Likely to Be Decided by One Whirlwind Month
The answers will be coming soon for the University of Miami.
Starting Saturday at Folsom Field, where the Hurricanes will play Colorado, a series of challenges will determine whether the latest Miami generation is prepared to compete for a national championship or is in need of an uncharacteristic transition period.
This week, the Hurricanes (2-0) will face Colorado (2-1), a team with a greater balance in its offense, uncertainty in its defense and an angry memory of the last-minute loss at Stanford last weekend.
In two weeks, Miami will seek to continue to maintain its mental advantage against another top-ranked Florida State team, at Tallahassee, Fla.
Then, in nearly a month, Syracuse will pose what is expected to be the greatest threat this season to Miami's home winning streak, currently at 52 games.


American Culture (and Goods) Thrive in South Africa
Sitting in a Kentucky Fried Chicken restaurant, sipping Coca-Cola and listening to a Whitney Houston tape, Gift Neku does not seem like a man starved for Americana.
Indeed, after years of anti-apartheid sanctions -- and, in a perverse way, because of them -- South Africa is a country awash in American consumer goods, colonized by American pop culture, and obsessed with American celebrities.


Supercollider Signals a Humane Future
To the Editor:
The world of science is following with concern the debate in the United States about whether to complete the installation of the $10 billion Superconducting Supercollider in its 54-mile circular tunnel already under construction in Texas.
The Supercollider is possibly the ultimate instrument for research into the structure of matter in the line of development started by Ernest Lawrence 60 years ago with the first cyclotron at Berkeley, Calif.
As a Big Science project, it may be compared to the large plasma machines looking to harness thermonuclear reactions for electric power, the space station and, more aptly, with the giant L.E.P. accelerator built in a 20-mile tunnel at CERN by the West European countries and with the Russian colliding accelerator project in an 18-mile tunnel.


Mutual Funds That Play the Markets for You
Mutual fund companies are casting a wide net for neophyte investors who lack the desire or the skill to construct their own fund portfolios.
The product of the moment?
Asset allocation funds.
These funds can buy stocks, bonds and cash in any combination.
Their selling points are instant diversity and the flexibility to respond to market conditions.
But that built-in flexibility means that funds flying the asset-allocation banner may have very little in common.


Tattoo Ruled No Cause for Dismissal


Review/Film; Zen and the Art of Making Its Tenets Into a Movie
"I am insubstantial in the universe, but in the universe there is nothing that is not me," reflects Hye Gok (Yi Pan Yong), an elderly and ailing Zen Buddhist monk in Bae Yong Kyun's ravishingly beautiful film "Why Has Bodhi-Dharma Left for the East?"
Not long after Hye Gok speaks these words to his young student Ki Bong (Sin Won Sop), his riddle finds a haunting visual corollary.
As Ki Bong scatters the ashes of his teacher in a mountain pool strewn with autumn leaves, the colored foliage floating on the pool's surface intermingles with the reflections of leaves still clinging to the trees above.


Religion Notes
Hunger Relief as Atonement


Greene Leads Phils Past the Braves, 3-0
When Tommy Greene took the mound for the Philadelphia Phillies tonight, he faced a possible double-edged predicament.
Greene came into the game knowing he might well end up being the latest in a line of pitchers to be thrown in the shark tank known as the Atlanta Braves offense.


Connecticut Prosecutor Won't File Charges Against Woody Allen
A state's attorney in Connecticut said yesterday that he had "probable cause" to prosecute Woody Allen on charges that he sexually molested his adopted daughter, but had decided to spare her the trauma of a court appearance.
The state's attorney in Litchfield, Frank Maco, said he had drawn up an arrest warrant for Mr.
Allen, but then decided not to pursue the case.
He said the girl's mother, Mia Farrow, had agreed that dropping the charges was in her daughter's best interest.


Lunch Break
It's refreshing to have an Administration in Washington that finally takes child nutrition seriously.
Last week Secretary of Agriculture Mike Espy promised to improve the quality of federally financed school lunches.
The link between diet and chronic disease makes this a serious issue.
About 25 million children -- nearly 60 percent of all public-school students -- are fed through the Agriculture Department's lunch program, most at reduced cost or no cost.
For many children this is the only meal of the day.


Raccoons End Franco's Year
John Franco's season was ended yesterday by what the Mets' closer called a "deep paper cut" on his left thumb, suffered as he tried to put away a box of garbage outside his Staten Island home.
"I had to or the raccoons would have got it," said Franco.
Raccoons in New York, then, have further deepened the disaster of a season for the Mets, who were nearly held hitless for the second time in 16 days against Montreal last night.
Eddie Murray ended Chris Nabholz's no-hit bid in the seventh with an infield single.
Yes, the 38-year-old Murray got to first before third baseman Sean Berry could recover the baseball after it bounced off his glove.


Open Positions on Short Sales Up 5% on Nasdaq
The number of Nasdaq shares sold short and not yet covered rose to another record high in the latest monthly period, as more traders placed bets that prices would tumble.
But for the most part, the bets were losers, as prices of over-the-counter issues hit new highs.


Review/Pop; A Night of Lullabies For Baby Boomers
It was fitting that the first two of James Taylor's four shows at the Paramount were benefits for Babies Hospital of Columbia-Presbyterian Medical Center because from his first song on Wednesday, "Sweet Baby James," through two unhurried sets, nearly everything he sang was a lullaby: gentle, reassuring, benevolent, restrained.
They were lullabies not for children, but for adults, particularly those of Mr.
Taylor's baby-boomer generation, who are trying to come to terms with their vanishing youth and diminished expectations.
To them, and perhaps to himself, Mr.
Taylor offers soothing, good-natured counsel, most of which boils down to: you've suffered enough, enjoy what you have and think kindly thoughts.
"Since we're on our way down, we might as well enjoy the ride," he crooned in "Secret o' Life."


Lillian R. Kessler Is Dead at 85; Established an Export Company
Lillian Ruth Kessler, founder of the Kessler International Corporation, which exports railroad parts, electronics and heavy industrial equipment to Asia, Africa and South America, died last Saturday at a nursing home in Washington.
She was 85.
Her daughter, Elinor Fuchs, said her mother had Alzheimer's disease.


Isler Out of Talks
PETER ISLER, one of the key participants in talks with BILL KOCH on organizing an all-women's team for the 1995 America's Cup races, is no longer part of the prospective campaign.
"Our philosophy at America  is that teamwork and attitude are all-important," Koch, financier of America  's successful defense of the cup in 1992, said in a statement.
"There are no stars, and the only ego is the ego of the boat. I concluded that we simply share different goals."


Think Nationally, Stump Locally: Democrats Move to Dinkins's Aid
The White House and the national Democratic Party, increasingly worried about Mayor David N. Dinkins's prospects for re-election, are organizing a series of efforts to help his campaign, capped by a visit from President Clinton on Sunday to help the Mayor raise a million dollars.
A Presidential appearance to raise money in a mayoral race, even one as important as New York's, is unusual enough.
But the White House is not stopping there -- it is dispatching Vice President Al Gore and several Cabinet members to the city to campaign for Mr.
Dinkins and sending money to help the state party get people to the polls.


Classical Music in Review
'Bach and Beyond' Bachanalia Festival Orchestra Alice Tully Hall


COURT RULING LETS TRADE AGREEMENT MOVE TO CONGRESS
A Federal appeals court removed a large obstacle today from President Clinton's effort to pass the North American Free Trade Agreement by the end of the year.
It ruled that the Administration could submit the agreement to Congress without an environmental impact statement.
Preparing an environmental statement takes up to a year, a delay that could have killed the trade pact.


Viewing the Stock Market as a Savings Vehicle
To the Editor:
"Investment Soars in Mutual Funds, Causing Concerns" (news article, Sept. 7) explored the negative aspects of the transfer of assets by individuals from banks to equity markets, but failed to consider the positive.


Nicaragua Repeals New Car Tax After Strike
Under pressure from a four-day transportation strike that paralyzed Nicaragua, the Government gave in to demands today and repealed new vehicle taxes on and promised to rebate part of an increase in the price of fuel to owners of taxis, buses and trucks.
"This was a peaceful struggle on our part," Luis Molina Vega, a union leader, said of the strike by 30,000 truck, bus and taxi drivers who were supported by ordinary Nicaraguans who put up stone barricades across major highways and city streets.
"Now it's time to get the country going again."


Between a Gas Pump and a Hard Place; Station Owner Grapples With Taxes, Technology and Regulation
The White House wants a tax increase on gasoline.
The Environmental Protection Agency wants gasoline that will pollute less.
Paul J. DeMartini wants to pump 1.5 million gallons this year.
Only the first two are going to get their way.


The Lure of Technology, And Partnership Deals
THE most exciting opportunity of the decade," boasted a brochure from American Wireless Systems Inc., and from the figures the company supplied, who could doubt it?
In large type, the brochure from the Irvine, Calif., company listed potential returns on an investment partnership to build a wireless cable television system in Minneapolis.
A minimum $12,500 investment could grow to $129,752 after five years of operations.
"Actual results may vary," added a smaller note at the bottom of the page.
"No guarantees or warranties are expressed or implied."


OPEC Seems Unwilling To Trim Output Levels
In the midst of OPEC's worst crisis in seven years, oil ministers from the organization's 12 member nations have begun consultations here on how to push up severely depressed world oil prices.
But there is little indication that the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries is close to finding a credible solution to its problems.


3 New Offerings: 2 in Stocks and 1 in Bonds
The Schooner Fund is a small-company fund managed by James Gipson, who also runs the well-regarded Clipper Fund.
Schooner concentrates on companies with market capitalization of $50 million to $1 billion.
Mr.
Gipson uses a value approach to stock-picking, meaning he buys companies that he believes are undervalued.
Because the fund is nondiversified, it is riskier than funds that own securities of more issuers.
Schooner is available in 29 states; shares should be widely available soon.
Sogen International invests in stocks and bonds around the world, including the United States, and its manager, Jean-Marie Eveillard, has built a solid track record.
He is now running a second fund, Sogen Overseas, which will invest almost entirely in international equities.
Like Mr.
Gipson, Mr.
Eveillard uses a value approach.
He sees opportunity in European small-capitalization and mid-capitalization stocks.


Two Stock Exchanges Drop Plans to Build Complex
The New York and American Stock Exchanges have canceled a plan to build an enormous new trading complex and office tower on Wall Street, public and private officials familiar with the project said yesterday.
There was no immediate indication why the exchanges canceled the undertaking, as neither would comment.


Parent Protest Wins Pledges From Chancellor
Hundreds of parents and local school officials, upset at asbestos, leaks and other conditions in decrepit schools and at a week of having their children shuffled among temporary classrooms, tied up traffic on the Brooklyn Bridge yesterday and staged a noisy, angry demonstration at the headquarters of the Board of Education.
Most expected little to come of the protest, which started about 8 A.M.
But within hours the new School Chancellor, Ramon C. Cortines, met the leaders, accompanied them to schools in Ocean Hill-Brownsville in Brooklyn and left seemingly as angry as the protesters.
He promised swift remedial action where possible and other solutions -- including permanant closings -- where necessary.


Butmir Journal; Slogging Through a Bosnian Lifeline
Day and night for months, soldiers and civilians lugging rucksacks, infantry weapons, stretchers and tattered luggage have gone subterranean to break the Serbian siege of Sarajevo, streaming like worker ants through the Bosnian capital's semi-secret lifeline, a tunnel beneath its airport.
"This is the ceremonial entranceway into our capital," a Muslim journalist said as he began his journey home to the war-ravaged city of Mostar after a 10-day stay in Sarajevo.
"It's fantastic."


Review/Television; From the Origins of Life to Its Future
Make way for a mind-expanding science series that gets to the genes of things.
"The Secret of Life," a remarkably lucid and visually vivid explanation of the nature and promise of DNA, goes in eight engrossing hours from the mists of prehistory into the fog of the future.
The opener tomorrow night suggests how life might have begun about four billion years ago, not in the "warm little pond" imagined by Charles Darwin but in some sulfuric steam bath like the one that Karl Stetter, a German biologist, is seen admiring near Naples.
From the bacteria he finds there, he extracts what he believes is ancient DNA of a sort that has carried instructions down the ages for the making of many species, including humans.


Studies Confirm Potential Cancer Risk From Coated Breast Implants
Studies have confirmed that silicone breast implants with polyurethane plastic coatings break down and send potentially cancer-causing chemicals into women's bodies in small amounts, Federal officials said today.
The research, by Bristol-Myers Squibb, the company whose subsidiary, the Medical Engineering Corporation, made the implants until 1991, has shown that women who have the implants also have a substance in their blood or urine called 2-toluene diamine, or TDA, which has been found to cause cancer when fed to rats.


Supercollider Signals a Humane Future; Einstein Used a Pen
To the Editor:
Leon Lederman suggests in "Science and the Bottom Line" (Op-Ed, Sept. 16) that the achievements of Newton et al. are good reasons to fund the Supercollider.
But without exception the scientists he names used little or no apparatus.


Mutual Funds That Play the Markets for You
Mutual fund companies are casting a wide net for neophyte investors who lack the desire or the skill to construct their own fund portfolios.
The product of the moment?
Asset allocation funds.
These funds can buy stocks, bonds and cash in any combination.
Their selling points are instant diversity and the flexibility to respond to market conditions.
But that built-in flexibility means that funds flying the asset-allocation banner may have very little in common.


Apple Executive Is Let Go and Sues
The Apple Computer executive and board member who handled the Apple-Microsoft suit was laid off Thursday and immediately resigned from the board and sued Apple over his severance.
The departure of Albert A. Eisenstat, a 13-year employee who was the company's executive vice president and in charge of its legal affairs, is the most recent of several executive departures at Apple.


What Care Would Cost in Clinton's Plan
As a tidal wave of health care policy talk swept across the nation this week, Americans were left groping to understand exactly how the President's plan might affect their medical care and their finances.
Of course, no one will be certain about the impact before Congress and lobbyists join battle in what might be a yearlong fight over the final form of any health care bill.


A Bosnian Sports Field Is Now Used to Bury the Dead


Classic Time for Grambling
Billed for many years as more than just a football game, the 23d annual Whitney M. Young Jr.
Memorial Classic will continue that tradition tonight with a game between Grambling and Hampton in the Meadowlands.
Kickoff is 6:45 P.M. at Giants Stadium.
Expanding on a tradition at games between historically black colleges, the halftime show will feature not just the bands from Grambling and Hampton but also one from Morgan State.
There will also be a concert at 3 P.M. in stadium parking lot 16.


Sihanouk Again Becomes King and Picks Government
Norodom Sihanouk, one of the century's most resilient political survivors, became King of Cambodia for the second time in half a century today, fulfilling a decadelong struggle to return to power.
In his first act as King, Sihanouk named his son, Prince Norodom Ranariddh, as First Prime Minister of a new Government.
He also named Hun Sen, who had led the Vietnam-installed Government and whose party placed second in United Nations-sponsored elections, as Second Prime Minister.


Corrections
A headline yesterday about approval of a 1994 foreign aid bill that includes $2.5 billion for Russia referred incorrectly in some editions to the chamber that acted.
It was the Senate, not the House.


The Do-It-Yourself Will: Good Idea, Sometimes
LANNY SCHWARTZ figured he could write his own will.
After all, he had won an award as the best student in trusts and estates at the New York University Law School and had practiced corporate law for a decade.
A few hours at his home computer, $120 of self-help books at his side and the future of his wife and 4-year-old daughter in his heart, Mr.
Schwartz gave up.
The guidebooks "made me nervous," he said, adding: "Who knows if they're current? Who knows if the author knew what he was doing?"


Expos' Pride Can Feel The Cheers
It was a rare, extraordinarily special sensory experience.
The cheers, inaudible but intense, crashed over Curtis Pride.
"I felt the cheers," he said.


Bridge
The Von Zedtwitz Double Knockout Teams, organized by the Greater New York Bridge Association, is ending in a simpler fashion than usual this year.
Instead of a conclusion with one undefeated team and several once-defeated teams, there were four once-defeated teams and therefore a straight knockout situation.
In the first semifinal, played Wednesday at the Beverly Club, 130 East 57th Street, a team consisting of Jeanne and Albert Rahmey, Alan Sontag, Win Allegaert, Simon Satanowsky and Michael Prahert upset a higher-ranked squad.
They won by 45 imps against Edgar Kaplan, Judi Radin, Michael Radin, Michael Kopera, Brian Glubok and Nick Nickell.


Transactions
Baseball  American League
BOSTON RED SOX -- Signed Greg Harris, pitcher, to a one-year contract with a club option for 1995.
National League
SAN DIEGO PADRES -- Activated Wally Whitehurst, pitcher, from the 15-day disabled list.


Leon Braun, 85, Dies; Ex-New York Official
Leon Braun, a lawyer and a former deputy comptroller for New York State, died on Tuesday at his home in Coconut Creek, Fla.
He was 85.
The cause was lung cancer, said John A. Garcia, a friend of the family.


Mandela Calls to an End to Sanctions
Proclaiming that "the countdown to democracy in South Africa has begun," Nelson Mandela called today for the lifting of all remaining economic sanctions against his country.
Almost instantly, governments and cities, including New York, initiated measures to end the years-old sanctions, which have been maintained despite a steady erosion of the racial separation policies known as apartheid.
The call by the leader of the African National Congress, made here the day after South Africa's Parliament adopted a package of laws giving blacks their first say in the country's Government, is expected to eventually revive investment in South Africa. 'Stability and Social Progress'
"To strengthen the forces of democratic change, and to help create the necessary conditions for stability and social progress," Mr.
Mandela told the the United Nations Special Committee Against Apartheid, "we believe that the time has come when the international community should lift all economic sanctions against South Africa."  [ Excerpt from the speech, page 5. ]


Carefully Chosen Sides In the Art of the Appeal
WILLIE SUTTON, the late career criminal, once explained that he robbed banks "because that is where the money is." You would have thought the same sort of logic would apply to the way beggars picked their locations, but this is not so.
Take Sutton Place, which, while not named after the aforementioned Willie, is certainly one of those areas where the money is.
Panhandlers are rare there.
They are also not much in evidence around Wall Street.
But what is most notable is how many more beggars there are on the West Side than on the East Side.


Morris Levinson Memorial
A memorial service for Morris L. Levinson will be held at 3 P.M. tomorrow in the main sanctuary of the Central Synagogue at East 55th Street and Lexington Avenue in Manhattan.
Burial will be on at 2 P.M. on Monday at the Eternal Light Memorial Gardens in Boynton Beach, Fla.
Mr.
Levinson, an industrialist and philanthropist who was the former president of the United Jewish Appeal, died on Thursday at his home in Townshend, Vt.
Contributions in his memory may be sent to the American Committee for the Weizmann Institute of Science at 51 Madison Avenue, New York, N.Y. 10010.


3 New Offerings: 2 in Stocks and 1 in Bonds
The Schooner Fund is a small-company fund managed by James Gipson, who also runs the well-regarded Clipper Fund.
Schooner concentrates on companies with market capitalization of $50 million to $1 billion.
Mr.
Gipson uses a value approach to stock-picking, meaning he buys companies that he believes are undervalued.
Because the fund is nondiversified, it is riskier than funds that own securities of more issuers.
Schooner is available in 29 states; shares should be widely available soon.
Sogen International invests in stocks and bonds around the world, including the United States, and its manager, Jean-Marie Eveillard, has built a solid track record.
He is now running a second fund, Sogen Overseas, which will invest almost entirely in international equities.
Like Mr.
Gipson, Mr.
Eveillard uses a value approach.
He sees opportunity in European small-capitalization and mid-capitalization stocks.


The Lure of Technology, And Partnership Deals
THE most exciting opportunity of the decade," boasted a brochure from American Wireless Systems Inc., and from the figures the company supplied, who could doubt it?
In large type, the brochure from the Irvine, Calif., company listed potential returns on an investment partnership to build a wireless cable television system in Minneapolis.
A minimum $12,500 investment could grow to $129,752 after five years of operations.
"Actual results may vary," added a smaller note at the bottom of the page.
"No guarantees or warranties are expressed or implied."


Combating Rape on Campus In a Class on Sexual Consent
In separate lecture halls on the Antioch College campus, male and female freshmen, one group surly and the other shy, this week attended the sexual consent workshops that are a mandatory part of orientation here.
They had heard about Antioch's sexual offense policy, which evolved after two years of unruly undergraduate democracy, from commentators and comedians who have been poking fun at the "Can I do this? Can I do that?" approach.


Between a Gas Pump and a Hard Place; Station Owner Grapples With Taxes, Technology and Regulation
The White House wants a tax increase on gasoline.
The Environmental Protection Agency wants gasoline that will pollute less.
Paul J. DeMartini wants to pump 1.5 million gallons this year.
Only the first two are going to get their way.


Classical Music in Review
Stephen Drury Pianist The Knitting Factory


Russia's Congress Seems to Falter As Yeltsin's Police Apply Pressure
As large contingents of police moved around the Parliament building, a rump Congress of People's Deputies that is meeting in defiance of President Boris N. Yeltsin appeared to be backing down today amid internal dissension.
The Congress adjourned tonight after the first signs of a split in its leadership began to appear.
The Parliament Speaker, Ruslan I. Khasbulatov, survived a call for his resignation after Vice President Aleksandr V. Rutskoi rose to his defense and accused some deputies of trying "to flee in good time and to betray in good time."


Viewing the Stock Market as a Savings Vehicle; Greed and Fear Cycles
To the Editor:
Your article on the surge in mutual fund investments (Sept. 7) deserves our full attention.
The greed cycle that has dominated the market and led to historic highs will yield, as it always must, to fear, compounded by the growing realization that the malaises that plague us run exceedingly deep.
The economies of the Western world aren't likely to "recover" any time soon.


Review/Music; Happy Start for a New Philadelphia Story
With fatter paychecks in one pocket and a $12 million gift in another, the Philadelphia Orchestra came to Carnegie Hall on Thursday night looking the picture of prosperity.
This concert of Rorem, Sibelius and Brahms opened Carnegie Hall's season.
It also introduced Wolfgang Sawallisch to New York in his new job as music director.
Preconcert suspense (would this concert happen at all?) disappeared as the orchestra's players and management came to a contract agreement on Sunday.
The $12 million -- a matching grant from Sidney Kimmel, the apparel tycoon -- will go toward a concert hall to replace the acoustically suspect Academy of Music on Locust Street, a project that has stubbornly resisted financing in the last few years.


Kenneth Hancock, 51, A Top Federal Scientist
Kenneth G. Hancock, director of the National Science Foundation's chemistry division, died on Sept. 10 while attending a science conference in Budapest.
He was 51 and lived in Rockville, Md.
A foundation spokesman said Dr.
Hancock, who was found in his hotel room, died of a heart attack.
Dr.
Hancock was in Hungary to attend a workshop on environmental chemistry that the foundation helped sponsor.


Last Lap for Prost
A three-time world Formula One champion, ALAIN PROST of France, on the verge of clinching his fourth overall driving title, this time for the Williams-Renault team, says he will retire at the end of this season.
"The Australian Grand Prix will be the last race of my career," Prost said after yesterday's opening practice session for the Portuguese Grand Prix in Estoril.
The Australian Grand Prix is scheduled to be held on Nov. 7.
"I want to leave at the summit."


No Headline
The countdown to democracy in South Africa has begun. NELSON MANDELA.  [ 1:6. ]


COMPANY BRIEFS
BANK SOUTH CORP., Atlanta, a multibank holding company, will acquire Chattahoochee Bancorp Inc., Marietta, Ga., for $11.50 a share of Bank South for each Chattahoochee share.
DIAL CORP., Phoenix, said its Dobbs International Services Inc. unit, had won a five-year contract worth $50 million to $60 million to provide catering for USAir flights out of Pittsburgh.


Shoemaker's Diazo Captures the Pegasus
Bill Shoemaker returned to the Meadowlands tonight for the first time in seven years and watched from his wheelchair while his colt Diazo won the Pegasus Handicap by four lengths over Press Card.
Shoemaker, paralyzed since an auto accident two years ago, was accompanied by Laffit Pincay, who hadn't been in the Meadowlands in five years but who returned as the jockey aboard Shoemaker's colt.
And together, the two celebrated Californians teamed to produce a solid victory for Diazo, who ran fifth in the Kentucky Derby in May and then took the summer off to heal his sore shins.


Review Panel Calls Insurer Poorly Run
A state advisory panel has concluded that Empire Blue Cross and Blue Shield, New York State's largest medical insurer, has had "extraordinarily poor management" and must make fundamental changes in its business strategy if it is to survive.
In a report released yesterday, the panel said that Empire must move quickly to create managed-care programs to replace the traditional insurance policies that have contributed to the company's financial decline.
The report criticized Empire's executives and board of directors for "failing generally to engage in strategic planning for the company's future."


How Mobile Radio Challenges Cellular
To the Editor:
Your article on two-way radio growth ("Mobile-Radio Companies Will Merge," Sept. 4) could leave the impression that specialized mobile radio is only a dispatch service used by truck drivers.
Digital technology will soon expand this two-way radio beyond voice communication.


Bessie Boris, 76, Dies; Painter of Landscapes
Bessie Boris, a painter of landscapes and portraits known for their rich colors and expressive distortions, died on Thursday at her home in Lee, Mass.
She was 76.
The cause was cancer, said her daughter, Rachel Klein, of La Jolla, Calif.


Single Defendant Is Focus In Smuggling of Immigrants
Federal prosecutors in the Golden Venture case have narrowed their focus to the role of a single defendant, who was charged yesterday with manslaughter in the deaths of six passengers.
The defendant, Kin Sin Lee, was also described by prosecutors for the first time as being the owner of the ship.
The rusty freighter had carried nearly 300 illegal Chinese immigrants on a treacherous four-month voyage across the Indian and Atlantic Oceans to New York City.
A handful perished trying to swim ashore when the vessel wrecked off Rockaway Peninsula on June 6.


Religion Notes
Hunger Relief as Atonement
Jews who are fasting today in observance of Yom Kippur, the Day of Atonement, are being urged to give the money they would have spent on food to the poor instead.
The appeal comes from Mazon, a nationwide Jewish group working to relieve hunger.


A Walk on the Wild Side of Wall Street


Paramount Is Being Pressed To Study QVC Bid Closely
As Monday morning's special board meeting at Paramount Communications nears, pressure on the 15 directors is mounting for them to consider QVC Network Inc.'s now $9.9 billion offer, if for no other reason than it could be worth $2.1 billion more to Paramount's shareholders than a rival offer from Viacom Inc.
Viacom's initial $8.2 billion bid has tumbled in value to $7.8 billion.
"It would appear reckless for the board not to consider an offer with such a large premium, and that is one thing that directors are not allowed to be," said Nell Minow, a principal at Lens Inc., a Washington money management firm.


Small-Cap Nasdaq Stocks
A complete listing of Nasdaq small-capitalization stocks now appears in The New York Times on Sundays.
The partial listing of those stocks, formerly published daily, has been discontinued to provide space for expanded mutual fund tables.


R.T.C. Nominee in Senate Limbo
Stanley Tate, the Clinton Administration's nominee to head the agency in charge of cleaning up failed savings and loans, has been waiting since July for a Senate vote on his nomination.
He complained bitterly today that the delay was prolonging management problems at the agency.
But key senators are insisting that the management problems be fixed before the nomination goes forward, creating a tense standoff between the nominee and the committee that must confirm him.


Oakley Perks Up
After meeting with the Knicks' president, DAVE CHECKETTS, on Wednesday and before meeting with Coach PAT RILEY yesterday, forward CHARLES OAKLEY sounded like a man trying to rejuvenate himself after a summer of discontent.
"I'm trying to stay focused," said Oakley, who as recently as last week said he felt no respect from the team's management.
"The season's almost back around. I can't go into camp with things on my mind. I've got a job. I've got to do it."


INSIDE
Plan for Exchanges Canceled
The New York and American Stock Exchanges have canceled plans for a new trading complex and office tower on Wall Street, officials familiar with the project said.
Page 27.
Japan Stands Firm on Trade
Japan's Prime Minister said he planned to keep a hard line on trade disputes with Washington despite sweeping change in his country's political and economic systems.
Page 3.
Somalis Kill 3 Americans
Three Americans were killed, three others were wounded and three Pakistani peacekeepers were also wounded when their helicopter was shot down by gunmen.
Page 2.
End to Woody Allen Inquiry
A state's attorney in Connecticut said he would not pursue sexual molestation charges against Woody Allen, citing the trauma it would cause his adopted daughter.
Page 25.


Classical Music in Review
Four Nations Ensemble Merkin Concert Hall


NEWS SUMMARY
International 2-5  MANDELA SEEKS END TO SANCTIONS
Nelson Mandela, in a speech to the United Nations, called for an end to all remaining economic sanctions against South Africa, a move that is expected to revive foreign investment in that country.  1


CHRONICLE
KATHRYN ZAREMBA is finally going to Tiffany &amp; Company, but she doesn't plan to buy anything.
In fact, it will be the other way round.
On Monday, Tiffany will present Ms.
Zaremba with a little token.
Needless to say, this doesn't happen to everyone, but then everyone isn't Miss Zaremba.
She is starring in the Off Broadway production of "Annie Warbucks." Her 10th birthday party will be held on the main floor of Tiffany in the early evening, and her sister, ELISABETH, who is also in the show and who will be 14 a few days later, will be a joint celebrant.


Mathematically Alive, but Numbers Are Numbing
Forget about a miracle on Blue Jays Way.
Forget about the sweep.
Forget about the Yankees.
They still have eight games left, but the rest of the season has deteriorated into an agonizing formality for an overachieving team that journeyed so far and has plummeted so swiftly.
Knowing that their pennant hopes had shrunk considerably before they even played one inning at the Skydome tonight, the Yankees did not halt their drastic descent.
They stumbled along, mesmerized by Juan Guzman's dominance and stunned by Jimmy Key's erratic pitching, and watched their minute chance shrink even more as the Blue Jays danced to a 7-3 victory.


Don't Follow China on Nuclear Tests
China is preparing to detonate a nuclear warhead underground, according to U.S. intelligence.
That has prompted American weapons labs to pressure President Clinton to resume nuclear testing.
It would be perverse for China to test, and doubly perverse for the U.S. to follow suit.
How will the resumption of American tests help Mr.
Clinton get a global ban on testing?
Before the President decides whether or not to test, he has to ask himself that question.


Oracle Agrees to a Fine Over Accounting Moves
When an apparently charmed front-runner stumbles, there is a sense of the tragic.
When the fall is examined closely, the mood sometimes shifts to slapstick.
That may be the case with the Oracle Systems Corporation, the gifted software design company that simply could not count.
Without admitting wrongdoing, Oracle agreed yesterday to pay a Federal fine of $100,000 to settle a complaint by the Securities and Exchange Commission accusing the company of numerous accounting irregularities in the late 1980's and early in this decade.


Julian Semyonov, A Prolific Novelist And Scenarist, 61
Julian Semyonov, a prolific Russian author of spy novels and thrillers whose crime fiction often portrayed the dark side of Russian life, died in the Kremlin Hospital in Moscow on Sept. 14.
He was 61 years old.
The cause was a heart attack, although he had been incapacitated for several years as the result of a stroke, said John Calder, president of Riverrun Press in England.


Mr. Dinkins and the Schools
Mayor David Dinkins wants to overhaul New York City's school system.
He's got some good ideas, but two questions leap out on the first reading of his plan: Can he get the State Legislature to pass them, and how can the city afford them?
The schools looked bad enough before the asbestos mess.
Then thousands of families were disrupted because the schools couldn't open on schedule.
That only deepened New Yorkers' despair about a system that seems increasingly preoccupied with politics rather than education.
Now it is a front-burner issue in the mayoral campaign.


SMOKERS WILL PAY, DRINKERS WILL NOT
President Clinton has decided not to ask Congress to raise taxes on alcoholic beverages to help pay for his overhaul of the health care system, a White House spokesman said today.
The Administration will, as expected, ask for a levy on large corporations that choose not to join the regional health insurance purchasing cooperatives known as health alliances, said Kevin Anderson, the White House spokesman on health issues.


Norodom Sihanouk Returns to the Throne in Cambodia


Suicide Doctor Gets a Trial Date, and a Warning
Warning Dr.
Jack Kevorkian not to aid in any more suicides, a judge today set a Feb. 15 trial date for the retired pathologist on a charge of violating the Michigan law against assisted suicide.
"I want you to warn your client that I order him to obey all laws," Judge Thomas E. Jackson of Detroit Recorders' Court told Michael A. Schwartz, a lawyer for Dr.
Kevorkian.
The judge also warned the doctor, who has been allowed to remain free without posting bail, that he could be jailed if he assisted in any more suicides.


For G.M. and Union, It Is a Matter of Jobs
At least a week before the bargaining begins in earnest, the goals of the General Motors Corporation and the United Automobile Workers union for their new labor contract are coming into focus: The U.A.W. wants to preserve jobs; G.M. wants to shrink its blue-collar work force.
These aims are more compatible than they may seem.
To continue to employ U.A.W. workers, the union recognized long ago, G.M. must become leaner.
The prickly issues instead are how deep -- and how fast -- the nation's No. 1 auto maker can cut.


Andreotti's Accusers Have a Flimsy Case
To the Editor:
Your Sept. 13 article describing the efforts by former Prime Minister Giulio Andreotti of Italy to rebut charges by the Italian courts of association with the Mafia is mistaken and misleading.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
The Federal Reserve decided against any move to raise interest rates last month because economic growth was sluggish and inflation was abating.
Most economists say they believe the Fed embraced a similar neutral stance this week.
President Clinton reaffirmed the central bank's independence, saying he opposed nominating the heads of the Fed's 12 district banks.  [ Page 37. ]
The Administration's nominee to head the agency in charge of cleaning up bankrupt failed savings and loans, Stanley Tate, has been waiting since July for a Senate vote on his nomination.
He says the delay is prolonging problems at the Resolution Trust Corporation.  [ 37. ]
Orders for big-ticket items like cars and computers rose in August for the second time in three months, advancing 2 percent, to a seasonally adjusted $131.2 billion in August.  [ 45. ] Companies
Pressure is mounting on Paramount's board to consider QVC Inc's $9.9 billion offer at Monday morning's special board meeting, because it could be worth far more than Viacom's bid, which has tumbled in value to $7.8 billion from its initial $8.2 billion.  [ 37. ]
General Motors is headed toward employing only 200,000 hourly workers, down from 265,000 now, but a deadline of 1996 seems too early for either G.M. or the U.A.W.  [ 37. ]
An Apple Computer executive was laid off and sued the company.
Albert A. Eisenstat, executive vice president, had been in charge of Apple's legal affairs.  [ 39. ]
Oracle Systems agreed to pay a Federal fine of $100,000 to settle an S.E.C. complaint accusing it of accounting irregularities.
The software design company did not admit wrongdoing.  [ 39. ]  International
A Federal appeals court removed a large obstacle from President Clinton's effort to pass the North American Free Trade Agreement, deciding the pact could be submitted to Congress without an environmental impact statement.  [ 1. ]
OPEC ministers are considering how to push up prices in the midst of their worst crisis in seven years, with prices around $17 a barrel -- equal to the price 20 years ago, adjusted for inflation.  [ 45. ]
Grand Metropolitan P.L.C. chose George Bull chief executive, succeeding Sir Allen Sheppard, who remains chairman.  [ 39. ] Markets
The New York and American stock exchanges canceled a plan to build an enormous new trading complex and office tower on Wall Street, officials familiar with the project said.  [ 25. ]
Nasdaq shares sold short and not yet covered rose to another record high in the latest month.  [ 49. ]
The stock market's worst week since February ended with a whimper, as most market indicators were flat or up only modestly.
The Dow average lost 70.14 points for the week.  [ 38. ]
Treasury bond prices rose on the Fed's neutral stance.
The 30-year Treasury bond rose 13/32 of a point.  [ 46. ]
Coffee futures prices settled above the key level of 80 cents a pound as the new Association of Coffee Producing Countries made a bid to shore up the market by withholding a portion of beans.  [ 48. ]
The dollar slipped against the German mark and other European currencies.
Gold prices also retreated.  [ 48. ] Your Money
The level of health insurance proposed by President Clinton is more generous than most Americans now have.
But people who work for large corporations that provide a wealth of benefits at low cost could eventually see their benefits dwindle.  [ 35. ]
Wireless cable partnerships are being promoted, but whatever the lure of technology deals, there are no guarantees.
Allen R. Myerson: Investing.  [ 35. ]
Asset allocation funds are the latest mutual fund offerings, and experts caution buyers should check managers' credentials.  [ 35. ]


Eagles Move Bahr In And Send Ruzek Out
The Philadelphia Eagles waived kicker ROGER RUZEK yesterday and gave his job to the former Giant MATT BAHR.
Ruzek was signed by the Eagles as a free agent in 1989 and went on to lead the team in scoring from 1990 to 1992.
But so far this season, Ruzek had faltered, connecting on only 6 of 10 field goal attempts in the preseason and only 2 of 4 in the team's first two regular-season games.
After Ruzek suffered an injury at Green Bay, the club signed Bahr, who was released by the Giants during training camp this year.


Stocks End a Bad Week On a Mostly Flat Note
The stock market's worst week since February ended yesterday not with a bang but a whimper, as most market indicators were flat or up only modestly in slow trading.
The Dow Jones industrial average lost 70.14 points for the week -- after losses of 37.45 points on Monday and then 38.56 points on Tuesday -- to give the Dow its worst loss in points since the trading week that ended on Feb. 19, the week President Clinton's budget plans sent the market down 70.25 points.


Clinton Links Gun Control to Health Care Savings
President Clinton made an impassioned appeal today for gun control, saying the nation will never be able to get its health care costs down if the streets continue to be a battleground for armed teen-agers.
Mr.
Clinton, speaking at a seaside juvenile rehabilitation center, chose to make his link between health care and crime prevention in Florida, where much attention was drawn in the last year over the shooting deaths of nine foreign tourists in robbery attempts.


A Shift on Interest Rates
Surprising economists, the Federal Reserve has moved away from raising interest rates after it concluded in August that economic growth was sluggish and inflation was abating.
Most economists say the Federal Reserve reaffirmed this neutral stance on Tuesday, meaning it was not leaning toward raising or lowering rates.
Business Day, page 37.


Corrections
A brief notice yesterday about the scheduled debate between the candidates in the Democratic runoff for New York City Comptroller has become outdated because of a change in arrangements.
The debate, between Elizabeth Holtzman and Alan G. Hevesi, is now set for 11 P.M. to 11:30 P.M. tomorrow on Channel 13.


A Cure for Paperwork, Or Just New Headaches?
President Clinton's promise to cut the mounting paperwork clogging the American health system will be welcomed by consumers befuddled by complex benefit forms.
And it could save a great deal of money for doctors and hospital administrators who have to employ staffs to cope with the bewildering range of forms and requirements imposed by insurers.
But at the same time, critics are asking whether Mr.
Clinton's proposed new layers of state and Federal agencies will simply replace one set of costly bureaucratic headaches with another.


Sports of The Times; Why Cuba Should Never Turn Pro
SEVEN O'CLOCK Thursday night on the Gulf, and 800 bodies are packed into a makeshift arena at the Biloxi Belle Casino Resort.
They are fight fans and casino goers.
Many are smoking, pushing the envelope on the room's ventilation system, and others are drinking at their seats.
The crowd is primed for a six-bout evening of boxing.
The premier attraction is welterweight Donald (Tiger) Stokes, a k a the pride of Gulfport.
Before Stokes, however, we must wade through five other gruesome fights.


RESULTS PLUS
GOLF  61-Year-Old Vying With Crop of Rookies  Jim McMurtrey of Danville, Calif., beat Jackie Cummings of Tuscaloosa, Ala., the 1990 champion, 2 and 1, yesterday to reach the semifinals of the United States Senior Amateur Championship in Charlottesville, Va.
McMurtrey is 61 years old.
The other semifinalists are 55 and in their first Senior Amateur: Jerry Nelson of Warsaw, Ind.; Joe Ungvary of Cuyahoga Falls, Ohio, and Robert Housen, the New Jersey State Amateur champion from Brielle. (AP) Two Long Putts for the Lead: Bill Glasson, who was tied for the first-round lead, bogeyed three of his last six holes yesterday and Jim McGovern took advantage with two 30-foot birdie putts to take a one-stroke lead after two rounds of the $800,000 B.C.
Open in Endicott, N.Y. (AP)


Study Hard, Show Promise, Earn a No-Debt Degree
In the late 1980's, Gail Triner deided to give up a 15-year career in the financial industry and a $70,000 salary to pursue a doctorate in history at Columbia Universeity.
She could afford it on one condition: After the first year, she would need full financial assistance to cover tuition and expenses.
Loans were out of the question, because she and her husband, Carter Kaneen, a financial analyst, had just taken out a mortgage on their Manhattan apartment.
Still, she felt it was time to change careers, and set out to become an academic.
Mr.
Kaneen's salary has covered their mortgage and living expenses, which they pared considerably, for six academic years.
At 41, Ms.
Triner is now finishing her dissertation on Brazilian economic history and preparing for her first teaching post.


Q &amp; A
Foreign Stock Investing
Q Are there ways to invest in foreign stocks other than American depository receipts?
SHELDON ZASLOW, Bay Shore, L.I.
A Along with A.D.R.'s, which are traded on American exchanges, investors might buy shares of foreign companies by opening a foreign brokerage or custodian account and buying on exchanges abroad.


For Computer Convention, Be Sure to Pack Vision
Not since George Bush was under fire for what he called "the vision thing" has any chief executive -- whether government or corporate -- drawn so much criticism and commentary on that subject as Louis V. Gerstner Jr. after a remark he made two months ago.
At the time, the new I.B.M. chairman was announcing a dreadful financial result for the company, a dividend cut and another round of shedding workers and plants.
"The last thing I.B.M. needs right now," Mr. Gerstner said, "is a vision."


So Far No Meeting of Minds Or the Mayoral Candidates
Mayor David N. Dinkins does not want a debate without George J. Marlin, the Conservative Party candidate for mayor.
The Mayor's main rival, Rudolph W. Giuliani, does not want a debate with Mr.
Marlin.
That is the nub of a sputtering, stuttering argument that is as old as politics but reveals much about the dynamics of this race.
In short, Mr.
Giuliani is behaving like a lordly front-runner, showing no particular eagerness for the exposure -- or the risks -- that a debate could provide.
For his part, Mr.
Dinkins has dropped a bit of the incumbent's usual reserve and is spoiling for a fight, but only on his terms: in tandem with Mr.
Marlin, who has made no secret that he thinks Mr.
Giuliani is a traitor to Republican principles.


Review/Dance; Modern Forms for Ancient Roots
Liu Feng-Shueh, a distinguished dance scholar and educator who is also one of Taiwan's modern-dance pioneers, displays her breadth in an excellent program that will be presented through this weekend by her Neo-Classic Dance Company.
The opening on Thursday night at the Taipei Theater in the McGraw-Hill Building (1221 Avenue of the Americas, at 49th Street) got off to a splendid start with Ms.
Liu's re-creation of ancient Chinese dances and ceremonies.
A second category on the program included works overtly inspired by Chinese themes but fusing contemporary Western dance techniques with idioms derived from Chinese sources.
A third type, somewhat less successful, falls into the international mainstream of modern dance, although here, too, the choreographer's special sensibility is seen in movements from classical Chinese opera and the martial arts.


The Black Caucus Gets Mugged
In the days ahead, the Congressional Black Caucus may find itself in an advantageous position.
In a Congress riven with discord over Nafta, the economy and other issues, the Black Caucus counts 39 votes in the House, and 1 in a Senate that often produces squeaker votes.
But the Black Caucus's chairman, Kweisi Mfume, Democrat of Maryland, seems not to understand the uses of power.
When Mr.
Mfume embraced Louis Farrakhan last week in Washington, he temporarily lost the savvy he has shown while legislating, and behaved like a novice.
Mr.
Mfume was had.
So was the Black Caucus.


Woman Hurt By Stolen Jeep Clings to Life
Friends of a woman dragged for blocks in upper Manhattan by a stolen Jeep on Thursday evening gathered at her hospital bedside yesterday in hopes that the Yugoslav exchange student would survive despite her severe injuries.
The woman, Valentina Popovic, 25, of Valjevo, Serbia, was listed in extremely critical condition last night at St.
Luke's-Roosevelt Hospital Center, said Barbara Quinn, a hospital spokeswoman.
She said that the student was suffering from "massive body injuries" and that her right leg had been amputated below the knee.


Dinkins Plans to Turn Shelter Into Housing and Theater
Mayor David N. Dinkins went to the politically pivotal neighborhood of Washington Heights in Manhattan yesterday to announce an ambitious plan to transform a state armory, which now houses an unpopular homeless shelter, into an apartment tower, an indoor track, a community theater and a day care center.
He also pledged to ask the City Council and the city's pension board to lift prohibitions against investment in South Africa.
He made his pledge after yesterday's appeal by Nelson Mandela for an end to such sanctions.


CHRONICLE
MAMDOUHA BOBST has given away a lot of money, but the $5 million she's just parted with "really makes my heart feel warm," she said.
The money has been given to the Animal Medical Center to kick off a campaign to raise $30 million for the nonprofit veterinary hospital by 2000.


Review/Film; Warning: Warlock at Work
"Warlock," which opened yesterday at neighborhood theaters, dishes up stylish satanism for the druids-and-rune-stones set.
It was directed by Anthony Hickox ("Waxwork," "Waxwork II," "Hellraiser III"), who has extremely limited interests but a definite flair for hellish visual tricks.
For instance, there is the way that Julian Sands, who plays the title role, makes his entrance.
The film has barely begun when an eclipse occurs, the world turns ominous and a woman busy dressing for a date becomes the devil's bride.
It takes Mr.
Hickox no time at all to move from her conception of the devil's child to the birth, seconds later, of a pulsating mound of protoplasm.
The protoplasm quickly evolves into Mr.
Sands, who kills the woman, then locates important information that has been etched on her skin.
The protoplasm also finds time to eat the woman's dog.


Observer; Hopeless Before Coreopsis
Today we stick to the garden.
Editor's orders.
Last week we sent him a piece so rife with error that it took seven sub-editors with seven mops to get it clean.
Which is to say, to scrub out the mistakes before we went to press.
He was furious.
That's because earlier, just at cocktail time, he had come all the way over to the Black Bird to ask if I had checked all my facts.
"Checked!?" I roared, pointing out in my roar diminuendo, reserved for insolent editors, that I didn't have to check these particular facts, as I remembered everything vividly.


Fed Took A Neutral Rate Stand
Concluding that economic growth was sluggish and inflation was abating, the Federal Reserve announced today that it had decided last month that there was no need for it to lean toward raising interest rates.
In a surprise to many economists, the Fed took this action unanimously at its Aug. 17 meeting, and most economists say they believe it embraced a similar neutral stance at its meeting on Tuesday, meaning it was not leaning toward raising or lowering rates.


Classical Music in Review
World Music Institute on Interpretations Merkin Concert Hall


CLINTON'S HEALTH CARE PLAN: White House Memo; On Health, Clinton Finds Heaven Is in the Details
Before ABC News's "town hall" on health care went on the air Thursday night, Ted Koppel came out to instruct the audience on the pace of live television.
The "Nightline" host told those in the crowd in the Tampa Bay Performing Arts Center to keep their questions for President Clinton "pithy and to the point."


Brett's Decision Today
GEORGE BRETT, Kansas City's most celebrated athlete over the past two decades, has scheduled a news conference for this afternoon to announce his plans for next season.
Brett refused to say before last night's home game against California whether he had decided to retire and accept a job as a Royals vice president or whether he would play another year.
Brett is finishing the option year of a five-year contract, playing his 20th season, all in a Royals uniform.
He and the Royals have been haggling all week over a contract to play next year; the Royals have indicated that they would like Brett to come back and play in 1994.
The front office job offer was written into his last contract.


Financing the Health Plan
No new taxes on alcoholic drinks.
Stiff new taxes on cigarettes.
Taxes, too, for certain large employers.
Page 8.


R.T.C. Nominee in Senate Limbo
Stanley Tate, the Clinton Administration's nominee to head the agency in charge of cleaning up failed savings and loans, has been waiting since July for a Senate vote on his nomination.
He complained bitterly today that the delay was prolonging management problems at the agency.
But key senators are insisting that the management problems be fixed before the nomination goes forward, creating a tense standoff between the nominee and the committee that must confirm him.


Paramount Is Being Pressed To Study QVC Bid Closely
As Monday morning's special board meeting at Paramount Communications nears, pressure on the 15 directors is mounting for them to consider QVC Network Inc.'s now $9.9 billion offer, if for no other reason than it could be worth $2.1 billion more to Paramount's shareholders than a rival offer from Viacom Inc.
Viacom's initial $8.2 billion bid has tumbled in value to $7.8 billion.
"It would appear reckless for the board not to consider an offer with such a large premium, and that is one thing that directors are not allowed to be," said Nell Minow, a principal at Lens Inc., a Washington money management firm.


Panel Approves Proposal For a Stadium in Hartford
A select committee of the General Assembly today approved Gov.
Lowell P. Weicker Jr.'s proposal to build a $252 million football stadium in Hartford if -- and the ifs are still many -- the New England Patriots of the National Football League can be induced to move here from Foxboro, Mass.
The 28-to-4 vote set up a final debate on Monday before the full House and Senate that supporters believe will be just as lopsided in favor of a measure that for the moment is entirely conditional: only if the team is sold to an investors' group that has promised to relocate here, and only if the league then approves the move, which has not even been formally proposed, would any state money be spent.


Traffic Alert
TODAY  PEARL STREET will be closed today and tomorrow betwwn Park Row and Centre Street from 6 A.M. to 7 P.M.
TOMORROW  AMERICANA FESTIVAL 47th Street will be closed between Lexington and Seventh Avenues from 11 A.M. to 6 P.M.
AFRICAN AMERICAN DAY PARADE Adam Clayton Powell Boulevard will be closed from 111th to 142d Streets starting at 1 P.M.
McBURNEY'S SIXTH AVENUE FAIR Avenue of the Americas will be closed between 14th and 23d Streets from 10 A.M. to 7 P.M.
THIRD AVENUE MERCHANTS Third Avenue will be closed between 14th and 34th Streets from 10 A.M. to 7 P.M.
Also, President Clinton will arrive at Kennedy International Airport mid-morning Sunday for a stop in Queens at an undisclosed site and a fund-raiser in mid-Manhattan that evening.
The New York City Transportation Department advises vehicle operators to avoid the airport area.


Giuliani Reaches Out to the Elderly


Alvin Hasenberg, Confectionary Executive, 76
Alvin Hasenberg, an executive in the confectionary industry, died on Sept. 16 at the Robert Wood Johnson University Hospital in New Brunswick, N.J.
He was 76.
The cause was heart failure, his family said.


Executive Changes
AMERITECH CORP., Chicago, the regional telephone operating company, appointed James Firestone president of its newly formed consumers services unit.
INTER-TEL INC., Chandler, Ariz., a telecommunications concern, named Kurt Kneip chief financial officer and vice president, succeeding Ralph Marsh, who will remain as treasurer.


Study Hard, Show Promise, Earn a No-Debt Degree
In the late 1980's, Gail Triner deided to give up a 15-year career in the financial industry and a $70,000 salary to pursue a doctorate in history at Columbia Universeity.
She could afford it on one condition: After the first year, she would need full financial assistance to cover tuition and expenses.
Loans were out of the question, because she and her husband, Carter Kaneen, a financial analyst, had just taken out a mortgage on their Manhattan apartment.
Still, she felt it was time to change careers, and set out to become an academic.
Mr.
Kaneen's salary has covered their mortgage and living expenses, which they pared considerably, for six academic years.
At 41, Ms.
Triner is now finishing her dissertation on Brazilian economic history and preparing for her first teaching post.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.00
3.06
3.19
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
2.91
2.90
2.79
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.02
3.04
2.82
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
4.94
4.99
5.91
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
6.03
6.06
7.35
TELEPHONE BONDS
7.06
7.10
8.40
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
5.47
5.47
6.39
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Studies Confirm Potential Cancer Risk From Coated Breast Implants
Studies have confirmed that silicone breast implants with polyurethane plastic coatings break down and send potentially cancer-causing chemicals into women's bodies in small amounts, Federal officials said today.
The research, by Bristol-Myers Squibb, the company whose subsidiary, the Medical Engineering Corporation, made the implants until 1991, has shown that women who have the implants also have a substance in their blood or urine called 2-toluene diamine, or TDA, which has been found to cause cancer when fed to rats.


A Corporate Image Problem; Fighting for the Rights To the Ameritec(h) Flag
Ameritec v.
Ameritech is more that just a battle over an 'h' this time.
Now it's over a $30 million image campaign.
As part of the promotional campaign, the Ameritech Corporation, the Chicago-based telephone company that serves much of the Midwest, is wiping out its old signature as a Baby Bell company and raising a freshly designed corporate logo.


Jets' Lewis Ranks First In a Cast of Non-equals
When the Jets made Mo Lewis their third-round draft pick of 1991, he was the cornerstone of their plans to upgrade their linebacking.
Now, Lewis is not only that but also their leading pass rusher, with two quarterback sacks.
None of this comes as a surprise to the linebackers coach, Foge Fazio.
The drafting of Lewis, the only rookie to start for the Jets in 1991, was the first move in Fazio's program to rebuild his corps from one of the team's weakest units to one of its strongest.


Mormon Scholar Says She Was Excommunicated


Corrections
Pictures yesterday with an article about catchwords in the health care debate were reversed in some copies.
The picture of Thomas F. McLarty 3d, White House chief of staff, shown smiling, should have been at the left; the picture of Senator Bob Dole should have been at the right.


Corrections
A Critic's Notebook article on Wednesday about the CBS news magazine program "60 Minutes" misspelled the name of a correspondent.
He is Steve Kroft.


Officials in U.S. Are Moving For a Removal of Sanctions
Officials in Washington and throughout the country moved swiftly today to wipe away economic and trade sanctions against South Africa in reponse to Nelson Mandela's call for an end to his country's economic isolation.
But despite a flurry of activity in Congress and local governments like New York City, experts warned against any expectations of an immediate flood of capital into South Africa, in part because of the continuing political violence there.
After Mr.
Mandela's address to the United Nations, President Clinton called on states, counties and cities to move quickly to lift their sanctions.


Clinton Links Gun Control to Health Care Savings
President Clinton made an impassioned appeal today for gun control, saying the nation will never be able to get its health care costs down if the streets continue to be a battleground for armed teen-agers.
Mr.
Clinton, speaking at a seaside juvenile rehabilitation center, chose to make his link between health care and crime prevention in Florida, where much attention was drawn in the last year over the shooting deaths of nine foreign tourists in robbery attempts.


METRO DIGEST
WHITE HOUSE AID FOR DINKINS
Leading national Democrats are increasingly worried about the re-election prospects of Mayor Dinkins, fearing that his defeat could hurt the party's image as the voice of America's cities and complicate President Clinton's own re-election, so Mr.
Clinton is traveling to New York for a Dinkins fund-raising dinner.
Page 1.
Dinkins and his main opponent, Rudolph W. Giuliani, spar over debating. Page 26.
The Mayor takes his campaign for re-election to Washington Heights.
Page 26.
NEW YORK CITY
EXCHANGES DROP PLAN FOR COMPLEX
The New York Stock Exchange and American Stock Exchange have canceled a plan to build an new trading complex and office tower on Wall Street, public and private officials familiar with the project said.
Page 27.
DRAGGED WOMAN IN CRITICAL CONDITION
Friends of a woman dragged for blocks by a stolen Jeep in Morningside Heights Thursday evening gathered at her hospital bedside in hopes that the Yugoslav exchange student, who was in extremely critical condition, would survive despite her massive injuries.
Page 27.
PROTEST AT SCHOOLS HEADQUARTERS
Hundreds of parents and local school officials upset at asbestos, leaks and other squalors in decrepit schools and a week of having their children moved about like pawns, tied up traffic on the Brooklyn Bridge and staged a noisy, angry demonstration at the headquarters of the Board of Education in Brooklyn Heights.
Page 27.
DEFENDANT SINGLED OUT IN SMUGGLING
Federal prosecutors in the Golden Venture case have narrowed their focus to the role of a single defendant, who was charged with manslaughter in the deaths of six passengers who tried to swim ashore from the ship when it wrecked off Rockaway Peninsula on June 6.
Page 28.
REGION
STADIUM PLAN IS APPROVED
A committee of the Connecticut General Assembly approved Gov.
Lowell P. Weicker Jr.'s proposal to build a football stadium in Hartford if the Patriots move to the city.
Page 29.
PRINCIPAL DENIES ABUSE CHARGE
An elementary school principal in Belleville, N.J., at an arraignment attended by parents who were there to support him, pleaded not guilty to charges of sexually abusing children.
Page 28.
AUTOPSY CAN'T PROVIDE ALL ANSWERS
An autopsy has solved the medical mystery of why a 7-year-old boy died after collapsing in gym class, but Mount Laurel, N.J., school officials and parents have no easy answers for the questions that his second-grade classmates are asking about life and death.
Page 28.
SITE OF CLAIMED SIGHTINGS OFF-LIMITS
Joseph Januszkiewicz, whose claim that the Virgin Mary appears to him has drawn thousands to his backyard in Marlboro Township, N.J., says he will post "No Trespassing" signs around the property.
Page 28.
REPORT SAYS EMPIRE IS POORLY MANAGED
A state advisory panel has concluded that Empire Blue Cross and Blue Shield, New York State's largest medical insurer, has had "extraordinarily poor management." Page 28.
About New York by Michael T. Kaufman 27
Traffic Alert 27


For G.M. and Union, It Is a Matter of Jobs
At least a week before the bargaining begins in earnest, the goals of the General Motors Corporation and the United Automobile Workers union for their new labor contract are coming into focus: The U.A.W. wants to preserve jobs; G.M. wants to shrink its blue-collar work force.
These aims are more compatible than they may seem.
To continue to employ U.A.W. workers, the union recognized long ago, G.M. must become leaner.
The prickly issues instead are how deep -- and how fast -- the nation's No. 1 auto maker can cut.


Trials of a Small Business in New York City
To the Editor:
Every day I see something in the newspaper or on television explaining how New York City is going to make it easier for small businesses to operate because they are the nucleus of a successful economy.


Troubled Man Arrested Back On West Side
A month after he was released from a Queens psychiatric center to live with his son in Connecticut, Larry Hogue, the mentally ill man who for years frightened residents of the Upper West Side, was arrested yesterday back in Manhattan.
Mr.
Hogue, 49, had violated the terms of his release from Creedmoor Psychiatric Center in Queens, under which he was barred from coming to New York City without giving the authorities 24 hours' notice, the police said.


Hey, Who Let Her Song In Here?
Scandals have increasingly short shelf lives these days.
In 1984, Vanessa Williams became the first Miss America to have her title revoked, after sexually explicit photos of her appeared in Penthouse magazine.
While Ms.
Williams went on to become a Grammy-nominated singer, the pageant's reputation was tarnished.


Competitive Golf a Family Endeavor
FOR Trish Ely, 9, and her brother, Billy, 6, golfing with their parents at the Lake Mohawk Golf Course here is routine family fun.
Following their parents, Harvey Ely 3d, 39, and Christine Ely, 37, on the hilly fairways, the children use clubs with graphite shafts that have been trimmed to their size.
Both Mr. and Mrs.
Ely have played competitive golf for several years and have won major club tournaments.


YELTSIN SAYS FOES ARE LESS RESOLUTE AS TALKS ARE SEEN
President Boris N. Yeltsin of Russia declared today that resistance by lawmakers isolated in the darkened and encircled Parliament building was "on its last gasp," while leaders of the opposition there issued defiant appeals for mass resistance.
As Mr.
Yeltsin's bid to disband the Congress of People's Deputies went into its fifth night, the scene grew more menacing at the monumental White House, as the riverfront headquarters of Parliament is known.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  American League  KANSAS CITY ROYALS -- Announced the retirement of George Brett, designated hitter-first baseman, and named him vice president of baseball operations.
Hockey  National Hockey League  HARTFORD WHALERS -- Agreed to terms with Eric Weinrich and Allen Pedersonon, defensemen, on multiyear contracts.
Sent George Maneluk, goaltender; Corey Beaulieu, Rob Cowie, Martin Hamrlik, Scott Humeniuk, Karl Johnston, Garth Premak, Jukka Suomalainen and Steve Yule, defensemen; Denis Chalifoux, Louis Dumont and Jarrett Reid, centers; Igor Alexandrov, Igor Chibirev, Scott Daniels, Craig Lyons and Kevin Smyth, left wings, and Paul Guay and Trevor Stienburg, right wings, to Springfield of the American Hockey League.
NEW JERSEY DEVILS -- Sent Dean Malkoc, defenseman, and Bill Armstrong, Mike Bodnarchuk, Jason Miller, Krzysztof Oliwa and Brian Suillivan, forwards, to Albany of the American Hockey League.
WASHINGTON CAPITALS -- Sent Duane Derksen, goalie, to Milwaukee of the International Hockey League.


At the Oak Room Door
ALFRED J. CRISTINA is at the door of the Oak Room in the Plaza Hotel.
He is smiling and shaking hands with the couple who have just walked in as though they are friends he hasn't seen in some time.
In fact, he last saw them only a few weeks ago, and they aren't friends, exactly.
But William and Susan Courtney of Red Bank, N.J., have been dining in this room for 15 years, and they, like many other regular patrons, think of Mr.
Cristina, more generally known as Fred, as "one of the great attractions" that keeps them coming back.
Mr.
Cristina, 72, is the maitre d'hotel at the Oak Room.
It has been his working home for 54 years, a record in the hotel and perhaps even in the city's restaurant business.
He has greeted and served George M. Cohan, Clara Bow, Lily Pons, Bette Davis, Maria Callas, Elizabeth Taylor, Mickey Mantle, James Cagney, Joan Sutherland, Ingrid Bergman, Leonard Bernstein, James Brown, Barbra Streisand, Muhammad Ali.
In fact, name any of the glamorous personalities of the last half-century, and chances are they've come into his orbit.


Hasta la Vista, Squirrels: Urban Terminator
THE SQUIRRELS swarmed over the deck like pirates, fierce and greedy, scampering up the fire escape, pausing briefly on the ledge, then plundering the shrubs, the little trees in their tubs, the dainty herbs.
When I ran out to shoo them away, they glanced at me, snarled and went on about their nasty business.
That's what got me nuts.
These bushy-tailed rodents were dissing me on my turf.
Were they rabid, were they maddened by the Farmers' Almanac prediction of a harsh winter or did they just make me for a city bumpkin who couldn't handle wildlife outside a zoo?
I telephoned the city.
When officials can't deliver, they tend to assume a sympathetic but bored and patronizing tone.
The animal bureaucrats I called all sounded as if they were busy battling dinosaurs in Jurassic Park.
Squirrels?
Later.


Will Mideast Moderates at Last Prevail in the Peace Struggle?
To the Editor:
There is an interesting precedent for the current negotiations between the Government of Israel and the Palestine Liberation Organization.
According to Maj.
Gen.
Sir John Glubb (Glubb Pasha), after the Ottoman Empire's collapse in 1918 and the Turkish administrators' repatriation, not a single Arab in the liberated territories could be found who had any experience in civil government.


Gifts Help N.A.A.C.P. Focus on Economic Agenda
A few days before his death last January, Reginald F. Lewis, one of the country's wealthiest businessmen, dictated instructions to his wife from his hospital bed about giving favorite charities a share of his sizable fortune, including $2 million for the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People.
The gift, and the creation of the Reginald F. Lewis Memorial Endowment, were announced at the annual N.A.A.C.P. convention in July and inspired an unexpected pledge of $1 million a few weeks later from Alphonse Fletcher Jr., a 27-year-old investor who regarded Mr.
Lewis as a role model, adviser and friend.


A Back-to-Basics Rental Follows the Condo Decade
THE vagaries of the housing market are on display in the Rego Park section of Queens.
On land where one builder had hoped to put up a condominium with the characteristics of luxury housing a few years ago, another has gone into construction on a back-to-basics rental walk-up.
Putting it differently: Where once one builder had hoped that professionals with rising incomes would be willing to invest in new housing, another will seek out renters with more modest household incomes.


Sniff, Sniff
Thierry Mugler introduces a perfume, at Saks, Sept. 20.


Money Is the Root of All Expansion Hopefuls
During the National Football League's expansion meetings last week, during the informal talks among club owners in the coming weeks, during the voting in four weeks to choose two expansion teams, one factor overrides all others: money, big money.
The would-be club owners need it, stadium construction or reconstruction needs it, and you, the public, will provide much of it.
Pro football is not for the faint of pocketbook.
The six bidding groups from five cities have tried to show the club owners that they can handle the $140 million franchise fee.
In recent weeks, the bidders have beefed up their syndicates with wealthy investors.
They know the owners want to avoid financial disasters such as Victor Kiam's fire sale last year of the New England Patriots.


Cordelia Hodges, Henry Tilghman
Cordelia Ritchie Hodges, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Fletcher Hodges 3d of New York, was married yesterday to Henry Richardson Tilghman, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Thomas S. Tilghman of Trumbull, Conn.
The Rev.
Robert D. Edmonds performed the Episcopal ceremony at St.
Andrew's Church in Edgartown, Mass.
Mrs.
Tilghman, 29, is a lawyer at Mulnomah Defenders Inc., a law office in Portland, Ore.
She graduated from Kenyon College.
She and her husband received law degrees from Lewis and Clark University.
Her father is the president of Hodges Capital Management, an investment management firm in New York.


CLOSE TO YOU
Textures that increase your depth perception.


Russian Says Soviet Atom Arsenal Was Larger Than West Estimated
A top Russian official says Moscow's nuclear arsenal peaked seven years ago at 45,000 warheads -- 12,000 more than generally believed and twice the number held by the United States at the time.
The totalexceeded all estimates save those of the most hawkish analysts.
The official, Viktor N. Mikhailov, head of the Ministry of Atomic Energy, also says the Russian stockpile of highly enriched uranium is more than twice as large as commonly believed.
Uranium in this form is a principal component of most nuclear weapons.


From B to D, Mets Have Work Cut Out
The auditions, of course, have been the only thing worth witnessing at Shea for months.
And they have been everything auditions usually are, awkward, incomplete, rich with transcendent thrills and mortifying embarrassments.
Perhaps their greatest aspect of ridiculousness has been the infrequency with which they have been attended by the man for whom they have been held, General Manager Joe McIlvaine.


Sticking Necks Out
New jewelry at Elp Studio, Mayfair Hotel, Sept. 21.


POP BRIEFS
Birdsongs of the Mesozoic: 'The Fossil Record 1980-87' Cuneiform RUNE 55; CD and cassette.


Gracious Hosts in an Old-World Setting
LA Gondola feels like home.
The Hicksville restaurant is less than a year old, but Long Islanders have been there before.
It is the epitome of the warm, family-run Italian restaurants that once dominated the Island.
Long before neon, open kitchens and de rigueur wood-burning pizza ovens, dining rooms like La Gondola's, with well-spaced tables, Old World paintings and wall-size murals typified Island Italian restaurants.
In place of spotlights and track lighting, ornate multiple chandeliers and elegant wall sconces illuminated the rooms.


NICARAGUA STRIKE UNITES OLD FOES
As he unstacked the paving blocks of a huge barricade that had stopped traffic along the Pan-American Highway, Oscar Mejia, a 29-year-old electrician, appeared satisfied with the four-day transportation strike he had joined.
The strike this week led the Government on Friday to ease an increase in fuel prices and repeal new vehicle taxes, but Mr.
Mejia disagreed with the way some Government officials characterized the strikers.


EUROPE: FALL AND WINTER: What's New, From Soho to Salamanca -- Spain; An 'equestrian opera,' a landlocked lighthouse
After the stifling heat of summer, when even the hardiest Madrilenos do little more than stagger from beer to beer at the open-air terrazas along the Paseo de la Castellana, fall comes as a relief, a time when the city recovers its normal hectic rhythm and attention turns again to cultural events and social gatherings and eating out at night.
To kick things off, this year's Fall Festival includes an "equestrian opera," a musical show of North African horse traditions, beside the lake in the Casa de Campo park as well as theater, ballet and concerts.
At the Teatro Albeniz, 11 Calle de la Paz; 531 83 11, between Nov. 10 and 14, an "encounter" of Oriental, Arabic and Andalusian music is planned.
A Spanish operetta, "La Cancion del Olvido," is also playing at the Teatro de la Zarzuela, 4 Jovellanos; 429 82 25, through Oct. 10.


SEPTEMBER 19-25: Mandela Seeks Investment; South Africa's Blacks Get Their First Share of Power, And Sanctions Promptly Fall
Nelson Mandela and F.W. de Klerk began demobilizing their political forces last week, demonstrating their faith that South Africa's course of negotiated democracy is now all but irreversible.
First Mr. de Klerk assembled his docile Parliament to enact a law that will surrender some of the white Government's power to a multiparty council until the first universal elections next April.
Mr.
Mandela thereupon laid aside one of the last weapons of the liberation struggle.
He urged his allies in the West to call off the remaining sanctions against trade and investment.
The appeal at the United Nations was quickly heeded by states from New York to California and countries from Europe to New Zealand.


RECORD BRIEFS
Bartok: 'The Wooden Prince,' 'Cantata Profana' Soloists; Chicago Symphony Orchestra and Chorus (Cantata) conducted by Pierre Boulez.
Deutsche Grammophon 435 863-2; CD.


Cross-Country Hunt for Killers
They have staked out Bronx street corners, apartments and social clubs and fought to break through a wall of silence for more than a year.
But investigators seeking the killers of Carmelo Rivera, a 35-year-old bodega owner who became the mistaken target of a vigilante gang last August, received their first real break this month.
The police arrested a suspect in Beverly Hills, Calif., at a house belonging to the actress and singer Charo and, within seven days, tracked down and arrested another suspect in the killing of Mr.
Rivera, a bystander killed in an act of brutal street justice gone awry.


Mattingly Won't Play Blame Game
Don Mattingly spoke evenly and without emotion.
The Yankees are finished.
Mattingly knew it.
Although Mattingly did not say those words exactly, he basically offered his concession speech in the quiet visiting clubhouse at the Skydome today.
"There's a little bit of disappointment at this point," Mattingly said after the Blue Jays rumbled closer to their third straight division title with a 3-1 victory.
"I'm sure it'll hurt for a while. But once you get away from it all and get away from the grind of the season, you'll look back and see some positives."


A Clinton Cutback Upsets Environmentalists
To the dismay of some environmentalists, the first agency to wither away as the Clinton Administration reorganizes the the Federal Government may be their staunch ally, the White House Council on Environmental Quality.
The Administration, intent on cutting its payroll, originally included no money in its budget for the agency beyond Sept. 30, the end of the fiscal year, and the dozen staff members who have not already quit were given dismissal notices effective on that date.


Miami Helps Case for No. 1, but Hurts Its Image
The Miami Hurricanes barely preserved their status today as a contender for a national championship in a season that would be considered a transition year by programs with lesser talent.
But there was also a large, ugly step backward: a series of fights against the University of Colorado that cleared both benches, resulted in 12 ejections, overshadowed an emotional 35-29 victory over the Buffaloes and provided another reminder of the program's recurring problems.
Miami (3-0) won its 30th consecutive regular-season game but endured the fifth occasion in this decade in which the conduct of its athletes has become an issue.
Seven Hurricanes and five Colorado players were ejected after a series of confrontations delayed the game for more than 10 minutes with 20 seconds remaining in the first half.
The bench-clearing brawl reinforced the negative images of two programs known as much for their misconduct as their championship-level success and detracted from Miami's survival of a dramatic Colorado rally.


Did Steinbeck Know Yaddo?
To the Editor:
"Yaddo" (Sept. 19), about the artists' colony in Saratoga Springs, N.Y., said its founder was one Kate Trask.
This is the name of the madame in "East of Eden." Was Steinbeck suggesting that Yaddo was a whorehouse?
DR.
ANTHONY G. LAWRENCE  Lake Placid, N.Y.


Views on Health Care Aren't Universal
Americans are sure that there is a problem with health care - three quarters of all respondents in last week's New York Times/CBS News Poll thought that the current system was heading toward a crisis - but they don't always agree on what exactly is wrong and the ways it should be fixed.
Some of the disparities reflected the current system's problems.
Poorer people were more likely to be dissatisfied about the current coverage and cost of health care.
Black respondents were far less likely than white ones to say that their families had enough coverage


King and Roper Lead Army's Rout of V.M.I.
This time, Akili King had some help.
With Rick Roper running for 74 yards and 2 touchdowns and passing for 89 yards, Army improved its record to 2-1 with a methodical 31-9 victory today over hapless Virginia Military Institute (0-3) before 32,441 at Michie Stadium.
King, the sophomore fullback who had rushed for 357 yards in the Cadets' first two games, contributed 100 yards on 25 carries as Army made it two victories in attempts tries over Division I-AA opponents.
They lost, 42-21, at Duke last week and will now face six straight I-A teams, beginning with Akron here next Saturday.


LONG ISLAND JOURNAL
Nipped
TO the multitude of eclectic items left to the world by Andy Warhol add chiggers.
At a recent dedication of the new Warhol nature preserve in Montauk, everyone in attendance came down with a chigger infestation.


Venice Boat Trip
To the Editor: The Q &amp; A column on Aug. 1 contained an inquiry about Il Burchiello, the Venetian cruise boat.
On a trip to Italy this year, we took Il Burchiello on May 27 from Venice to Padua.
The boat left Piazza San Marco at 8:45 A.M. and apart from a stop in the first lock due to "a power plant outage," "no men available to work the lock," "not enough water from the Alps," which created a half-hour delay, there were no stops at any of the villas in the brochure, nor at any monuments, until the lunch stop at 1 P.M.


No Headline
I have eight judges absolutely ready, ready, ready to go to trial.
But there are no jurors.
So I have eight judges looking at the ceiling.
JUSTICE JOAN B. CAREY, administrative judge of the criminal branch of State Supreme Court in Manhattan.  [ 1:1. ]


Deborah E. Cashman, Jeffrey T. Ohl
Deborah Eileen Cashman, an associate at Ashland Management Inc., an investment company, was married yesterday to Jeffrey Taylor Ohl, an assistant vice president at Kidder Peabody &amp; Company.
Both work in New York.
The Rev.
Robert Clerkin officiated at St.
Joseph's Catholic Church in Garden City, L.I.
Mrs.
Ohl, 24, graduated cum laude from St.
Lawrence University.
She is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Vincent E. Cashman of Garden City.
Her father is a partner in J. C. Bradford &amp; Company, a securities brokerage, in New York.
Her mother, Judith L. Cashman, is of counsel to the Nassau County Attorney in Mineola, L.I.


Worry Time for Wall Street?
Is it finally time to jump ship?
On Wall Street, where awe over the longevity of the bull market has been giving way in some quarters to disbelief, many are worried that the answer could be yes.
Every widely watched indicator of stock market value has been flirting with historical danger levels, whether it be the dividend yield (too low) or the price of stocks divided by earnings (too high).
Privately held companies, sensing that the window of opportunity to sell shares to a very willing public might abruptly close, are filing their going-public documents as fast as their lawyers can review them.
Or even sooner.


In Defense of R.&amp; D.
To the Editor:
"The Risks for High Tech, When Non-Techies Take Over" (Sept. 5) quite correctly points out the risks for high-tech companies that are managed by cost-cutting non-techies who lack the technical background, insight and patience for success in high-tech industries.


BEST SELLERS: September 26, 1993
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Fiction
1
1
59
THE BRIDGES OF MADISON COUNTY, by Robert James Waller. (Warner, $16.95.) A photographer and a lonely farmer's wife in Iowa.
2
2
5
WITHOUT REMORSE, by Tom Clancy. (Putnam, $24.95.) John Kelly becomes involved in a Pentagon project to rescue prisoners held in North Vietnam.
3
3
24
LIKE WATER FOR CHOCOLATE, by Laura Esquivel. (Doubleday, $17.50.) Frustration, love, hope -- and recipes -- sampled by a woman on a Mexican ranch.
4
5
28
THE CLIENT, by John Grisham. (Doubleday, $23.50.) A deadly secret presents problems for a young boy.
5
7
3
THE GOLDEN MEAN, by Nick Bantock. (Chronicle Books, $17.95.) A sequel to "Griffin &amp; Sabine."
6
4
7
VANISHED, by Danielle Steel. (Delacorte, $23.95.) The abduction of their young son creates a crisis for a New York man and woman and for the woman's first lover.
7
6
8
STREETS OF LAREDO, by Larry McMurtry. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $25.) A Texas bounty hunter goes south of the border in pursuit of a train robber and killer.
8
8
3
STRIP TEASE, by Carl Hiaasen. (Knopf, $21.) The problems, political and sexual, of a Congressman.
9
11
14
PIGS IN HEAVEN, by Barbara Kingsolver. (HarperCollins, $22.) The stresses and strains that befall a mother and her adopted Cherokee daughter.
10
10
11
THE NIGHT MANAGER, by John le Carre. (Knopf, $24.) A Zurich hotelman's life in the world of arms dealers, dope smugglers and international terrorists.
11
13
9
A CASE OF NEED, by Michael Crichton writing as Jeffery Hudson. (Dutton, $18.95.) A 1968 novel about the mysterious death of a surgeon's daughter.
12
9
3
THE DEATH AND LIFE OF SUPERMAN, by Roger Stern. (Spectra/Bantam, $19.95.) A novel about the comic-book hero, including his rebirth in the near future.
13
15
2
CONSIDER THIS, SENORA, by Harriet Doerr. (Harcourt Brace, $21.95.) Four emigres from north of the border try to get accustomed to a Mexican village.
14
2
VIRTUAL LIGHT, by William Gibson. (Spectra/Bantam, $21.95.) A scramble in the year 2005 for a pair of virtual-reality eyeglasses that disclose secrets.
15
5
THE SHINING ONES, by David Eddings. (Del Rey/Ballantine, $22.) The second volume of a fantasy saga.
16*
36
GRIFFIN &amp; SABINE, by Nick Bantock. (Chronicle Books, $17.95.) The romance of an artist and a secret admirer, told through illustrated cards and letters.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Nonfiction
1
1
3
SEINLANGUAGE, by Jerry Seinfeld. (Bantam, $19.95.) Observations on life's pleasures and ordeals by the star of the television show "Seinfeld."
2
2
20
EMBRACED BY THE LIGHT, by Betty J. Eadie with Curtis Taylor. (Gold Leaf Press, $14.95.) A woman's near-death experience.
3
3
6
MAYBE (MAYBE NOT), by Robert Fulghum. (Villard, $19.) Essays suggesting that inspiration can be found in most unexpected ways and places.
4
6
11
LISTENING TO PROZAC, by Peter D. Kramer. (Viking, $23.) A psychiatrist discusses mood-changing medications and their effects on a person's self.
5
4
59
WOMEN WHO RUN WITH THE WOLVES, by Clarissa Pinkola Estes. (Ballantine, $23.) How myths and folk tales can enable women to understand their psyches.
6
5
5
THE HIDDEN LIFE OF DOGS, by Elizabeth Marshall Thomas. (Davison/Houghton Mifflin, $18.95.) An analysis of canine behavior.
7
7
16
REENGINEERING THE CORPORATION, by Michael Hammer and James Champy. (Harper Business, $25.) A manifesto for business innovation.
8
9
41
CARE OF THE SOUL, by Thomas Moore. (HarperCollins, $22.50.) A psychotherapist's discussion of spirituality and everyday life.
9
13
16
MAMA MAKES UP HER MIND, by Bailey White. (Addison-Wesley, $17.95.) Life in a tiny Georgia town; by a first-grade teacher and radio commentator.
10*
12
14
DAYS OF GRACE, by Arthur Ashe and Arnold Rampersad. (Knopf, $24.) The memoirs of the late tennis star.
11*
8
54
THE WAY THINGS OUGHT TO BE, by Rush H. Limbaugh 3d. (Pocket, $22.) Anecdotes and opinions offered by the talk-show host.
12*
10
15
THE FIFTIES, by David Halberstam. (Villard, $27.50.) A journalist's social, political, economic and cultural history of the 1950's.
13
11
2
CASE CLOSED, by Gerald Posner. (Random House, $25.) A reassessment of the assassination of President John F. Kennedy.
14
14
11
GIRL, INTERRUPTED, by Susanna Kaysen. (Turtle Bay/Random House, $17.) An account of a young woman's mental illness.
15
15
32
HEALING AND THE MIND, by Bill Moyers. (Doubleday, $25.) Conversations with physicians and others about the relationship of sickness to thoughts and emotions.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous
1
1
9
AGELESS BODY, TIMELESS MIND, by Deepak Chopra. (Harmony, $22.) A physician's advice about aging.
2
2
13
EAT MORE, WEIGH LESS, by Dean Ornish. (HarperCollins, $22.50.) Counsel from a physician about diet and nutrition.
3
3
19
MEN ARE FROM MARS, WOMEN ARE FROM VENUS, by John Gray. (HarperCollins, $20.) Communicating.
4
1
THE WINNER WITHIN, by Pat Riley. (Putnam, $22.95.) The basketball coach offers advice on teamwork.
5*
4
4
FOOD -- YOUR MIRACLE MEDICINE, by Jean Carper. (HarperCollins, $25.) Treating illnesses.
Rankings reflect sales figures, for the week ending Sept. 11, at 3,050 bookstores plus wholesalers serving 28,000 other retailers (gift shops, department stores, newsstands, supermarkets), statistically weighted to represent sales in all such outlets nationwide.
An asterisk indicates that a book's sales are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
ACROSS THE BRIDGE: Stories, by Mavis Gallant. (Random House, $19.) In these 11 lucid urban stories, most of which are set in Paris or Montreal, Mrs.
Gallant's wit and exactitude subvert the antiquity of her material.
THE CULTURE OF DISBELIEF: How American Law and Politics Trivialize Religious Devotion, by Stephen L. Carter. (Basic Books, $25.) A professor of law at Yale examines what he calls a 20-year-old tendency to ban religion from public discourse, and argues that a just balance of mutually respectful forces is required, not a victory for church or secularism.
FIDEL CASTRO, by Robert E. Quirk. (Norton, $35.) An indictment, often devastating, of its ego-driven subject and his works, drawn chiefly from public materials by orthodox scholarship.
FLY FISHING THROUGH THE MIDLIFE CRISIS, by Howell Raines. (Morrow, $22.) The editorial page editor of The New York Times nobly describes his passionate fishermanship and the fly-fishing guru who helped him attain it.
HENRY JAMES' MIDNIGHT SONG, by Carol De Chellis Hill. (Poseidon/Simon &amp; Schuster, $23.) A grand, ebullient novel, set chiefly in 1890's Vienna, where James, Freud, Jung and Edith Wharton are up to some naughty conduct.
THE MORNING AFTER: Sex, Fear, and Feminism on Campus, by Katie Roiphe. (Little, Brown, $19.95.) A tough book by a 25-year-old who argues that women are too brave and too smart to fit the role of eternal victim imposed on them by some ideologies that expand the meaning of rape.
MUDDY BOOTS AND RED SOCKS: A Reporter's Life, by Malcolm W. Browne. (Times Books/Random House, $23.) The memoir of a bold foreign correspondent who has seen 20th-century mayhem from Indochina to the Persian Gulf.
NO OTHER LIFE, by Brian Moore. (Nan A. Talese/Doubleday, $21.) A brilliant meditative novel about a place that is and is not Haiti and a visionary who is and is not Jean-Bertrand Aristide, Haiti's once and future President.
SEXUAL VIOLENCE: Our War Against Rape, by Linda A. Fairstein. (Morrow, $23.) Manhattan's chief sex crimes prosecutor explains recent sensible changes in the law and walks readers through some successful prosecutions.
SILENT PASSENGERS, by Larry Woiwode. (Atheneum, $18.) In Mr.
Woiwode's collection of short stories, events matter less than epiphanies, mystical networking, usually intrafamilial, between human beings.
A SIMPLE PLAN, by Scott Smith. (Knopf, $21.) Each bad deed leads to a worse one in this disturbing first novel, a morality tale told by an ordinary man who became a multiple murderer.
A TIDEWATER MORNING: Three Tales From Youth, by William Styron. (Random House, $17.) The author's memory plays upon the painful moments of his life at the ages of 10, 13 and 20; the result is a trio of stories, each of whose sadness is multiplied by the presence of the others.


Niagara Falls Flights Still Popular After Crash
A silver helicopter swept in over the trees at the edge of the Niagara Gorge, tousling hair and halting conversation among the 20 or so French tourists alongside the landing pad.
Hubert Poissonnier jumped out, video camera in hand.
"It was splendid," Mr.
Poissonnier said of his ride above Niagara Falls.
Like many of the foreign tourists who make September one of the busiest months for Niagara Helicopters Ltd., Mr.
Poissonnier, a 28-year-old visitor from northern France, was unaware of the midair collision last year that killed four people on an American sightseeing helicopter near the falls.
He would have taken the ride anyway, he said.


The Performance Scale: What It Means, How It Was Done
IN NEW YORK CITY, the traditional measure of a school's effectiveness has been how well its students perform on standardized reading and math tests.
But this measure omits a factor that educators consider a major influence on a child's school performance: the social and economic differences among students' families.
The school performance scale seeks to give parents more information to evaluate the effectiveness of individual public elementary and intermediate schools, by adjusting scores on math and reading tests to eliminate socioeconomic variations.
The scale is based on data provided by the Board of Education and on the work of Dr.
Robert Berne, an associate dean at New York University's Wagner Graduate School of Public Service, who has been studying ways to judge New York City school performance for several years.
Profiles of city's high schools were not available when the study was done.


Jean Schneider And John Schob
Jean Mary Schneider, the assistant executive director of the Metropolitan Professional Golfers' Association, and John Joseph Schob, its president, were married yesterday in Scarsdale, N.Y.
Msgr.
Joseph Colligan performed the ceremony at St.
Pius X Church.
Mrs.
Schob is also the director of the junior division of the Metropolitan P.G.A., which is responsible for P.G.A. activities in the New York area and has headquarters in New Rochelle, N.Y.
She graduated from the University of the Pacific, attended the Juilliard School and received an M.B.A. from Iona College.
She is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Edward T. Schneider of Chappaqua, N.Y.
Her father is the president of Town and Country Fuel Oil and of Schneider Fuel Oil, both in Mount Vernon, N.Y.
Mr.
Schob is also the head golf professional at the Huntington (L.I.) Crescent Club.
He graduated from Rutgers University.
He is a son of the late Mr. and Mrs.
Anthony G. Schob.


Westport Company Drops Curtain
STATE financial support, long delayed by red tape, was held up yet again and so the Fairfield County Stage Company of Westport announced last week that it was going out of business.
Actually it was not quite that simple.
"I'm not going to blame it all on the state," said the company's artistic director, Burry Fredrik.
"We were behind the eight ball from the beginning."


Train Journey Into Disaster And Heroism
Michael Dopheide will return home to Omaha on Sunday not just as a survivor of Amtrak's deadliest accident but also as a hero.
Passengers say Mr.
Dopheide, covered in diesel fuel and menaced by burning debris, guided more than 30 people to safety from a partly submerged coach of the derailed Sunset Limited early Wednesday.


Malls Wrestle With the Blues
THAT inalienable American right -- the freedom to shop -- has long been subject to the vagaries of Sunday blue laws.
And though these barriers to consumerism have fallen in many states where churchgoing shares the day with trimming the hedges and driving to the mall, the battle between the soul and a sale is not over.
The debate is being rekindled in the mall country of northern New Jersey.
On Election Day, voters in Bergen County will decide whether to overturn their 34-year-old ban on Sunday shopping.
Although 10 of the state's 21 counties adopted blue laws in 1959, Bergen is the last to retain them.


Time Redux? Paramount May Eat Its Words
WHEN almost everyone on Wall Street seems certain of something, one thing is likely: those who follow that wisdom will overpay.
So it is now, in the great takeover battle for Paramount Communications.
Wall Street is sure Paramount (annual revenues $4.2 billion) will be taken over.
The question is whether the buyer will be Viacom ($1.9 billion revenues) or QVC ($1.2 billion).


Miss Brennan, Mr. Ellinghaus
Susan Mary Brennan, a daughter of Lawrence Brennan of Loudonville, N.Y., and the late Rosemary Brennan, was married yesterday to Jonathan Paul Ellinghaus, a son of William and Erlaine Ellinghaus of Key West, Fla.
The Rev.
Julian Davis officiated at St.
Pius X Catholic Church in Loudonville.
Mrs.
Brennan-Ellinghaus, 27, graduated from the State University at New Paltz, N.Y.
She and her husband are actors in New York.
Her father is a civil engineer with the New York State Department of Conservation in Albany.


THE BULLY OF THE SKIES CRIES UNCLE
As American and other major carriers well know, business people rarely use the Saturday-night stay, so crucial to unlocking the mysteries of lower fares.
The concept of "yield management" seems more like a technological update of the atmosphere of a Middle Eastern bazaar than a rational management technique, except that here the customer has no negotiating leverage.
ELLEN RAND Teaneck, N.J.


The Multimillionaires of Frequent Fliers
FIRST there was the landed gentry.
Now comes the airborne equivalent -- "millionaires" whose currency is frequent-flier miles.
In the 12 years since American Airlines introduced the frequent-flier program and other carriers quickly matched it, these people have stockpiled a million or more miles, redeemable for free trips or upgrades to first or business class.


Corrections
An article last Sunday about the GUM department store in Moscow misspelled the name of a Botany 500 representative.
She is Jennifer Bower, not Bowen.


When Pretty Plants Become Too Pushy
THE asters are blooming.
The goldenrods are glowing by highways.
Chrysanthemums are filling in flower borders with gold, yellow, bronze, maroon, even white blossoms.
One would think that the growing season is winding down and the end for herbaceous plants is near.
But not for all of them.
Some plants seem to thrive in spite of all these signals.
In fact, they spread far and wide until they make plant nuisances of themselves.
Some gardeners call them weeds.
Some call them plant pests.
Others call them invasive exotics.


Christine Becce, Charles Collins 3d
Christine Marie Becce, an assistant vice president in the equities group at Lehman Brothers, and Charles Cornelius Collins 3d, a senior financial analyst in corporate finance at Dun &amp; Bradstreet, both in New York, were married yesterday.
The Rev.
Robert Gibney performed the ceremony at Our Lady of Mount Carmel Roman Catholic Church in Ridgewood N.J.
Mrs.
Collins, a graduate of the University of Delaware, is a daughter of Mike and Rosalie Becce of Matawan, N.J.


815 City Schools: How They Rate
At a time when Board of Education politics and the asbestos crisis have preoccupied parents of New York City's schoolchildren, effective schools can still be found.
Some are progressive, some old-fashioned.
Some serve the middle class, some the poor.
A new performance review seeks to give parents new insights into 635 elementary and 180 intermediate schools, assessing such factors as student background, teacher stability, science scores and school conditions.
Today in The City, section 13, (distributed in most parts of New York City).


Penny Hughes, Douglas Rigler
Penny Elizabeth Hughes, a daughter of Sam and Robbie Hughes of Tuscaloosa, Ala., was married yesterday to Douglas Curtis Rigler, the son of Douglas and Katherine Rigler of Bethesda, Md.
The Rev.
John Wimberly officiated at the Western Presbyterian Church in Washington.
Mrs.
Rigler is a senior designer with the Kamber Group, a public relations concern in Washington.
She graduated from Auburn University.
Her parents own Superior Felt Mills, which makes roof felt in Birmingham, Ala.


To Our Readers
Starting today, The Times's suggested Sunday newsstand price increases to $2 in the greater New York metropolitan area.
The weekday price, and the newsstand price outside the New York region, are unchanged.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, a review on Aug. 22 about "Theirs Was the Kingdom," a biography of DeWitt Wallace and Lila Acheson Wallace, the founders of Reader's Digest, misstated the site of a speech in which President Ronald Reagan cited an anecdote from Reader's Digest after laying a wreath at a military cemetery in Bitburg, Germany.
A letter from a reader, dated Aug. 30, points out that the speech, on May 5, 1985, was given at a United States air base in Bitburg, not at the cemetery.


Plan Helps Panhandlers With Vouchers, Not Quarters
"Junior" spends most of his days sitting near the sidewalk on York Street here, holding his baseball cap out and asking passersby for change.
"How you doing? You got some coins?" he asks.
But now, mixed in with the dollar bills, quarters and dimes, he is getting 25-cent vouchers he can redeem for food, personal items, even bus fare.
"I like the idea," said the unemployed panhandler, who would give only his nickname.
"I'm happy when someone gives me a voucher because I can go over to Wawa and get me some food."


Caroline Webber, Warren Anderson
Lieut.
Comdr.
Caroline Marie Webber, a Navy dentist in Washington, was married there yesterday to Lieut.
Comdr.
Warren Anderson, a Navy doctor and a resident in ophthalmology at the Bethesda Naval Hospital.
The Rev.
William Tully performed the Episcopal ceremony at St.
Columba's Church.
Mrs.
Anderson is the daughter of E. Joyce Webber of Winter Park, Fla., and the late Dr.
Robert F. Webber.
She graduated from Emory University, from which she also received her dental degree.
Her father was an electrical engineer and a professor of engineering at Rollins College in Winter Park.
Her mother is a real estate broker in Orlando, Fla.


NEW YORKERS &amp; CO.
Euro-Chic on Feet: Italian Shoes in SoHo
Mare, an Italian shoe company, plans to open its first United States store in early October.
The new shop, at 426 West Broadway between Prince and Spring Streets in SoHo, will be decorated with sandblasted glass fixtures and brushed-aluminum stands for its men's and women's shoes, with prices from $120 to $300.
The store is a joint venture by Nello Nembro, the owner of Mare, and Fred Marsh and Albert Cruz, the owners of Sacco shoes.
No More Retailing; Now, Just Real Estate
Alexander's, the defunct department-store chain, won court approval last week to give up the retailing business and become a real estate company.
The organization filed for bankruptcy in May 1992, and the new court order reorganizes the bankruptcy plan.
Alexander's can sell and lease its properties, but it must pay back its creditors.


A Harvest in Queens That's Out of the Past
John Klein Jr. went away to college to study business administration, but he returned home to the city -- to run the family farm, a modest plot of land bordering an asphalt playground in Fresh Meadows.
"It's a good life," said Mr.
Klein, 26, one recent morning as he tugged a tarpaulin off an old red tractor in preparation for the harvest.
"It's hard work, but you get to be your own boss."


Sir Peter Hall Is Star Of London's Season
WHO is the busiest theatrical director in London this fall?
Surprisingly, it is not Stephen Daldry or Sam Mendes or another of the drama's bold young Turks, though they too have lively-sounding productions about to bubble to the surface.
No, it is the Grand Old Man of the British theater: the creator of the Royal Shakespeare Company, former chief executive of the National Theater, the 62-year-old Sir Peter Hall.
Here he is with no fewer than five productions already arrived in London or soon to hit town.
His revival of Terence Rattigan's "Separate Tables," a double bill about outcasts and loners in the dowdy British 1950's, continues to run successfully at the Albery, as does his version of Aristophanes' "Lysistrata" at Wyndhams.
On Oct. 12 his production of Shakespeare's seldom-performed "All's Well That Ends Well," with Sophie Thompson (Emma's younger sister) as the heroine, comes to Royal Shakespeare headquarters at the Barbican.
A week later Goldsmith's genial "She Stoops to Conquer" opens on Shaftesbury Avenue, followed by yet another of Sir Peter's autumn offerings, Pam Gems's portrait of the greatest of French chanteuses, "Piaf."


Few Raves Greet Plan By Whitman
It was to have been the jolt that awakened a tax-weary electorate and bolstered her campaign for governor, but four days after Christine Todd Whitman delivered her bold promise to cut taxes by 30 percent, the plan's impact seems to have been dissipated in a campaign of Democratic scorn and largely unfavorable editorial responses.
Several Republican state senators and Assembly members, who would presumably be responsible for enacting the plan -- cutting taxes by $1.2 billion over three years -- expressed dismay that after revealing her long-awaited plan on Tuesday, the Whitman campaign seemed to let the subject drop.
The plan faced a carefully orchestrated Democratic campaign to deflect attention from Gov.
Jim Florio's own vulnerability on the tax issue.


Brigitte Gaveau, C. R. A. Bowles
Brigitte Gaveau, the daughter of Marie-Denise Bellocq of Princeton, N.J., was married yesterday to Christopher R. A. Bowles, the son of Robert and Joyce Bowles of Lansing, Mich.
Marvin R. Reed, the Mayor of Princeton, officiated at the home of the bride's mother and stepfather, Pierre Bellocq.
Mrs.
Bowles, a graduate of Seton Hill College, is a quality assurance monitor at Altana Pharmaceuticals in Melville, L.I.
Her stepfather is the art director and cartoonist for The Daily Racing Form in Hightstown, N.J.


From Seville


Going From Gambit To End Game, Neatly
THE standard prescription for fighting off a gambit or any other dangerous attack is to exchange off the enemy's most powerful weapon -- the queen.
Today, however, with the heavy utilization of the winning possibilities in the end game, one cannot count on finding a secure berth there.
Indeed, the game between the grandmasters Joel Lautier of France and Mikhail Gurevich, formerly of the Soviet Union and now of Belgium, from Round 13 of the International Chess Federation's Interzonal Tournament, showed the gambiteer gleefully heading into an end game.
That was Lautier, and his express purpose was to win in the most direct manner.
He succeeded admirably.


A Call to Enlarge Democracy's Reach
EIGHT months into the Clinton Administration, debate continues to percolate in Washington about America's proper role in the post-Communist world.
Top officials set out last week to define the Administration's vision, as President Clinton prepared to address the United Nations.
On Tuesday, his national security adviser, Anthony Lake, offered his view of the nation's new foreign-policy goals.
The speech, excerpted here, was delivered at Johns Hopkins University.


Jesse Jackson Visits Harlem To Rally Faithful for Dinkins
At an old-fashioned political revival meeting yesterday, the Rev.
Jesse L. Jackson visited Harlem to register voters and to arouse Mayor David N. Dinkins's black supporters as Mr.
Dinkins, who is in a tight campaign, fights to hold onto his office and his status as New York City's first black mayor.
After Mr.
Jackson addressed a packed auditorium at the Rev.
Al Sharpton's weekly rally at Public School 175 on 134th Street, the two ministers headed to four housing projects in Brooklyn to register voters.


Sarah Harrington, William Johnson
Sarah Stuart Harrington, a daughter of Mrs.
Stuart Faulkner Harrington of Bay Head, N.J., and the late Mr.
Harrington, was married there yesterday to William George Johnson, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
George W. Johnson of Mountain Lakes, N.J.
The Rev.
Edward B. Gammons Jr. officiated at All Saints' Episcopal Church.
Mrs.
Johnson, 28, graduated from St.
Lawrence University and was until recently a saleswoman at Charlotte Moss &amp; Company, an interior decorating concern in New York.


Member Leaves Vote
The International Olympic Committee member from Swaziland who left Monte Carlo, Monaco, midway during the vote for the 2000 Olympics has some explaining to do.
DAVID SIBANDZE asked to be excused after the first two rounds of Thursday's secret ballot by the I.O.C.
That left 88 members, instead of 89, to vote in the final two rounds.
Sydney beat Beijing in the final round, 45-43.
But because of the even number, the vote could have resulted in a 44-44 tie.
"He asked me for permission to leave for very important and urgent personal reasons," the I.O.C. president, JUAN ANTONIO SAMARANCH, said yesterday.
"I had to say yes. I thought maybe there was something wrong in his family."


Correction
The "On the Street" column last Sunday, about the opening of the new Barneys store, misstated the location and history of the former A. T. Stewart mansion.
It was at the northwest corner of Fifth Avenue and 34th Street and was not torn down to build the B. Altman store; that was at the northeast corner.


Patricia Johnson, J. H. Crawford 3d
Patricia Bates Johnson, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Howard B. Johnson of New York, was married yesterday to John Hamilton Crawford 3d, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Crawford Jr. of Locust Valley, L.I.
The Rev.
John Andrew performed the ceremony at St.
Thomas Episcopal Church in New York.
Mrs.
Crawford is a senior trust officer at Citibank in New York.
She graduated from Duke University.
Her father, now retired, is the former chairman and president of the Howard Johnson Company in New York, the restaurant chain founded by her paternal grandfather, the late Howard D. Johnson.
The bride's maternal grandfather, the late Theodore Bates, was the founder and chairman of the Ted Bates Advertising Company in New York.


Also Inside
MAKING IT WORK 3 Dining at the Oak Room of the Plaza?
Don't ask for Trump.
Alfred J. Cristina will make sure you're well served.
NEW YORKERS &amp; CO. 4 Egyptian musk, coconut, faux Giorgio: Abdul Jabbar runs a street-corner perfumery for those of limited means.
GOOD EATING 11 Brooklyn, city of churches, couscous and yellow-fin tuna with a river view.
PLAYING IN THE NEIGHBORHOOD 11 Tour the old New York City Lunatic Asylum on Roosevelt Island or revisit the 18th century in the Bronx.
VOTER'S GUIDE 17 Holtzman vs.
Hevesi: a review of the candidates and the issues in the Democratic runoff for Comptroller.
SOAPBOX 19 Of public toilets and the art of municipal politics.
Plus, a lesson in block power.


A Revival of Ye Olde Lampposts


Clinton Visit to Seal Off Several Streets
With President Clinton's arrival in New York City today for a two-day visit that will include a speech before dozens of world leaders at the United Nations, motorists should expect to encounter whole swaths of Manhattan sealed off as the Secret Service and the police impose extremely tight security amid increased concern over terrorism.
As in all Presidential visits, hundreds of agents have been in the city for days, sealing manhole covers, looking for suspicious packages, diving near bulkheads in search of explosives and removing garbage cans in and around the areas where President Clinton is scheduled to travel.


Life in the Baltics
To the Editor:
In her review of "The Baltic Revolution" (Aug. 29), Liah Greenfeld on the one hand states that the Baltic countries started the breakup of the Soviet Union and on the other says that Anatol Lieven has written a detailed book on only marginally significant countries.
Are the Baltics really so insignificant as Ms.
Greenfeld seems to think?


Hunted Somali General Lashes Out
United Nations officials in Mogadishu say that Gen.
Mohammed Farah Aidid, blamed for the downing of a helicopter this morning in which three Americans were killed, is feeling increasingly isolated and so is stepping up his campaign of violence.
On Tuesday, United States troops captured Osman Hassan Ali, General Aidid's chief financier and weapons procurer.


Clinton Aides Agree on Terms for U.S. Bosnia Role
President Clinton's top foreign policy advisers agreed today on strict conditions for deploying American troops to enforce a cease-fire in Bosnia, including well-defined goals, clear United States command and an exit strategy for ending the mission, a senior Administration official said.
As prospects for a peace settlement improve in Bosnia and Herzegovina, the Administration has moved closer to making good on its promise to the parties to the conflict there that it would send American troops to help enforce the agreement.


Ms. Diulio, Mr. Williamson
Anne-Marie Kathleen Diulio, a daughter of Dr.
Eugene A. Diulio and Rosemary Diulio of Bronxville, N.Y., was married yesterday to James Edward Williamson, the son of Joseph E. Williamson Jr. and Jean Williamson of Bridgeville, Del.
The Rev.
J.
Peter Conroy, a Roman Catholic priest, officiated at the Fordham University Chapel in the Bronx.
Mrs.
Williamson graduated magna cum laude from Wellesley College and is a candidate for a master's degree in education at the University of Michigan.
Her father is an economic consultant in New York, and an associate professor of economics at Fordham.
Her mother is a manager and a nurse at Columbia-Presbyterian Medical Center in New York.


Next Steps for Car Exhaust
EVEN as the manufacturers of small engines begin adopting catalytic converters, the companies that make the bigger converters used on cars are looking ahead to a new generation of technology.
Catalytic converters are very good at catching the hydrocarbons that slip unburned through automobile engines.
But the converters do not work until they reach 700 degrees Fahrenheit, which generally does not happen until the vehicle has been driven for several miles.
To meet the new pollution standards that will not allow for those few minutes of dirty motoring, researchers have tried various strategies to catch the hydrocarbons emitted in the first three or four miles, which can be half the pollution that a car emits in a 20-mile drive.


U.S. VOWS TO STAY IN SOMALIA FORCE DESPITE AN ATTACK
The Clinton Administration said today that the deaths of three American soldiers whose helicopter was shot down in Mogadishu early this morning would not deter Washington from supporting the United Nations operation in Somalia.
But the episode, which brought to 11 the number of American combat deaths there, provoked renewed calls from Congress for the immediate withdrawal of the 4,700 remaining United States troops there.


The Subways Need More Than a New Color Scheme
To the Editor:
The article about new designer color schemes for the subways ("Artists of the Underground," Sept. 19) would be a delight to read if it were published about five years from now, after the Transit Authority got its priorities straight.
What the T.A. ought to do right now, for example, is eliminate the urine stench at the Times Square station and other stations and junk the present P.A. system.
EDWIN KENNEBECK Manhattan


IN SHORT: FICTION
CIVIL WAR NOVEL GLORY ENOUGH FOR ALL By Duane Schultz. St. Martin's, $22.95.


PLAYING IN THE NEIGHBORHOOD
ROOSEVELT ISLAND A Ride Into History, Halfway Across the River


Whatever the Skin Color, Cruelty Is Unacceptable
To the Editor:
Don't the parents of black children have any responsibility to teach their children anything about right and wrong?
The white parent is not excused from these duties.
I cannot believe that Rosemary Bray seems to feel that these children are entitled to steal another child's bike and beat him up.
They are going to grow up to cause problems for everyone, including her son.
C.
D.
CHESLER Manhattan


Dietrich: Picking Up the Pieces
Fueled by devotees and a flourishing collectibles market, motion-picture memorabilia rocketed to a new level of international acceptance this month when the city of Berlin bought the Marlene Dietrich collection for $5 million.
The purchase, announced 12 days ago, reflects the continuing frenzy over the belongings of superstars like Dietrich, Elvis Presley, Marilyn Monroe and John Lennon.
To Dietrich's fans, every item she owned or touched, no matter how insignificant, took on vital importance, something she realized full well.
Prescient about the power of her image from her earliest days as a cabaret performer in Weimar-era Germany, she saved virtually everything relating to her public persona, which, remarkably, was still intact the day she died in May 1992 at the age of 90.


Jennifer Pons, W. M. Bellamy 3d
Jennifer Neill Pons, the daughter of Patricia Pons of New York and Alton B. Pons of Chapel Hill, N.C., was married yesterday to William Murray Bellamy 3d, the son of William and Jan Bellamy of Stamford, Conn.
The Rev.
Gordon Lyall performed the Episcopal ceremony at the Chapel of the Cross in Chapel Hill.
The bride, 29, is a senior finance manager for the Sara Lee Corporation in Chicago.
She graduated from the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa.
She and her husband received M.B.A. degrees from Duke University.


Soft and Cuddly, and Dopey
THERE are some pretty swell dogs in this town.
Dogs of the rich and famous.
Dogs that hang out at art galleries.
Dogs that appear in Ralph Lauren ads and dogs that star in Broadway shows.
But in a purposeful decade atoning for the selfishness of the previous one -- a decade when Cher delivers medical supplies to Armenia, Miss America has a political platform and the First Lady has a real job -- just being a swell dog isn't enough.
You had to be a super dog to get into the United Nations Plaza apartment of Victoria and Si Newhouse on Tuesday night.
The Newhouses were giving a cocktail party for the Delta Society, an organization that provides therapy to the disabled through contact with animals.
They'd opened the doors to their home, with its museum-class contemporary art collection, to five award-winningly purposeful dogs, their owners and 100 or so paying guests.


From Strauss To Rock, and Opera, Too
EUROPE'S fall music season is already well under way, and when one considers an entire continent stretching from Portugal to the Urals, the field for highlights is vast indeed.
In Paris and London there are venturesome celebrations of two 20th-century com posers, neither from the country in question.
On Friday at the Theatre du Chatelet, the primary site for opera and concerts presented by the city of Paris (as opposed to the state of France), a season-long series of programs devoted to Richard Strauss got under way.
The opening salvo was a new production of "Der Rosenkavalier" that will continue tomorrow, Wednesday, next Sunday and on Oct. 5.
It is conducted by Armin Jordan, staged by Adolf Dresen and stars Felicity Lott and Kurt Rydl.


Streetscapes/Fifth Avenue Plantings; A Lush, Wild Look Is Replacing the Sedate Strip
IT'S a jungle out there -- even on Fifth Avenue.
At 1107 Fifth, at 92d Street, the planting strip between the building and the sidewalk has become a tangle of seemingly unrelated plants, as if a mixed delivery for a botanical garden had gone astray.
But there is order in this chaos, and this garden, about 7 feet wide and now locally famous, marks a radical departure from the norm of more than half a century, one that is replacing the traditionally timid landscaping of these quiet buffers with something more like an adventure-park roller coaster.


John William Carr, Lynette Allison
Lynette Elaine Allison, the general counsel at Scholastic Inc., the publisher in New York, was married yesterday to John William Carr, a partner at the New York law firm of Simpson Thacher &amp; Bartlett.
Judge George Bundy Smith of the New York State Court of Appeals in Manhattan officiated in the Rainbow Room Pegasus Suites in New York.
The bride, 36, graduated from Brown University and received a law degree from Columbia University.
She is the daughter of Lynn Allison of Ann Arbor, Mich., and Leon Taylor of Ypsilanti, Mich.
The bride's father retired as an electrician for the Ford Motor Company.
Her mother is an instructor in the business office systems department of Washtenaw Community College in Ann Arbor.


Karen Akers, Kevin Power
KAREN AKERS, the six-foot-tall cabaret singer with a pageboy hairdo and cheekbones that cast shadows on her face, is known for singing sad French love songs while standing on stage with the statuesque coolness of Greta Garbo.
Ms.
Akers, who began as a folk singer playing church basements in the 60's, has recently performed at Rainbow and Stars, the Cafe Carlyle and Carnegie Hall.
Often, the songs in her shows reflect the condition of her love life.
Several years ago, when she was newly divorced and dateless, one of her signature numbers was "Torch Song." It described the Statue of Liberty as a tall, lonesome lady standing on an island and "looking for a man who wouldn't take me for granite."


Of Candy Bars and Public Art
There is a new paradigm for public art in this country.
It is not always easy to distinguish from social work, and it is certainly a long way in conception from the old model of "plop" art, with its casual regard for the relationship between sculpture and site.
The new public art also goes beyond the percent-for-art programs that emerged during the 1970's and 80's and aspired to bring artists and architects closer together in planning new buildings and urban designs.
The latest brand of public art is something else again: artists collaborating directly with the communities that will come into contact with the work, the process of collaboration becoming, in many cases, as important as the end result.
The approach, strictly speaking, isn't new.
Its roots -- and the problems it poses -- go back at least to the 1960's, grounded as they are in movements like Process Art and Performance Art, and in the left-wing political activism that moved artists of that time from their studios to the streets (not only here but abroad, as in London, where Conrad Atkinson and Stephen Willats collaborated with workers from the East End).
The political art of recent years has spawned a new generation of artists and curators who have picked up strands of 60's thinking and adapted them to 90's issues.
The latest manifestation of the new public art has been in evidence here, during the last few months, in a program that winds down this week called "Culture in Action." It was sponsored by Sculpture Chicago, supported by money from the National Endowment for the Arts and various private groups and organized by Mary Jane Jacob, an independent curator.
The program (total cost around $800,000) is actually eight separate projects, mostly in neighborhoods distant -- if not geographically, then economically and sociologically -- from Chicago's gleaming commercial heart.
The outcomes of such projects have been about as far from the towering Picasso and Calder sculptures that adorn Chicago's Loop as can be imagined; they have taken the form of block parties and parades, paint charts, chocolate bars and hydroponically grown leafy vegetables.
One project is based in the hotly contested area near Maxwell Street, for a century a thriving Old World bazaar in the shadow of the Loop.
There, city planners and a nearby university have combined to raze blocks as part of a scheme to build athletic fields and other structures and eliminate the busy marketplace that still caters mostly to low-income people.
Another project took place on a West Town street, a couple of miles west of the Loop, occupied mainly by Latinos and fractured by competing gangs.
Yet another took place in a factory where a dozen union workers from a large chocolate company banded together to design their own candy bar and wrapper.
And a project that involved hundreds of people united members of disparate communities across the city, including a Mexican-American neighborhood around Harrison Park and the black neighborhood around Garfield Park.
The Chicago program is only one example of the new public art.
In a kind of collaboration with their South Bronx neighbors, John Ahearn and Rigoberto Torres have produced sculptures depicting residents of that community.
Other public art blurs the division between advertising and art, volunteerism and Conceptualism.
The red ribbon that has come to symbolize concern about AIDS was conceived by artists who belong to a group called Visual Aids -- a whopping success by the standards of the new public art.
Programs like the one here in Chicago highlight many of the knotty questions that the new public art raises.
The questions are not only about esthetics.
They are also about the often fine line dividing exploitation and collaboration in the relationships between artists and their communities.
Such programs raise the now inevitable questions about public financing, too: Would the money be better spent on established social programs, not to mention art that aspires to something more visually ambitious than a leafy vegetable?
How, in fact, do you compare a leafy vegetable with a park designed by Vito Acconci, much less with a Titian?
For that matter, how do you compare the social service provided by these art projects with the work done by real social service organizations?
AND HOW DO YOU COMPARE SUCH projects even with the political art that filled the last Whitney Biennial and the Aperto at the Venice Biennale?
An essential element distinguishes this new public art from much of what was on view in New York and Italy: it eschews galleries and museums, where such art often takes on a boutiquish odor.
The work may stem from the same ideas and idealism that inspire artists to make sculptures and installations for more conventional sites, but it takes those ideas in a different direction.
It is not primarily about addressing the traditional art public and its debates over quality.
What may come to mind is the recent brouhaha involving three artists in Southern California who doled out $10 bills to undocumented migrant workers.
By all accounts, that publicity stunt masquerading as art had nothing to do with serious collaboration between the artists and the workers; both as social service and as a meditation on the problems at the Mexican-American border it was laughably meager.
Its real audience was the art world and its critics, among whom the gesture of giving away public money for the arts had precisely the intended incendiary effect.
Had it not provoked a response from that group, the whole gesture would have been, on the face of it, empty.
One can think of that California project as the new public art at its worst.
But much of the new public art is different.
It almost always derives from good intentions.
Of course, the streets of Chicago's West Side are paved with them.
Some of the "Culture in Action" projects are examples of such well-intended duds.
Suzanne Lacy, who for years has been putting together spectacles and performances that involve large groups of people, organized one of the most disappointing and tradition-bound projects with a group of women from around the city.
The group drew up a list of 100 local women of distinction, dead and alive, chosen from more than 400 nominations solicited through newspapers and women's organizations; then limestone rocks, each embedded with a brass plate bearing the name of one of the women, were distributed around the Loop.
The impulse to recognize the achievements of these mostly unheralded women was admirable.
But the rocks, with their small and difficult-to-read plaques, turn out to be undistinguished testimonials to distinguished women, clunky obstacles on busy streets where they may be likelier to annoy than to enlighten passers-by.
As to an even more questionable component of Ms.
Lacy's project, a dinner party to which Gloria Steinem, Anita Hill and a small group of other prominent women have been invited, it is difficult to see why such a private event, oddly caricaturing Caryl Churchill's caustic 1983 play, "Top Girls," should be underwritten by a public art program (even if it is videotaped for outsiders to see).
Another dubious project involved the artists Kate Ericson and Mel Ziegler, who asked a group of residents of Ogden Courts Apartments, a housing project, to help them design a paint chart, each color relating to some event in the history of public housing or some aspect of life in such housing -- Urban Renewal Lime, Cabrini Green, Pruitt-Igoe Dust. (It is being distributed in paint stores.)
Some Ogden Courts residents, Ms.
Jacob volunteered, wondered quite understandably what possible benefit they derived from contributing to this artsy exercise, especially one that reduced catastrophes like Pruitt-Igoe to something as decorous as a wall coloring.
It was agreed that after completing the chart, Ms.
Ericson and Mr.
Ziegler would collaborate with the residents on thinking up something more to the point.
Yet another well-meaning but fuzzily conceived project is by a quartet of artists who call themselves Haha.
In a storefront in Rogers Park, near Evanston, they have joined a group of residents and others to create a hydroponic garden.
The aim is to make the storefront a meeting place for AIDS volunteers and people interested in discussing AIDS, the garden becoming both a source of therapeutic food for people with AIDS and a metaphor for nurturing and caring.
The artists in Haha are sensitive people dealing with an immense problem about which they are trying, as artists, to make some constructive statement.
But with all the serious work to be done and already being done by volunteer AIDS organizations, the project seems hopelessly precious, not to say ineffectual.
The garden is too small to be much of a contribution, and in any case, its physiological benefits are questionable.
And where is the art in all this?
As metaphor, the garden is trite.
As interior design, the storefront is unexceptional.
Surely this can't be described as good Performance or Process Art, either, even by the most generous definitions of those terms.
SO WHAT ARE THE BEST OF THE "Culture in Action" projects?
A local artist named Inigo Manglano-Ovalle organized a block party on Erie Street near Wood Street in West Town, collaborating over many months with children and teen-agers, gangs, and community organizations.
For the party, which took place late last month, more than 70 video monitors were set up along the street.
They displayed videotapes of neighborhood residents made by the young people with whom Mr.
Manglano-Ovalle collaborated.
The young people were trained in the use of video; they decided on the subject matter of the tapes, and some of the equipment they used was contributed to the neighborhood after the project was finished so the young people could continue to make videos with it.
Gangs that usually fight over turf banded together for the party and for the supervision of the street.
And where was the art here?
In the more than 40 visually lively tapes made by the young people.
In the theater of the party.
And in the peculiarly artistic demonstration of community solidarity.
Another project was put together by Daniel J. Martinez, the artist responsible for the notorious "I Can't Imagine Ever Wanting to Be White" buttons at the Whitney Biennial.
For "Culture in Action" he did something as sensitive and upbeat as the buttons were crude and off-putting.
He spent around two years enlisting 800 volunteers from Mexican-American and black neighborhoods that don't generally mix with each other.
The group organized a colorful, costume-filled parade that moved from one neighborhood to the other, stopping in between at Maxwell Street.
Like Mr.
Manglano-Ovalle's project, this was an artistic, theatrical illustration of community organization and embrace.
At the same time, Mr.
Martinez created an installation on a fenced-in lot near Maxwell Street that is owned by the University of Illinois at Chicago, which is trying to drive out the market.
The installation (done without the university's involvement) consists of a platform made from giant granite blocks.
The blocks come from a plaza that the university designed during the mid-60's for its campus several blocks away.
That plaza partook of the sort of now discredited liberal design mentality of the time that obliterated old neighborhoods and replaced them with housing projects.
Its destruction, and the use of its remains on the disputed site of an old neighborhood that the university asserts it will improve by eliminating is thus full of reverberations and double-entendres.
The platform Mr.
Martinez has created also suggests a giant soapbox, a place for speakers to exhort crowds.
His sentiments are clearly with one side.
But his spare installation avoids preaching and, like good political art, aims at provoking serious debate without pretending to be able to effect major change.
There are obviously plenty of pitfalls with the new public art.
One of the most dangerous, condescending assumptions that can underlie it is ghettoization under the guise of public outreach -- that art for lower-income communities, immigrant communities, must take the form of social activism, that the history of Western culture as presented in museums is irrelevant to such people.
Yet another danger -- perhaps an inevitability -- is that such projects as "Culture in Action" will be imitated by every arts organization that wants to seem trendy and politically correct, turning what should be painstaking and long-term community involvement into the quick-hit, radical-chic, plop art of the 90's.
Fly in the artists, stage an event with the city's downtrodden, alert the media!
Ms.
Jacob says she has already received calls from organizations around the country that would like her to put together in their cities something similar to what she put together in Chicago.
No wonder she is reluctant to speak of paradigms.


The Melody of His Voice Lingers On
Since Paul Simon and Art Garfunkel went their separate ways in 1970, an entire generation has grown up and gone through college, total strangers to a time that found dark solace and spiritual nourishment in songs like "The Sound of Silence" and "Bridge Over Troubled Water."
They do not know -- cannot know -- those special late-night moments, usually thick with marijuana smoke and illuminated by lava lamp and black light, when Mr.
Garfunkel's sweet, haunting tenor hung in the air like an inspired afterthought.
Impassioned, romantic, innocent, it was the official voice of the late 60's for the young middle-class with poetic leanings.


EUROPE: FALL AND WINTER: What's New, From Soho to Salamanca -- Hungary; A theater festival, fashions and food
In the early 1980's, as Hungary's politics began to thaw a little, so did the cultural scene.
It was then that a group of actors broke away from the establishment Nemzeti theater and established the Katona Jozsef Company.
The group of 30 actors quickly became known at home and abroad for its spectacular style, a reputation that helped Budapest to be selected for this year's festival of the Union of European Theaters.
The festival's arrival in Budapest is yet another sign that Eastern Europe is fast joining Western Europe spiritually, if not politically and economically.


Benjamin H. Kean, Shah's Physician, Dies at 81
Dr.
Benjamin H. Kean, an expert on tropical diseases who helped discover the cause of travelers' diarrhea and played a disputed role in the Iran hostage crisis as physician to the exiled Shah, died on Friday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 81.
The cause was colon cancer, said Adair Russell, a colleague.


Connecticut Q&amp;A: Dr. Arthur Girard; Props and Fun Attract Future Scientists
DR.
ARTHUR GIRARD is a science teacher of a different sort.
A microbiologist at the Central Research Division of Pfizer Inc. in Groton, Dr.
Girard dresses up as Anton van Leeuwenhoek (1632-1723), a Dutchman widely acknowledged to be the father of microbiology, to introduce students to microscopy.
Dr.
Girard's teaching stints in southeastern Connecticut are part of the company's SMART program, which stands for Science and Math Are Really Terrific.
In addition to sending scientists into the classroom -- most dress more conventionally than Dr.
Girard -- Pfizer pays to renovate science classrooms in local high schools and sponsors an annual science fair for high school students.


Foliage Trips On the Hudson
The Port Imperial Ferry Corporation, which carries commuters across the Hudson between New York City and New Jersey on weekdays, is also taking foliage-watchers up the river to Tarrytown this fall.
The trips are Thursday to Sunday through Oct. 10, then on Saturday and Sunday until Oct. 31.
Included in each six-hour excursion is a guided bus trip to two historic sites near Tarrytown: Sunnyside, the home of Washington Irving, and Philipsburg Manor, a 17th-century farm with gristmill, stone manor house and Dutch barn.


RECORD BRIEFS
Britten: The Suites for Cello Alexander Baillie, cellist. Etcetera KTC 1166; CD.


Debate Over Public Disciplinary Hearings for Lawyers
New rules of conduct for New York divorce lawyers have prompted a sharp debate on whether disciplinary hearings against them should be opened to the public.
At a State Assembly hearing last week, supporters of a more open process said the system now is one of "lawyers protecting lawyers," while the State Bar Association said that changing the process could unfairly tarnish lawyers' reputations.


Irish Center Pays Tribute To Emigrants
Six million Irish left their country from the mid-1800's to the mid-1900's, escaping famines, absentee landlords and a dearth of civil rights and opportunities.
The town of Cobh, on an island in Cork harbor, was the main Irish gateway to the New World.
It was at one time known as the Cove of Cork and then, after a visit by Queen Victoria in 1849, as Queenstown.
This year a museum has opened in Cobh's Victorian-era railroad station to note the importance of the community in maritime history.
The museum, called Cobh, the Queenstown Story and also known as the Cobh Heritage Center, displays paintings, photographs, old letters and newspapers.
In addition to exhibits on the ships that carried people away, the museum also includes material on the Titanic, which sank in 1912, and on the sinking of the Lusitania by the Germans off Cork Harbor in World War I.


Cousin Barnabas, Meet Your Peers
THIS is why you live in New York: it may be the only place in America with a theater company dedicated to plays about vampires.
The Vampyr Theater, currently in its second year at the Creative Place Theater on Eighth Avenue, grew out of Tony Sokol's lifelong fascination with vampires.
New "plasma-pleasing" works are always in production.


Amid the Peep Shows, Discount Groceries
A new store has opened on Eighth Avenue at 43d Street, behind a bright orange front and huge spotlights.
It is not a peep-show parlor or porno theater.
It is a discount food store, catering to families, although it gets its share of homeless people and residents of nearby single-room-occupancy hotels.


Biloxi Blues: U.S. Again Comes Up Short Against Cuba
The instant the ring announcer announced that Juan Hernandez of Cuba had outpointed David Reid in the evening's 10th bout, the frustration that had been building among many of the 3,500 fans at the Mississippi Coast Coliseum descended -- mostly from the bleachers.
No one expected the United States team of young amateur boxers to actually beat Cuba in the dual match; they hadn't done that in 17 tries.
But Reid's loss in the 147-pound division seemed a little like robbery.


Italy's Spending Cuts Are Facing Labor Obstacles
The Italian Government's fiscal resolve is coming under increasing pressure from rising unemployment and deepening regional separatism.
The central issue is familiar.
To control Italy's public finances, last week Prime Minister Carlo Azeglio Ciampi outlined a 1994 budget intended to rein in spending, raise taxes and otherwise take control of the budget deficit.
The deficit is expected to reach $69 billion next year, roughly 10 percent of the gross domestic product, or more than double the European average.


The Band Preened On
If you were lucky enough to escape the hype surrounding this month's premiere of "And the Band Played On," you may not be aware that Richard Gere has been anointed a saint.
So have Gere's co-stars in this television docudrama, among them Matthew Modine, Steve Martin, Ian McKellen and Lily Tomlin, and so has its maker, HBO.
"The politically correct entertainment event of the season" was how Entertainment Weekly described HBO's celebrity screening in East Hampton.
The press (not all of it employed by organs of HBO's corporate parent, Time Warner), has canonized the selfless "Band" players for gutsily bucking Hollywood taboos and making an angry, controversial, political movie about AIDS in which not all of the characters are heterosexual.
It would be gratifying to join the applause of Joan Rivers, Regis Philbin and John Cochran of NBC News -- to name a few who endorsed "Band" in HBO promos.
It would be cheering to believe that some brave Hollywood souls have defied the town's shameful record of silence and denial in shunning the AIDS epidemic on screen. (Jonathan Demme's "Philadelphia," due in December, is expected to be the first A-list feature film to break the ban.) And it would be exciting if a television movie about AIDS had the same galvanizing effect that "And the Band Played On" had as a book in 1987.
Written by Randy Shilts, the San Francisco Chronicle reporter who heroically pursued the AIDS story before most journalists would touch it, "Band" played a major role in waking up a nation to the depth of an epidemic and to the ignorance, bigotry and establishment fecklessness that allowed it to course through the world's veins unchecked.


Janet L. Rollins, Peter W. Atwater
Janet Lynn Rollins, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
P.
Donald Rollins of Simpsonville, S.C., was married yesterday to Peter William Atwater, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
N.
William Atwater of Califon, N.J.
The Rev.
Sally Dixon performed the ceremony at the Old Greenwich Presbyterian Church in Stewartsville, N.J.
Mrs.
Atwater, 31, was until recently the director of computer and information technology programs at the Hartford Graduate Center.
She graduated from the College of William and Mary and received an M.B.A. from Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute.
Her father retired as a manager, in Greenville, S.C., for the American Telephone and Telegraph Company.


Baseball Without Me
It has been a year since I resigned under duress as commissioner of baseball.
On the field, the game thrives -- as it always has.
This September, there have been good pennant races in all four divisions.
Attendance is soaring.
But off the field, the landscape is not so verdant.
Owners are fighting owners; owners are fighting the players' union; the union is fighting everything.
And all the while, there is no commissioner.
Too many of those who steward the game still don't understand that they hold baseball in trust for the public and that baseball deserves better.


Lisa Waldman and Paul Schwartzberg
Lisa Beth Waldman, a law clerk to Judge Thomas B. Wells of Federal Tax Court in Washington, and Paul Kenan Schwartzberg, an associate in the Washington law firm of Shaw, Pittman, Potts &amp; Trowbridge, are planning a December wedding.
The announcement was made by the future bride's parents, Dr. and Mrs.
Martin G. Waldman of Fairfield, Conn.
Ms.
Waldman, 26, graduated from Cornell University.
She and her fiance, a graduate of Amherst College, received law degrees from Emory University.
Her father is an endodontist in Fairfield.
Her mother, Judith Waldman, is the office manager for her husband's practice.


Setting Park Fees, After a Fashion
A dispute over a giant fall fashion show in Bryant Park has brought the park's widely praised managers something new: a vociferous critic.
For months, the fashion world has been talking about the show, "Seventh on Sixth," the industry's first centralized showing of leading American designers.


Noisy Nightclubs and Their Neighbors
For years, neighbors protested loudly against three noisy nightclubs in the Flatiron District and breathed collective sighs of relief when they closed.
But now, three new nightspots have announced plans to move into the very same sites, and fury has returned.
Recent changes in state law will give teeth to community resistance to clubs.
Under the law, which went into effect on Sept. 9, the State Liquor Authority must obtain approval from community boards before granting new licenses when three or more licenses exist within a 500-foot area.
Another law, effective as of Nov. 1, holds that the state agency must consider "public interest" factors like traffic, noise, reported criminal activity and the history of violations on the premises.


The Tortuous Path
When Hillary Rodham Clinton testifies before five Congressional committees this week, she will be giving a fast-forward preview of the long, complex legislative path facing the Administration's health care plan.
Article, page 36.


Publishers Laboring for Love, Not Money
HOW do newspapers that rarely break even and frequently cost their owners money survive?
Only when the owners are motivated by moral commitment rather than financial gain, say the publishers of two minority newspapers: M. Paul Redd, who owns The Westchester County Press, a weekly and the only black-owned paper in Westchester, and Gustavo Roca, owner of La Calle, a monthly Hispanic newspaper, which Mr.
Roca began publishing in 1989.
Mr.
Redd, who bought The Westchester County Press in 1986, said he is 66 years old, 10 days older than The County Press, which began publishing on Aug. 11, 1927.


New Jersey Q &amp; A: Dr. Ellen M. Cosgrove; 'Serious Hobby' for a Problem-Solver
DR.
ELLEN M. COSGROVE, 41, the director of medical education at the sprawling, 526-bed Monmouth Medical Center, overlooking the Atlantic Ocean here, has broken new ground in her profession.
When she joined the medical center four years ago as an academic and a practitioner of internal and geriatric medicine, Dr.
Cosgrove was not only the youngest person, but also the first woman to hold the directorship.


THE WHARTON SCHOOL OF DESIGN
How tasteless to hang a sexually suggestive Robert Mapplethorpe photograph in the library of the Mount and call it a "tribute" to Edith Wharton.
She most certainly would not have alluded to any private acts in her bedroom with a public display over her mantel.
JOYCE MENDELSOHN New York, N.Y.


Hampton Blocks That Kick, Then Blocks Another One
Gilad Landau, Grambling's Israeli place-kicker, ended his 24-hour fast in observance of the Jewish holy day of Yom Kippur at 6:30 P.M. tonight.
He then took an intravenous injection in time to get some energy for the 6:45 P.M. kickoff against Hampton in the Whitney M. Young Jr.
Memorial Classic.
All went reasonably well for Landau until the fourth quarter, when he had two critical kicks blocked, one for an extra point early in the period that would have evened the score and the other a 22-yard field goal with 6 minutes 33 seconds to play that could have won the game for the Tigers.
Instead, Hampton prevailed, 27-26, with redshirt freshman Malcolm Benson blocking both kicks.


Residential Resales
In the following reports, the "listed at" price is the asking price when negotiations began that ended in the sale.
Time on market is from most recent listing to contract.
MANHATTAN


Music, Then More Music
The opening concert of the New York Philharmonic's 152d season, at Avery Fisher Hall on Sept. 22, put the audience in a dancing mood.


EUROPE: FALL AND WINTER: What's New, From Soho to Salamanca -- Italy --; Restored churches and a country retreat
To judge from the lines and crowds that form everywhere from the Colosseum in Rome to the Doge's Palace in Venice, newness does not figure too highly on the menu of attractions Italy offers its legions of visitors.
Indeed, with the country in an introspective and cash-strapped mood, there seems little energy for innovation at all.
Yet, as the fall sets in after summer's draining heat, a handful of novelties offers some renewal to the familiar Venice-Florence-Rome circuit -- and some interesting detours.
In Venice, an exhibit of 430 previously unshown drawings by Modigliani is at the Palazzo Grassi, (041) 5229875, on the Grand Canal through Jan. 4.
The works, from the private collection of Paul Alexandre -- one of Modigliani's first patrons in Paris -- provide an overview of the artist's early development and are mainly studies for his figure paintings and sculptures.
Admission is $8.


Ms. Hargroves And Mr. Taylor
Jeannette S. Hargroves, a public policy analyst at the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston, was married yesterday to J. Arthur Taylor, a senior vice president of Baybank in Cambridge, Mass.
The Rev.
Linda Hart officiated at the North Universalist Chapel in Woodstock, Vt.
The bride graduated from Brown University and received a master's degree in education from Harvard University.
She is a daughter of the late Dr. and Mrs.
V.
Carney Hargroves.
Her father was the president of the Baptist World Alliance, the governing body of Baptist churches, and the minister of the Second Baptist Church of Germantown, Pa.


Habitats/Central Park West; Park Views: $45,000
THE treetops of Central Park spread themselves before you, with the silhouettes on Fifth Avenue glimmering in the distance.
It's the best kind of view -- you don't have to walk to the window to see it; it hits you the minute you walk in the door.
The apartment, on the sixth floor of a prewar Art Deco-style building, is a small two-bedroom with one bath -- the kind with narrow steel casement windows and curved wrought-iron railings separating the foyer from the living room.


Leigh Greeven, Clifford Chiu
Mr. and Mrs.
Alton E. Greeven Jr. of Austin, Tex., have announced the engagement of their daughter Leigh Alison Greeven to Clifford King Chiu, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Cheng C. Chiu of New York.
A December wedding is planned.
Miss Greeven, 27, is an account executive at Liz Claiborne Inc., the women's clothing and accessories manufacturer, in New York.
She graduated from the University of Alabama.
Her father is a consulting architectural engineer in Austin.


Corrections
A picture caption last Sunday about Westchester-Putnam Legal Services in White Plains misidentified the only man in a group of five people.
He was Gary W. Bieber, a staff lawyer for the agency, not Michael D. Hampden, its executive director.


Whatever the Skin Color, Cruelty Is Unacceptable
To the Editor:
In the article "A Stolen Bicycle, an Innocence Lost" (Sept. 12), Rosemary Bray justifies a brutal attack on a small boy and the theft of his property by six black bullies as a reaction against the synergy of race and class privilege.
She even tries to make the boys' parents, not the perpetrators, ultimately responsible for the youngster's traumatic but hopefully temporary fear of blacks.


A Nervous Prism Of a Building For Manhattan
Raimund Abraham's design for the Manhattan headquarters of the Austrian Cultural Institute, which went on view yesterday at the Museum of Modern Art, promises a welcome answer to a perennially awkward question.
What do you tell people from out of town who ask you to point them toward New York's important new buildings?
In recent years, this city has invested its architectural energies in some very worthy causes, such as preservation of the past and sensitivity to urban context.
But for an international city, New York is sadly lacking in contemporary world-class buildings.
And the lack is especially glaring considering how many world-class talents live here.
Where are the buildings that can compare in formal intelligence to Peter Eisenman's Columbus Convention Center, Richard Meier's Paris headquarters for Canal Plus, or Williams and Tsien's New College at the University of Virginia?
By late 1995, when the Austrian Cultural Institute is scheduled for completion, the answer will be: 11 East 52d Street.


A 3-Day Course In the State of the Art
WITH so many scientific advances affecting photography, the field changes practically weekly.
So when Photo '93, a three-day photography show and exhibition featuring lectures and new-product demonstrations, opens at the Jacob K. Javits Convention Center of New York on Oct. 29, wise planning will be needed to get the most from it.
The show is part of the Visual Communications Expo, which also includes Grafix, an international conference on graphic design, and Prolab, an exhibition of the association for professional photo lab owners.
Together, the three shows offer the photographer a full view of what's new in photo equipment and thinking.
The admission fee of $25 is good for all three shows, but many lectures and other events carry extra fees.


Of Guns and Grammar
To the Editor:
I found G. Gordon Liddy's review of Tom Clancy's novel "Without Remorse" (Aug. 22) highly entertaining, and full of good advice to the aspiring author.


Somewhere Over the Goal Post a Girl's Dream Lies
LAST fall, Heather Sue Mercer was running laps at the track when she saw Yorktown High School's place-kicker Mike Yanni booting a football between the uprights.
"I thought, 'Man, that looks like fun,' " said Heather Sue, who is now a 17-year-old senior at the high school.


Elizabeth Laws, John Kilgallon
Dr.
Elizabeth Grace Laws, who recently completed her residency in large-animal surgery at the New Bolton Center Veterinary Hospital of the University of Pennsylvania in Kennett Square, Pa., was married yesterday to John Thomas Kilgallon, a vice president of the G. E. Capital Corporation's transportation financing group in Stamford, Conn.
The Rev.
Edward M. Ifkovits, a Roman Catholic priest, officiated at St.
Ignatius Loyola Church in Baltimore.
Dr.
Kilgallon and her husband, both 30, graduated from Princeton University.
She received a degree in veterinary medicine from Tufts University.
She is a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Edward R. Laws of Charlottesville, Va.
The bride's father is a professor of neurological surgery at the University of Virginia in Charlottesville.
Her mother, Margaret A. Laws, is a former managing editor of the medical journal Neurosurgery, in Washington.


VOTER's GUIDE; In Tuesday's Runoff, Holtzman Puts Her Career on the Line
AFTER weeks of accusation and apologies, Elizabeth Holtzman puts her political career on the line on Tuesday in a Democratic primary runoff against Assemblyman Alan G. Hevesi for the job of city comptroller.
Ms.
Holtzman, the incumbent, seems to have accepted that the election has become a referendum on her integrity.
Last week, for the first time, she apologized to the public for what she conceded was the appearance of a conflict of interest in taking a low-interest campaign loan in 1992 from a bank whose sister agency was seeking city bond business.


Building the Cardboard City of Tomorrow
In a crowded room on the ground floor of the New School, a team of urban planners is building an elaborate cardboard city meant to help create a consensus about new construction around Lincoln Center.
The model, with scale photographs of the real facades attached to cardboard buildings, reconstructs the character of the neighborhood -- from 59th to 70th Street and from Amsterdam Avenue to Central Park West -- in vivid detail.
A thin camera lens "walks" through the model, projecting views of the area onto a screen.


Virginia Military Institute to Establish Courses at Women's College
The trustees of the all-male Virginia Military Institute voted this afternoon to underwrite a military program at Mary Baldwin College, a neighboring women's college, in an effort to comply with a Federal court order.
A private Virginia Military Institute alumni foundation will contribute $6.9 million to the program, to be called the Virginia Women's Institute for Leadership, which will include joint exercises with the military college's cadets, use of its obstacle course, a rigorous physical training program and wilderness and adventure exercises.


L. M. Burr, J. Scharfenberg Jr.
Laura McClintic Burr, a senior legislative assistant to Representative Luis V. Gutierrez, Democrat of Illinois, was married yesterday to John Charles Scharfenberg Jr., a Republican staff member of the House Committee on Banking, Finance and Urban Affairs.
Both work in Washington.
The Rev.
James Anderson, an Episcopal minister, and the Rev.
Michael Surufka, a Roman Catholic priest, jointly officiated at St.
John the Divine Episcopal Church in Burlington, Wis.
Mrs.
Scharfenberg, 28, graduated from Pitzer College.
She is a daughter of Sara Love Downey of Winnetka, Ill., and John S. Burr of New York.
Her father is the managing director of David S. Burr &amp; Associates, an alcohol and drug intervention and referral service in New York.
The bride is a granddaughter of the late George H. Love, who was the chairman of the Chrysler Corporation.


Corrections
A report in the Business Diary column on Sept. 12 about prescription drug prices misstated a provision of Medicare.
The system does not cover outpatient drugs.


Off Floor, Onto Wall With Shelving
LIKE spring housecleaning, organizing a garage as fall and winter approach can be an annual ritual.
Taking as many items as possible off the floor is a key to "making space." One way is to buy metal or heavy-duty plastic utility shelves that stand on the floor.
Although relatively expensive -- sufficient shelving for an average garage can cost hundreds of dollars -- purchased shelves can be assembled fairly quickly and look nice.
Some styles can be arranged to provide work surfaces and storage.


THE BULLY OF THE SKIES CRIES UNCLE
As an American Airlines flight attendant, I say the two-tier wage scale is alive and well, with thousands of employees eligible for food stamps ("The Bully of the Skies Cries Uncle," by Stephen D. Solomon, Sept. 5).
We paid for American's "expansion" with a 40 percent reduction in real wages over the last 10 years.
Now Crandall would like us to pick up the bill for his "transition plan."


Feeling the Pinch of United Way Cutbacks
MAJOR Terry Sharp of the Salvation Army is accustomed to austerity budgets and had a contingency plan in mind long before United Way officially announced cutbacks in aid to his and other agencies last week.
"I knew I would go out there and shake my tambourine even harder if I had to," he said.
"You do what you have to do to keep the doors open."
Even in good times, the major -- who runs the Salvation Army Corps Community Center in Peekskill -- solicits donations on Fridays outside local supermarkets.
"Now we will just have to get out there a little more often, and stay out longer," he said after learning that the Salvation Army Corps Community Centers in Westchester would get only $218,815 this year, 27 percent less than it did a year ago to help support its $3 million yearly budget.


The Executive Life; Where the Dangers Aren't Make-Believe
IT was time, Jeffrey Katzenberg decided, for another high-powered Hollywood adventure.
The aim: male bonding -- or getting to know your friends, and enemies, a little better by tackling a treacherous task as a team.
The challenge: brave the lower Grand Canyon's dangerous Colorado River rapids on a four-day white-water rafting trip.
It was the third time in a decade that Mr.
Katzenberg, the chairman of Walt Disney Studios, had masterminded such a trip.
He bought out a previously scheduled trip, invited 21 men (yes, no women), and flew them from Burbank, Calif., to the South Rim of the Grand Canyon on Sept. 8 on two 12-seat jets lent by Andy Vajna, the president of Cinergi Productions and a guest on the trip, and Planet Hollywood restaurants.


D. Q. Johnson, Susan Crawford LeMelle
Dr.
Susan Crawford LeMelle, an assistant clinical professor of oral surgery at Columbia University in New York, was married yesterday to Derek Quinn Johnson, the Deputy Borough President of Manhattan.
The Rev.
Calvin O. Butts 3d officiated at the Abyssinian Baptist Church in New York.
The Rev.
William M. James, a Methodist minister, took part in the ceremony.
The bride is also an attending dentist at the Columbia-Presbyterian Medical Center in New York, and a candidate for a master's degree in public health at Columbia.
She graduated from Tufts University and received a dental degree from New York University.


New &amp; Noteworthy Paperbacks
THE DIVERSITY OF LIFE By Edward O. Wilson.
Norton, $14.95.
For the first time in millions of years, the number of animal and plant species on earth is decreasing.
The author, a scientist, sees ways we can forestall ecological disaster, but only if we stop sacrificing long-term well-being for short-term economic gain.
"Mr. Wilson is an excellent guide to the broad movements of evolution," David Papineau said here last year.
TIGHT WHITE COLLAR By John L'Heureux.
Penguin, $11.
This author's earliest novels draw upon his former career as a Roman Catholic priest.
"Tight White Collar," his first work of fiction, focuses on a young Jesuit whose return to a family funeral leads him to question his calling.
In 1972 our reviewer, Martin Levin, said that the character's "uneasy truce with his doubts is finally shaped into a subtle composition of shadows and substance." Penguin has also reissued Mr.
L'Heureux's other 1972 novel, THE CLANG BIRDS ($11), which features five priests from a radical order more interested in communal living than in Communion.
The result is "a bitterly funny once-over of relevancy and religion," Martin Levin said here.


Spies &amp; Thrillers
We don't get much adventure fiction from New Zealand, but if Colin D. Peel's book COVENANT OF THE POPPIES (Thomas Dunne/St. Martin's, $17.95) is representative of what is going on there, the loss is ours.
The writing is lean and hard, pungent and well organized.
Mr.
Peel seems to have learned a lot since "Firestorm" in 1984.
"Covenant of the Poppies" starts in Afghanistan, where Mike McConnell, a British arms dealer, is faced with conflicting factions.
An attempt on his life sends him back to London, where his wife and son are killed by a booby trap intended for him.
He suspects that the killers were hired by the Joint Afghan Relief Organization (JARO), a group beyond suspicion in the eyes of the world.
Notables from various countries sit on its board, and they can exert tremendous power.
But McConnell knows that JARO deals in cocaine.


Ms. O'Loughlin, Mr. Haddad
Joellyn O'Loughlin, a daughter of Jean G. O'Loughlin of Floral Park, L.I., and the late Joseph M. O'Loughlin, was married yesterday to Michael David Haddad, the son of Robert and Janet Haddad of Webster Groves, Mo.
The Rev.
Robert F. Capon performed the ceremony at St.
Luke's Episcopal Church in East Hampton, L.I.
Mrs.
Haddad, 30, is a freelance film and video producer in New York.
She graduated from the College of Wooster.


Wall Street; New Name, New Life, for Astrum
IT'S rare to find a potential blue chip that does not even boast a listing on a major stock exchange.
But the Astrum International Corporation, the maker of Samsonite luggage, Culligan water filters and Botany 500 suits, may be one orphan that deserves a second look.
The company, fresh out of bankruptcy, changed its name from the far better-known E-II Holdings to distance itself from a checkered past.
The company, gobbled up by American Brands in 1987, gained notoriety when Meshulam Riklis, the flashy financier, assumed control a year later.
Before long, he was stripping the company's assets and sticking it with liabilities.


Carolyn Clark, Tim Tenney
Carolyn Anne Clark, a daughter of Richard M. Clark of Kalamazoo, Mich., and the late Susan K. Clark, was married yesterday to Tim Tenney, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
C.
Thomas Tenney of Ponte Vedra Beach, Fla.
The Rev.
Frank Geer, an Episcopal priest, officiated at Christ's Church in Rye, N.Y.
Ms.
Clark Tenney, 32, is a clinical social worker at Mount Sinai Hospital in New York.
She graduated from Northwestern University and received a master's degree in social work from New York University.
Her father is a senior vice president, the general counsel and the secretary of the Kellogg Company in Battle Creek, Mich.
The bride is a stepdaughter of Patricia H. Clark.


THE BULLY OF THE SKIES CRIES UNCLE
Your article states that empty airline seats are perishable.
Why, then does the price of these empty seats go up (rather than down) as departure time approaches?
I'd have taken a flight on a last-minute whim over the Labor Day weekend.
However, the walk-up prices are so ridiculous that this was out of the question.
Instead, I went to New York City twice and bought last-minute, perishable seats in Broadway theaters, for half price.
DENNIS B. BLOCK Greenwich, Conn.


Claudia Longo, William Bainton
Claudia Ann Longo, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Philip G. Longo Sr. of Bedford, N.Y., was married yesterday to William Demoulins Bainton, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Donald J. Bainton of Greenwich, Conn.
The Rev.
Lawrence J. Carroll performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at St.
Michael the Archangel Church in Greenwich.
Mrs.
Bainton, 25, is the pro-shop manager at the Lakeover National Golf Club in Bedford.
She graduated from Castleton State College.
Her father is the president of Philip G. Longo Real Estate in Bedford.
Mr.
Bainton, 28, is a systems analyst for the Metropolitan Life Insurance Company in New York.
He graduated from Johnson State College.
His father is the chairman and chief executive of the Continental Can Company in Syossett, L.I.


Couldn't We Just Call Them Ankees?
Three questions for people who need to exercise their brains today:
1.
Does the "Y" in New York stand for Yankees?
If the team leaves will the city have to be renamed New ork (that's almost Newark)?
Will there be such a hole in the soul of the city that asbestos will sift out of school ceilings?
Will teen-agers from Yonkers on church-sponsored trips have to run through the streets because the outfield is closed?
Will I have to give up sarcasm?


Almost Minted, And Now for Sale
OVER the years, the United States Mint has employed a virtual army of engravers and designers to develop the nation's coins.
Their work not only comprises our pocket change but another large group of coins, some very odd, that never made it into circulation.
These are pattern coins, and they are collected avidly not only because of their oddness but also because of their rarity.
In many cases only a few specimens of a design were struck.


PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: September 26, 1993
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Fiction
1
32
THE PELICAN BRIEF, by John Grisham. (Island/Dell, $6.99.) A law student probes the murder of two Supreme Court justices.
2
5
THE STARS SHINE DOWN, by Sidney Sheldon. (Warner, $5.99.) A businesswoman's fortunes are imperiled by past and present secrets.
3
3
DRAGON TEARS, by Dean Koontz. (Berkley, $6.99.) A demonic serial killer in California.
4
39
RISING SUN, by Michael Crichton. (Ballantine, $5.99.) The investigation of a woman's death involves the American-Japanese rivalry.
5
87
THE FIRM, by John Grisham. (Island/Dell, $6.99.) A young lawyer learns that his firm is engaged in secret, possibly illegal activities.
6
76
A TIME TO KILL, by John Grisham. (Island/Dell, $6.99.) Racial tensions surface at a trial.
7
16
CONGO, by Michael Crichton. (Ballantine, $5.99.) Why did a group of archeologists die?
8
2
THE TALE OF THE BODY THIEF, by Anne Rice. (Ballantine, $6.99.) "The Vampire Chronicles," continued.
9*
23
SPHERE, by Michael Crichton. (Ballantine, $5.99.) Four scientists explore an alien spaceship found on the ocean floor.
10
62
JURASSIC PARK, by Michael Crichton. (Ballantine, $6.99.) Dinosaur clones.
11
1
HIDDEN TALENTS, by Jayne Ann Krentz. (Pocket, $5.99.) The romance of a creative woman and a hard-boiled businessman.
12
12
COLONY, by Anne Rivers Siddons. (Harper Paperbacks, $6.50.) A 90-year-old woman recalls her summers at a Maine resort.
13*
1
THE SECRET HISTORY, by Donna Tartt. (Ivy, $6.99.) Close friends at a small college must deal with the consequences of a crime.
14
13
ALL THAT REMAINS, by Patricia D. Cornwell. (Avon, $5.99.) Searching for the truth behind the strange deaths of five young couples in Virginia.
15
1
THE GREAT STARSHIP RACE, by Diane Carey. (Pocket, $5.50.) "Star Trek"'s U.S.S.
Enterprise in deadly encounters with aliens.
16*
7
DECKED, by Carol Higgins Clark. (Dove/Warner, $4.99.) Her former roommate's death haunts a woman during a trans-Atlantic voyage.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
NonFiction
1
2
THE WAY THINGS OUGHT TO BE, by Rush Limbaugh. (Pocket, $6.99.) Anecdotes and opinions offered by the talk-show host.
2
6
UH-OH, by Robert Fulghum. (Ivy, $5.99.) Reflections on life's commonplaces.
3
2
SAVE YOUR JOB, SAVE OUR COUNTRY, by Ross Perot with Pat Choate. (Hyperion, $6.95.) Arguments against the ratification of the North American Free Trade Agreement.
4*
516
THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $10.95.) Inspiration.
5
32
I KNOW WHY THE CAGED BIRD SINGS, by Maya Angelou. (Bantam, $4.99.) The poet's depiction of her childhood and adolescence.
6*
19
THE GOVERNMENT RACKET, by Martin L. Gross. (Bantam, $7.99.) Examples of waste.
7*
22
THE SILENT PASSAGE, by Gail Sheehy. (Pocket, $5.50.) Menopause and today's women.
8
102
A YEAR IN PROVENCE, by Peter Mayle. (Vintage, $10.) A sojourn in the south of France.
9
4
PRINCESS, by Jean P. Sasson. (Avon, $5.50.) Life as lived by a member of the royal family and other women in Saudi Arabia.
10*
5
I CAN'T BELIEVE I SAID THAT! by Kathie Lee Gifford with Jim Jerome. (Pocket, $5.99.) The autobiography of the television talk-show host.
11
11
EVERY LIVING THING, by James Herriot. (St. Martin's, $6.99.) The veterinarian's memoirs.
12
19
TRUMAN, by David McCullough. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $15.) A biography of the 33d President.
13
9
A ROSE FOR HER GRAVE, by Ann Rule. (Pocket, $5.99.) Six true-crime stories.
14*
33
TOUJOURS PROVENCE, by Peter Mayle. (Vintage, $10.) The charms of rustic France.
15*
31
WHEN RABBIT HOWLS, by the Troops for Truddi Chase. (Jove, $5.99.) A woman voices the 92 personalities that live within her.
16*
14
A WORLD LIT ONLY BY FIRE, by William Manchester. (Little, Brown, $11.95.) An account of the Renaissance and the Reformation.
17*
123
YOU JUST DON'T UNDERSTAND, by Deborah Tannen. (Ballantine, $10.) The different languages men and women speak.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Advice, How-To and Miscellaneous
1
136
THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE, by Stephen R. Covey. (Fireside/S&amp;S, $9.95.) Principles to practice in the pursuit of success.
2
152
THE T-FACTOR FAT GRAM COUNTER, by Jamie Pope-Cordle and Martin Katahn. (Norton, $2.99.) How to reduce fat in one's diet.
3
111
LIFE'S LITTLE INSTRUCTION BOOK, by H. Jackson Brown Jr. (Rutledge Hill, $5.95.) Some 500 tips for achieving a self-fulfilling life.
4
14
WHAT TO EXPECT WHEN YOU'RE EXPECTING, by Arlene Eisenberg, Heidi E. Murkoff and Sandee E. Hathaway. (Workman, $10.95.) Counsel for parents-to-be.
Rankings reflect sales figures, for the week ending Sept. 11, at 3,050 bookstores plus wholesalers serving 38,000 other retailers, statistically weighted to represent sales in all such outlets nationwide.
An asterisk indicates that a book's sales are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.


The Fuhrer's Movie Maker
LENI RIEFENSTAHL A Memoir.
By Leni Riefenstahl.
Illustrated. 669 pp.
New York: St.
Martin's Press. $35.


Landmark Ho! Historic District May Be Expanded
The Landmarks Preservation Commission has proposed the largest expansion of a historic district in its 29-year history.
The plan, which was the subject of a public hearing last week in City Hall, would quadruple the number of landmark buildings in the Bedford-Stuyvesant/Stuyvesant Heights Historic District from 300 to 1,200.
The two-square-mile district, with its rows of 19th- and 20th-century buildings, would become the fourth largest landmark district in the city.
Greenwich Village is first, with 2,035 landmark buildings, and the Upper West Side is second, with 2,021, followed by Brooklyn Heights with 1,325.


The Pope's Struggle Against Marxism and Its Successors
WITH communism defeated in Europe, Pope John Paul II's long crusade against the ideology might seem to be over.
Increasingly, though, the Pontiff is troubled by what he sees as its two equally unpalatable successors -- capitalists run wild and Communists rebounding by stealth.
In the 15th year of his papacy, the Pope continues topropel the Vatican through an extraordinary era of political activity, now dominated by two principal concerns in Eastern Europe: the return to power of former Communists in countries that include his native Poland, and a distrust of capitalism as a molder of ethical conduct and social fairness.


Sandra F. Leighton, Michael J. Galvin
Mr. and Mrs.
Lawrence W. Leighton of New York have announced May wedding plans for their daughter Sandra F. Leighton and Dr.
Michael J. Galvin, a son of Patricia A. Galvin of New Smyrna Beach, Fla., and the late Gerald R. Galvin.
Miss Leighton, 30, graduated from Princeton University and is studying for a master's degree in special education at Columbia University.
Her father is the president and chief executive of UI USA in New York, the American division of Credit Agricole, the French banking concern.
Her maternal grandfather, the late Alan M. Stroock, was a founder of the New York law firm of Stroock &amp; Stroock &amp; Lavan.


GONE BY DAWN
It's going to be a long day.
A change of clothes in not on the schedule.
When you leave is how you end up, make sure your gear can go the distance.


NO AID IS PLEDGED FOR MIDEAST PLAN
Finance ministers and central bank presidents of the world's seven leading industrial democracies expressed support today for Russia and for Palestinians in the Israeli-occupied territories, but the officials pledged no new aid for either.
The ministers also reached no new plan to stimulate the sluggish world economy.
American officials said this week that they were especially interested in increasing global economic growth through lower interest rates in Europe and Japan and possibly lower taxes in Japan.
So the absence of any such deal was another sign that these periodic meetings play a dwindling role in international monetary policy.


Filing A Protest On Taxes
THIS may be an ideal time to protest real estate taxes.
Several new services are emerging to help a sharply rising number of property owners -- exasperated with the seemingly relentless increase in property-tax bills -- take on City or County Hall.
Suffolk County, L.I, for example, processed 6,575 petitions for tax review in the first eight months of this year, compared with 1,351 for all of 1990.


Clinton Plan Will Restrict Health Care Choice; A Tax to Cover Costs
To the Editor:
Cost seems to be an important theme in "Health Care: a Historic Journey" (editorial, Sept. 12).
Medicare and Medicaid are going to suffer if the Clinton plan achieves fruition.
Isn't it a shame that the elderly and the poor will be forced to accept the lessening of quality care?


Debuts to Celebrate Debuts


A la Carte; From Garden City, Talent for Restaurants
SOME restaurants are like magnets.
They attract chefs either because they have a prestigious reputation, a renowned chef or both.
Henri Soule, who came to the United States for the 1939-40 World's Fair and then opened Le Pavillion in Manhattan, was a prime example.
He taught a generation of chefs who went on to change dramatically and permanently restaurant dining in this country.


On a Wing and a Prayer
THE GRISLY WIFE By Rodney Hall. 261 pp. New York: Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux. $20.


EUROPE: FALL AND WINTER: What's New, From Soho to Salamanca -- France; Parisian building boom, renewed Matisse in Nice
The franc may have tottered a bit this summer, but Paris admits to no stage fright, no trembling of the hand, when it comes to embellishing itself.
Hammering and polishing are going on right now in preparation for several spectacular openings this fall and winter.
France's greatest secular temple, the Louvre, is celebrating its bicentennial as a museum in November and will mark this by inaugurating an entire new wing on Nov. 18, almost doubling its exhibition space.
Beneath the Louvre complex, stretching under the Place du Carrousel, a new fashion and commercial complex (occupying about 30,000 square feet) opens on Oct. 13 with the spring collection shows.
Four large halls will serve as the permanent stage for designers to show their collections, replacing the tents formerly put up in the courtyard of the Louvre.
The halls will also be used for conferences and exhibitions.


Lisa Beardslee, A. E. Schroeder
Lisa Ann Beardslee, the daughter of William and Linda Beardslee of Essex Fells, N.J., was married there yesterday to Andrew Ernest Schroeder, a son of James Schroeder of Robbinsville, N.J., and Wendy Wile of Wayzata, Minn.
The Rev.
Gordon Tremaine officiated at St.
Peter's Episcopal Church.
Mrs.
Schroeder is a mental health clinician at Serv, a nonprofit social services agency in Passaic, N.J.
She graduated from Gettysburg College and received a master's degree in psychology from Columbia University.


Deborah Messick, Richard Hohlt
Deborah Lee Messick, a daughter of Dorothy L. Pierce of Wilmington, Del., and the late Richard C. Messick, was married yesterday to Richard Frederick Hohlt, the son of Mabel F. Hohlt of Indianapolis, and the late Edgar F. Hohlt.
The Rev.
Richard E. Hamilton performed the ceremony at the First Congregational Church in Nantucket, Mass.


Does Bleckner Know Midwest?
To the Editor:
I wanted to express amazement and some mild discomfort at the remark by Ross Bleckner in "Bachelor of Arts," (Aug. 29).
Namely: "The art world is a kind of very moralizing place. It's a bunch of . . . kind of Midwest -- I hate to say this because it's so contemptuous -- finger-pointing Quakers who think that that they legislate artists' behavior. . . ."


U.S. Duo Downs Bahamas; Next Cup Stop: the World
John Antonas, the gentlemanly captain of the avowed underdogs in this Davis Cup relegation match, had already made his peace with the inevitability of his two-man Bahamian team getting "whitewashed" by the Goliath squad from the United States in the best-of-five-match format.
"This is not a war; this is friendship," he said.
"This is what creates a bond between people from different countries."


Folk Art, Decoys And Much More
ROBERT KOENIG is as good as his word: Upon succeeding to the directorship of the Noyes Museum a year and a half ago, Mr.
Koenig said that he would pay special attention to New Jersey folk art.
And lo, the fruits of this decision are now to hand in the form of a small but juicy exhibition.
Some pieces entered the museum's collection before Mr.
Koenig arrived; others are new acquisitions or are under consideration and still others are loans.
Together, they stand on the stepped gangway that runs the length of the building and threaten to upstage the other attractions.
These are the marines and seascapes by the Philadelphia artist, George Emerick Essig, that were assembled by a guest curator, Marion Grzesiak; a selection of images produced at the Rutgers Center for Innovative Printmaking; and, also from the permanent collection, a sampling of works on paper, together with 37 superior decoys.


U.S. Stages Comeback As Faldo Proves Mortal
"Apprehensive" was the word Tom Watson carefully chose to describe his mood just before lunch.
He would feel considerably better as he headed off to dinner.


Esthetics vs. 500 Jobs


Mutual Funds; Betting on Bonds of New Markets
THAT mutual fund investors are crazy for yield is an old story -- what is new is how far they will go to find it.
With yields on the bellwether 30-year Treasury issue hovering around 6 percent, investors are fleeing the United States in droves, to the emerging markets of South America, Eastern Europe and Africa.


A 'Contemporary Being' at the Asia Society
The Asia society has long been one of those small, somewhat aloof institutions in which New York abounds: everyone has heard of it, but no one ever goes there.
Over the years its galleries have regularly mounted shows of considerable scholarly polish but low popular appeal.
They have come and gone without causing a ripple in the city's high-powered mainstream art world -- a world whose interest in anything but contemporary Western culture is, to say the least, tepid.
When Vishakha Desai, Indian-born and in her early 40's, became director of the galleries in 1990, she decided to change this dynamic, and the plans she announced amounted to an overhaul of the Asia Society's enduring image.
True, her long-term agenda offered a few spectacular, encyclopedic shows along traditional lines, one of which, "Korean Art of the 18th Century: Splendor and Simplicity," will open next Sunday.
Organized in collaboration with the National Museum of Korea, it will include 125 objects, among them religious paintings, ceramics and furniture.


Grueling Questions in Brothers' Murder Trial
For six weeks, prosecutors watched as lawyers for two brothers who killed their wealthy parents four years ago methodically presented their defense.
This week prosecutors struck back with a grueling cross-examination, accusing the older brother of concocting an absurd story of having acted in self-defense after a lifetime of abuse.
By the end of the week, the older brother, Lyle Menendez, appeared drained after nine days on the witness stand, including three and a half days of cross examination by the Deputy District Attorney, Pamela Bozanich.
His confident demeanor during questioning by his lawyer had given way to memory lapses and fatigue as Ms.
Bozanich confronted him with evidence that she said proved the brothers had killed to inherit the family fortune.


Unusual Joint Effort Is Seeking to Reduce Sulfur in Diesel Fuel
Beginning Friday, pedestrians in New York and other congested cities may begin to breathe easier, as may motorists sandwiched between trucks in the Lincoln Tunnel, on the Long Island Expressway and on the nation's interstate highways.
The black soot pouring out of the exhaust pipes of the 2.5 million trucks, buses and many other diesel-fueled vehicles in the United States should begin to be substantially reduced.
Within 60 days, diesel-fueled vehicles that use the roads and highways must begin to use fuel that contains 90 percent less sulfur -- no more than 0.05 percent sulfur, compared with the current standard of 0.5 percent.


Time to Go
BEFORE their recent departure for Rome, Tibor and Maira Kalman were gazing out the windows of Joe Jrs., their beloved neighborhood coffee shop, thinking about what they would miss most about New York.
He: "Wood-grain menus with Acropolises on them."


Built on Solid Ground; There's No Place Like the 'Hood for Coleman
The young boys playing down the street rushed over to say hello.
Old Joe Wilkey waved from the porch of the house next door, as did Dorothy Johns, whose son ran with Derrick Coleman when they were teen-agers.
The boys, no older than 8, came to let the 26-year-old star of the New Jersey Nets know they were making good use of the trendy black sneakers -- the ones he endorses on television, of course -- that he had given them.


Public Killing Defines Barriers to Aristide's Return
By 6 o'clock on a bright Saturday morning two weeks ago, 10 uniformed Haitian police officers were already at work, preparing the ground for one of the most spectacular and brazen political killings in this violence-torn country's recent history.
Three hours later, a handful of men, two of them with known ties to the Haitian police, dragged Antoine Izmery from a church service toward the intersection of two downtown streets.


THE TRIALS OF BOB PACKWOOD
I am about the same age as Robert Packwood, have worked in a medium-size manufacturing company for 32 years and have been C.E.O. for about half of that time ("The Trials of Bob Packwood," by Trip Gabriel, Aug. 29).


Sanders And Nixon Rev Up The Braves
The Atlanta Braves' vaunted power, which has been used so often to pummel opponents, hasn't been readily available this weekend in their series against the tough Philadelphia Phillies.
And that left the Braves with little choice today other than to turn to an almost forgotten weapon in their arsenal: team speed.
Specifically, team speed as represented by Otis Nixon and Deion Sanders.
Those two provided the difference in a 9-7 victory that got the Braves even in this series of potential playoff foes and left them with a small bit of breathing room in their effort to win the National League West for the third season in a row.


SEPTEMBER 19-25: Croatia and Abkhazia; Ex-Communist Weapons In Post-Communist Strife
Last week brought compelling new evidence that the weapons that once guarded the Soviet empire are leaching dangerously into the conflicts unleashed by its fall.
In Croatia, diplomats and military analysts say the newly formed air force of the former Yugoslav republic has obtained at least four MIG fighter-bombers, one of which was promptly shot down by Serb gunners.
The planes appear to have come from the arsenal amassed by the former East Germany.


BENEFITS
Fall Follies
MONDAY -- The United Neighbors of East Midtown, which raises funds to care for the elderly in the community, will benefit from the second Fall Follies to be held at Au Bar, 41 East 58th Street at Madison Avenue.
At 8 P.M. there will be hors d'oeuvres and cocktails, and at 10 P.M. a raffle with prizes donated by Bill Blass, Estee Lauder and Tiffany &amp; Company, among others.
Tickets, $75, from (212) 682-1830, or $85 at the door.


Now Create a West Point for Public Service
To the Editor:
Now that the National Service Initiative has passed into law, it is time the concept be carried a step further.
A United States public service academy should be established on a par with the three major military academies.
Designed to attract "the best and the brightest" young people who are idealistic enough to dedicate some part of their lives to public service, it should offer free education on the college and postgraduate levels.
It should require strong prerequisite credentials like those now used for the military academies.


Art Exhibitions: A Second Look
SOME people find it disappointing to arrive in a city and find themselves faced with an art exhibition that they have already seen elsewhere.
"Why bother?" they say.
They make a big mistake.
Every good show gains by being seen more than once.
Even better is to see it in more than one place.
The light is different.
The rooms are different.
The public sets up a different kind of tension.
We ourselves are different.
The second chance is providential.


Coast Guard Band, Royal Bagpipers
IT is back to school for concertgoers as the state's universities, colleges and conservatories present a rich array of events.
It is even true for the School of Business Center at Quinnipiac College in Hamden, since the new building is being dedicated by members of the United States Coast Guard Band under Comdr.
Lewis Buckley.
The ceremony, which is open free of charge to the public, will be held tomorrow morning at 11 o'clock and will feature a Symphonic Suite by a member of the Quinnipiac faculty,Sam Costanzo; tickets are not required but more information is available from the public relations office at 281-8652.


THE ANGUISHED POLITICS OF BREAST CANCER
I understand the emotion behind advocacy groups like 1 in 9, but it's hard for me to get on the bandwagon when I think that the focus is too narrow ("The Anguished Politics of Breast Cancer," by Susan Ferraro, Aug. 15).
My understanding is that cancer researchers do not start with a single manifestion of this cellular malfunction and work backward.
They start with an inquiry into the mechanism of cells, particularly DNA.
The knowledge they gain may then help in the treatment of specific cancers, though they won't know which ones at the outset.
NANCY L. YOUNG Brookline, Mass.


Taking the P-A-I-N Out of a Dental Visit
IT took Audrey Rabinowitz Turkel a full year before she got up the nerve to take her daughter, Rachel, for her first dental visit.
"I haven't been to the dentist myself in three years," she confessed, while in the White Plains waiting room of a pediatric dentist, Dr.
Bruce Golden.
"All I remember from my childhood is the horrible smell and the sound of the drill. And the P-A-I-N," she added, spelling the word out for the benefit of 3 1/2-year-old Rachel, accompanied by her best friend, Alyssa Bachmann, who was also making her first trip to the dentist.


A SENSE OF PLACE
I RECEIVED a fax the other day.
From my daughter.
From her camp.
From her bunk.
From her bedside.
Montville is a far cry from the technology wonderland of the Silicon Valley and some years removed from places where traditions don't die hard, they just roll over and succumb to progress.
The Fourth of July celebration in my town was little changed much from those I recall from my own Long Island childhood.


Yanks' Last Goal: Avoid Watching Jays Celebrate
Don Mattingly smacked into a double play with the bases loaded against Al Leiter.
Mike Gallego flubbed a routine grounder that led to Toronto's first run.
Frank Tanana walked in that critical run.
Steve Farr yielded a devastating two-run single to Devon White.
Leiter allowed one hit in six shutout innings.
Al Leiter?
The stream of negatives was endless for the Yankees today, and their embarrassment has escalated.
They had spoken boldly of sweeping three games from Toronto so they could maintain their slight chances of winning the division.
But they lost Friday night, and the Blue Jays rode Leiter's surprisingly solid start to a 3-1 victory today.
Now the Yankees are simply trying to avoid witnessing the Jays celebrate another division title Sunday.
It might be unavoidable.
The Yankees should bring sunglasses.


EUROPE: FALL AND WINTER: What's New, From Soho to Salamanca -- Britain; Revival in Soho, gold mine in Wales
Soho has always been London's funkiest neighborhood, even if its darker bacchanalian side has sometimes got the better of it.
But this year, Soho is riding a revival: the number of late-night revelers crowding the area's street-front cafes and refurbished bistros now clearly outnumber the drunks and street hustlers.
Anchored by Frith, Dean and Greek Streets, close to the theaters of Shaftesbury Avenue and the West End, Soho is still cooking most nights well after London's pubs have shuttered.


. . . With Casting Via Hollywood
While "Cool Runnings" has at least one big star -- John Candy in a supporting role as the coach -- the real challenge was in the casting of the four members of the Jamaican bobsled team.
What was needed were actors who looked like athletes, acted like comics and could wield convincing Jamaican accents. (In the end, none of the actors chosen was Jamaican, although one was born in Trinidad, and the other three are of Jamaican ancestry.)
The task of casting was further complicated by the many stops and starts the project underwent: Over a period of four years it was owned by two different studios and had three different directors, not to mention three different casting directors.


Stronger Dollar Eases Pain of Prices
FOR European governments, currency speculators are quite simply the personification of evil.
Time after time over the past year these shadowy manipulators have imposed their will on exchange markets and forced once-proud currencies into humiliating devaluations.
Just ask central bank officials in London or Rome or Paris what they think of currency speculators.
Greedy, irresponsible, dangerous . . . the epithets pour out.
But wait!
Why not ask an American arriving in Europe with dollars to spend?
Thanks to the speculators, the dollar has made significant gains against European currencies since the late summer of 1992.
The dollar has yet to recover its privileged (or overvalued) status of the mid-1980's, but it has shaken off its image as the currency no one wants.


Carter McIlvaine, Timothy Everitt
Leighton H. McIlvaine Jr. and Virginia R. McIlvaine, both of Greenwich, Conn., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Carter Reynolds McIlvaine, to Timothy Spencer Everitt, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Charles B. Everitt of Manchester-by-the-Sea, Mass.
A November wedding is planned.
Miss McIlvaine, 24, is the national sales coordinator for Weebok, a children's division of Reebok International in Stoughton, Mass.
Her father is a managing director of Furman Selz Capital Management Inc. in New York.
Her mother is an assistant vice president of the South Beach Financial Corporation, a mortgage company in Riverside, Conn.
The prospective bride is the stepdaughter of Karin R. McIlvaine.


Off Floor, Onto Wall With Shelving
LIKE spring housecleaning, organizing a garage as fall and winter approach can be an annual ritual.
Taking as many items as possible off the floor is a key to "making space." One way is to buy metal or heavy-duty plastic utility shelves that stand on the floor.
Although relatively expensive -- sufficient shelving for an average garage can cost hundreds of dollars -- purchased shelves can be assembled fairly quickly and look nice.
Some styles can be arranged to provide work surfaces and storage.


Clinton Plan Will Restrict Health Care Choice; Psychotherapy's Place
To the Editor:
Willard Gaylin refers -- all too cavalierly, I fear -- to "psychotherapy for unhappiness" in his eloquent "Health Plan Misses the Point" (Op-Ed, Sept. 15).


Jets Must Take a Hard Look Into the Past
By the time the Jets take the field against New England tonight at Giants Stadium, it will have been two weeks since their last game, a 24-14 victory over Miami.
A bye week has reduced the momentum from the victory at Miami to vapors.
There is nothing tangible for the Jets (1-1) to hold onto.
They are left to their own devices to be ready for the Patriots (0-3).
In the past, that has been dangerous.


An Insiders' Guide to the World of Film Festivals
What is a Film FEStival?
A boulevard of starlets, agents, movie moguls and poseurs?
A group of cineastes rubbing elbow patches and contemplating Fassbinder?
Locals jockeying for a look at Madonna?
Sometimes it is all of these.
From the de trop spectacle of Cannes to the more laid-back festivals in Seattle and San Francisco, each has an assigned role.
The splashier venues get media attention for big movies; smaller festivals start word of mouth; all are good for the towns.


A Health Club Is the Target of a Rights Suit
The Jack La Lanne Fitness Center on 74th Street and Broadway is the target of a suit charging that the health club discriminates against gay couples by denying them family discount memberships.
Two gay men who belong to the club said they tried to enroll their lovers for the half-price fee offered to members' families.
Both said they were told that unmarried couples, heterosexual or homosexual, did not qualify for the discount.


THE WHARTON SCHOOL OF DESIGN
Were Edith Wharton alive she would undoubtedly chuckle at the "piquant" touch of inscribing the draperies of her library with lines from "The Age of Innocence" (Design: "The Wharton School of Design," by Julie V. Iovine, Aug. 22).
She might be even more amused at the two self-improvement havens that now border the Lenox home where she wielded her witty pen.
Kripalu is a former monastery that has been turned into a yoga-and-meditation center, and Canyon Ranch is a private estate refurbished as a luxury spa.
Either could be used for location shots for a movie version of the 1927 novel "Twilight Sleep," in which Wharton took jabs at the burgeoning religion of self-fulfillment and at rest cures.
ELYSE SOMMER Lee, Mass.


For Penn State, 4-0; For Rutgers, Deja Vu
The game was a rerun, a replay of so many Penn State-Rutgers matches of the past.
The Nittany Lions were swifter and stronger than the Scarlet Knights at Beaver Stadium tonight and had little trouble in winning the 22d game of this series, 31-7.
Penn State teams have now won 14 of the last 15 games against Rutgers since 1977, and 20 of 21 since 1950.
The difference in points this time was the largest since a 31-6 Penn State victory in 1986.
Rutgers is still not in Penn State's league nor anywhere near it with two more games remaining in this series -- one next year and the other in 1995.


Pentagon Fights Wider Ocean-Dumping Ban
International support appears to be growing for a ban on ocean dumping of low-level radioactive waste like medical refuse, debris from decommissioned submarines, and discarded nuclear-power plant equipment, diplomats and nongovernmental experts said this week.
The move would be an extension of the ban on ocean dumping of highly radioactive waste.
The idea, formally proposed by Denmark in July, has touched off an intense but lopsided policy debate in the Clinton Administration, with the Defense Department all but alone in its opposition.


Festival Fetes The Cranberry
The cranberry gets its due well before Thanksgiving this year at the first Massachusetts Cranberry Harvest Festival, from Oct. 9 to 11 at the Edaville Cranberry Bogs plantation in South Carver, , a one-hour drive south of Boston.
Events will include demonstrations of cooking and crafts; exhibits of antique planting and harvesting tools, and children's activities.


Correction
An article on Sept. 12 about the renovation of the garden at the Nassau Museum of Art misstated the location.
The museum is in Roslyn Harbor, not Roslyn.


Capturing the Special Character of the North Fork in Pictures
OF all the diverse places on the Island, perhaps none is so remote, or sometimes so timeless, as the North Fork, a peninsula whose miles of flat farmland conjure up simple, quiet times.
Perhaps one reason is the debt the North Fork owes to its early settlers from England and New England.
A good deal of the area continues t0 bear the whiff of the 17th century.


Celebrating the History of Horse Soldiering
MENTION the cavalry, and most people picture the pony soldiers of the Old West, falling valiantly at Little Big Horn under the command of George Armstrong Custer.
So where was the first United States cavalry unit based?
Texas, maybe?
Wyoming?
Colorado?
Connecticut.
"Connecticut is actually the home of the United States Cavalry," said Gary F. Brooks of East Hartford, curator of the Horse Cavalry Museum in Avon.
Gen.
George Washington, Mr.
Brooks said, had told a Virginia friend that he could start the First Continental Light Dragoons, a force of armed mounted troopers that organized in December 1776.
But about the same time Washington gave permission for the Second Continental Light Dragoons, which actually organized in Connecticut a few days earlier in the month.


Clinton Plan Will Restrict Health Care Choice
To the Editor:
President Clinton's claim in his speech to Congress that his proposed reform will broaden Americans' health care choices is deceptive.
His plan would in effect obliterate private practice and other small-scale providers, leaving patients to choose from a menu offering only corporate care served up by insurance giants like Prudential and Aetna.
The President hopes to control costs through the rapid expansion of large, competing health maintenance organizations.
But despite the Clinton assurances that other health insurance options will remain available, private practice cannot possibly coexist with a dominant H.M.O. sector.


I Christen Thee . . .
To the Editor:
I should like to point out a numerical misnomer of sorts in Rita Reif's article "This Architect's Eyes Are Fixed Upon the Sea"  [ Sept. 5 ] , about the ship-model collector Der Scutt.
The Queen Elizabeth 2, the ocean liner popularly known as the Q.E. 2, should not be referred to as the Queen Elizabeth II.


WARMING TRENDS
Without a doubt, fur is an extravagance.
And this season, the designers are pouring it on.
Great cascades of ranch mink, muskrat and sable flow commodiously from shoulders to grand swirling hems.


Ms. Harris, Mr. Thompson
Natalie Florence Bancroft Harris, a daughter of Donald and Kate Harris of Hong Kong, was married yesterday to David Ellsworth Thompson Jr., a son of Arlene Haywood of Washington and the late Mr.
Thompson.
The Rev.
Dr.
F.
Paul DeHoff performed the Baptist ceremony at the Union Church of Pocantico Hills in North Tarrytown, N.Y.
Mrs.
Thompson, 25, and her husband, 26, graduated from the University of Hartford, from which they also received M.B.A. degrees.
Her father is the director of corporate affairs for Philip Morris Asia Inc. in Hong Kong.
Her mother, a psychiatric social worker, was formerly the executive director of the Northside Center for Child Development in New York, a center for troubled children that was founded by the bride's maternal grandparents, Dr.
Kenneth B. Clark of New York and the late Dr.
Mamie P. Clark.


IN SHORT: FICTION
AN ITALIAN SUMMER THE COURTYARD OF DREAMS  By Anna Monardo. Doubleday, $21.50.


Policeman Is Slain in Egypt; Security Aides Cite Militants
Gunmen believed to be Muslim militants shot and killed a policeman today in the southern province of Asyut, raising the number of policemen assassinated there to nine this month, security officials said.
The policeman, Kamal Anwar Abdel-Hamid, 27, died instantly after he was shot in the head and chest in the village of Nazlet Bakour, 215 miles south of the capital, the officials said.


Blood Relatives


Corrections
A picture caption in the Neighborhood Report last Sunday misidentified a band performing at the Central Park SummerStage.
It was Black 47, not the Don Byron Klezmer Band.


Fast Start for Hamptons Film Event
A YEAR ago the only people who had heard of the Hamptons International Film Festival were probably friends of Joyce Robinson.
Ms.
Robinson, a former Hollywood casting director who moved to East Hampton in 1989, was drawing up plans to attract prominent movie people to the Hamptons in October 1993 for a five-day festival of films, hoopla and educational programs.


For Jimmy Webb, The Loss of Youth Is Bittersweet
Take one cup each of Leonard Bernstein and Paul McCartney, and stir them into a mixture of generic Nashville and Los Angeles rock.
Add half a cup of Methodist hymns.
A dash of psychedelia is optional.
Bake into a cake, cover with sweet pink icing, and leave it out in the rain.
What you'll have is the musical flavor of Jimmy Webb, a songwriter who has flourished for more than 25 years and for whom Linda Ronstadt has co-produced a wonderful new album, "Suspending Disbelief" (Elektra 61506; CD and cassette).
Mr.
Webb, who is 47, has had as odd a career as any songwriter of his generation.
A minister's son from Elk City, Okla., he became the hottest songwriter in Hollywood at the age of 21 through a succession of hits for Glen Campbell ("By the Time I Get to Phoenix," "Wichita Lineman," "Galveston"), the Fifth Dimension ("Up, Up and Away") and Richard Harris ("MacArthur Park," "Didn't We").
Since storm-tossed ballads were the farthest thing from hip in the heyday of the rock counterculture, Mr.
Webb has always been viewed as a transitional figure between the old and new guards of pop songwriting. (He will appear tomorrow at Avery Fisher Hall for an evening of his songs with Nanci Griffith, Glen Campbell, David Crosby and Michael Feinstein.)


Beyond Math and Reading Scores
A new performance review of 635 elementary and 180 intermediate schools: from student background to school conditions, from science scores to teacher stability.
Page 16.


For Schools, Best Isn't Always Best Known
WHAT makes a good school?
On Washington Avenue in the heart of the South Bronx, where wine bottles and crushed bricks spill onto the sidewalk and abandoned tires sprawl in vacant lots like pieces of a modern sculpture, the answer can be found at Public School 42, a turn-of-the-century coal-heated schoolhouse.


Esthetics vs. 500 Jobs
Republic National Bank, whose green-glass skyscraper dominates the corner of Fifth Avenue and 40th Street, wants to build a new tower so much that it's offering to restore the Knox Building, the Beaux-Arts landmark that abuts it.
But the design of the proposed structure -- to be built on a block with five landmark buildings -- is getting in the way.


Allergy Sufferers: Taking Special Precautions
WHEN 7-year-old Stephanie Posen went abroad this year for the first time her mother's excitement was tinged with one gnawing concern: the certain knowledge that if Stephanie ate fish, peanuts, eggs, carrots or fish she could have an allergic reaction that might very well be fatal.
Her mother, Ilise, a health care consultant from Haworth, N.J., took a number of precautions for the family's visit to the Netherlands.
She obtained information about the Dutch system of food labeling.
She packed a valise with breakfast cereal for snacks and pasta for dinner.
She even learned that eieren is the Dutch word for eggs.
If eieren was on the package, they didn't buy it.


It's Growing
I sat there expounding on new directions, new dreams, new goals.
My sister wasn't listening.
She wasn't even looking at me.
Actually, she was looking at me, right at me, in fact, but not in the eye.
"You have a hair growing out of the top of your cheek," she said.
"Huh?" I replied without comprehension.
"A long, golden, brownish hair, like the kind on your head, but it's on your face. Get rid of it," she snapped.
"Where? Show me," I declared.
I started to pull randomly.
"I can't see it. You do it." "No way," said she.
"You're my sister. Do it!" I demanded in official big-brother tones.
She reached over, yanked the hair from just below my cheekbone, flicked it away and then flailed with an "ucch," as if she'd jerked her hand out of a Roach Motel.
"Don't let it come back," she groused in best little-sister tones.


Homeless Man Of West Side Is Held Again
A month after being released from a psychiatric hospital to start a new life in Connecticut, a mentally ill man who had menaced residents of Manhattan's Upper West Side for years was back in custody in New York yesterday, facing new drug charges and yet more scrutiny by law-enforcement and mental-health officials.
The man, Larry Hogue, who has become a national symbol of the problems of mentally ill homeless people, seemed determined a month ago to break the cycle of addiction, mental illness, confinement and medication that has led him into and out of jails and mental hospitals for years.


Some Updates on the Pot Pie
ON a fall night after a season of grilled food and salads, I love an old-fashioned pot pie.
When you slice into the crust, a wonderful aroma is released, great for appetites sharpened by cooler weather.
Several years ago David Bouley (chef at the renowned Bouley restaurant in Manhattan) gave me a recipe for pot pie made with Cornish hens instead of the traditional chicken.
It made perfect sense, for the hens can be cut into smaller pieces to fit more easily into individual pie dishes.


U.N. Agency Issues Warning Of Winter Hunger in Balkans
As winter approaches in the Balkans, an international relief agency has warned that emergency food supplies for the former Yugoslavia will run out unless Western governments commit themselves soon to providing aid to the estimated four million people facing hunger there.


Desperately Seeking Savior: New Hope for Lion's Head
As mounting tax debts threaten to close the Lion's Head, its owners say they may have found a savior for the watering hole, long popular with authors, entertainers and politicians.
Since declaring bankruptcy in 1991, the Lion's Head has continued operating -- and running up more bills.
To recoup $250,000 in sales taxes, state tax collectors have begun legal action that could lead to liquidation.


Marie McEntee, John O'Neill
Marie Therese McEntee, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Thomas H. McEntee of Manhasset, L.I., was married there yesterday to John Darrin O'Neill, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Roger W. O'Neill of Cedar Grove, N.J.
The Rev.
Kevin M. Smith performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at the Church of St.
Mary.
Mrs.
O'Neill, 25, is a assistant editor of Golf Magazine in New York.
She graduated from William Smith College.


Profile: Louis Loss; For the Father of Securities Law, Yet Another Milestone
THEY came to a corner room of the library at Harvard Law School where Oliver Wendell Holmes's Civil War sword and humongous lunch pail were on display for an unusual book party.
The scholars and lawyers and friends were here to celebrate Louis Loss's latest opus.
It is an 11-volume treatise on securities law, an update co-authored by the 79-year-old Professor Loss of the seminal single volume he wrote 42 years ago that founded an entire field of study: the law that governs Wall Street.
But to many of those who gathered on Sept. 17, the celebration was as much of a life as it was of a law book.


Sports of The Times; The Return of the Native to Giants Stadium
ONE day during the construction of Bill Parcells's new home not far from the Patriots complex here, his wife Judy asked him about a certain brand of kitchen-counter material.
"Do you want Corian?" she said.
"Can he block?" her husband said.


Corrections
An article last Sunday about copyright and trademark protection misidentified the owner of the rights to the song "Happy Birthday to You." The rights to the well-known lyrics are held by Warner/Chappell Music, not by Paul McCartney. (The tune is in the public domain.)


Suspending Judgement
Don't leave new shapes hanging. Put them on for a towering feeling


New York Casts for Solutions to Gaping Holes in Juror Net
The office in the courthouse at 60 Centre Street in Manhattan was overflowing recently with people who would really love to do their jury service -- but some other year, O.K.?
Down the street, Justice Joan B. Carey, the administrative judge of the criminal branch of State Supreme Court in Manhattan, was raging.
"I have eight judges absolutely ready, ready, ready to go to trial," she fumed.
"But there are no jurors. So I have eight judges looking at the ceiling."


SEPTEMBER 19-25: Demjanjuk Back in U.S.; 'Ivan' the Interminable Case Ends, at Least for Israel
After seven years, the Israeli judicial system finally ran its course for John Demjanjuk: He was set free last week to go back to the United States.
In the end, many Israelis had their fill of this troubling case and were glad to be rid of the man condemned to the gallows in 1988 as "Ivan the Terrible" of Treblinka.
The Supreme Court had overturned the guilty verdict in July on new evidence raising a reasonable doubt about his identity.
And while the judges strongly suspected him of war crimes at another Nazi death camp, they questioned the likelihood of a second conviction.
Prosecutors agreed, as did other judges who in the last two months heard, and rejected, petitions from Holocaust survivors and Nazi hunters appalled that he was being freed.


SEPTEMBER 19-25: Gephardt and Moynihan; Clinton's Congress Partners Don't Do the Lock-Step
To win Congressional approval of the North American Free Trade Agreement, President Clinton will have to rely largely on Republicans.
So far, only 66 of the 258 Democrats in the 434-member House have promised to vote for it.
Last week, the hope that some undecided Democrats might make Mr.
Clinton's job a bit easier was deflated when Representative Richard A. Gephardt of Missouri, the majority leader, announced that he would oppose the pact.
The announcement was no surprise, but he did it with a splash that offers political cover to other Democrats concerned about party discipline.


New Law For Abused Adults
"I'VE got stories that would make you cry," said Maureen P. Sogluizzo, a lawyer for the Hudson County Adult Protective Services in Jersey City.
She was talking not only about the sad lives of abused or neglected adults she sees, but also the problems involved in trying to help them.
"We've got a deaf man in his 80's with a blind wife in her 70's and a 42-year-old mentally retarded daughter who the couple refuse to believe is mentally retarded," she said.


Traffic Alert
TODAY
AMERICANA FESTIVAL 47th Street will be closed between Lexington and Seventh Avenues from 11 A.M. to 6 P.M.
AFRICAN AMERICAN DAY PARADE Adam Clayton Powell Boulevard will be closed from 111th to 142d Streets starting at 1 P.M.
McBURNEY'S SIXTH AVENUE FAIR Avenue of the Americas will be closed between 14th and 23d Streets from 10 A.M. to 7 P.M.
THIRD AVENUE MERCHANTS Third Avenue will be closed between 14th and 34th Streets from 10 A.M. to 7 P.M.
Also, President Clinton will arrive at Kennedy International Airport mid-morning today for a stop in Queens at an undisclosed site and a fund-raiser in mid-Manhattan that evening.
The New York City Transportation Department advises vehicle operators to avoid the airport area.


World-Class Play And Kibitzing, Too
KIBITZING at a card table is difficult unless a player cooperatively shows his cards to the kibitzer.
The best kibitzing occurs in a Vugraph theater, when the cards are shown on a screen, the players are in a distant room and an expert commentary is provided.
Some of the best Vugraph kibitzing ever was in Santiago, Chile, this month at the NEC world championships.
Two Bermuda Bowl quarterfinal matches and both semifinals went down to the wire, and the spectators were buzzing with excitement.


The Executive Computer; So Far, the Newton Experience Is Less Than Fulfilling
DAY One: This is being writings a worth it takes a while before the handed tiny red floor is footprint.
Signed, Bite (poof!) Beers (poof!) been (poof!) I sits.
Day Two: This is being written on an Apple newton Message Pad.
It talks a while before the handwriting recognition is footprint (poof!) footprint (poof!) foolproof.
Signed, Pete.


Italy Aiding Foreign Drivers
Visitors driving a car with foreign license plates in Italy can now get free roadside assistance on the country's streets and highways.
The service, which is provided by the Automobile Club of Italy, also applies to foreigners who rent cars at Rome's Leonardo da Vinci airport and Milan's Malpensa airport.


Corrections
An inset in a map on Friday with an article about the crash of an Amtrak train near Mobile, Ala., showed the train's route incorrectly.
A corrected map appears today on page 28.


S. A. MacMillan And J. L. DeVita
Stephanie Anne MacMillan, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Harold M. MacMillan of Pittsford, N.Y., was married yesterday to John Leo DeVita, a son of Dr.
Marie N. DeVita of Paramus, N.J., and Dr.
Michael R. DeVita of Oakland, Me.
The Rev.
Bernard F. Dollen, a Roman Catholic priest, officiated at the Church of St.
John of Rochester in Fairport, N.Y.
The bride, 25, is a copywriter at Routledge Inc., a book publishing company in New York.
She graduated magna cum laude from Villanova University, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa.
Her father is the president of H. MacMillan Advisors, a financial consulting firm in Rochester.


New Mexico Gives Warning On Rodents
The New Mexico Department of Health and the National Park Service in Santa Fe have cautioned visitors to national parks around the country to avoid all contact with rodents believed responsible for the spread of a virus that has killed 21 people.
The virus was first discovered in May among Navajo Indians in New Mexico.
Thirty-six cases have been confirmed and 55 other cases are being investigated in North Dakota, Mississippi, Louisiana, Texas, New Mexico, Colorado, Arizona, Nevada and California, according to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention in Atlanta.


DOWN TIME
Frank Rich has it all wrong about Woody Allen (Endpaper/Public Stages: "Down Time," Sept. 5).
Woody has a blond son, a Korean girlfriend, a great apartment, lots of publicity and, most important, no brain tumor.
He's ecstatic.
You have to understand that disease is the only thing that can make a hypochondriac feel depressed.
LESLIE FELDMAN Garden City, L.I.


The Big City Newcomer Housing Blues
AFTER growing up in Cincinnati and graduating from college, Tracy Hildebrand and Cheryl Braje moved to Manhattan earlier this year and embarked on what is, perhaps, the city's first and most daunting survival test: finding an apartment.
With little trouble, Ms.
Hildebrand found the apartment of her dreams.
She moved in with two other young women in an affordable three-bedroom apartment in a modern doorman building in a safe, affluent block on the Upper East Side.


Whose Race Is This? Giants Have a Say
When the San Francisco Giants were being doggedly chased by the Atlanta Braves earlier this season, Giants Manager Dusty Baker made a recurring complaint.
Why, Baker wanted to know, did it seem that the world viewed the Giants as the team doing the chasing, when the Giants had the lead in the National League West?


If You're Thinking of Living In/TriBeCa; Families Are the Catalyst for Change
TRIBECA has been changing slowly since the mid-1970's and is changing still.
Its residents ventured down to its lofts to forge a livable quarter in an increasingly hostile city.
They have been, perhaps, too successful: Their local schools are at capacity, more recreational space is needed and new zoning proposals confront the very changes wrought by the neighborhood.
Families have overtaken commerce as the catalyst for change in this TRIangle BElow CAnal Street (although the only triangle here is its heart: Hudson Street meeting West Broadway at Chambers Street, with Canal its north side).


School Choice: Advice for Parents
The school performance scale is one of several tools parents can use when choosing a school for their children under a citywide "choice plan" adopted by the Board of Education last spring.
The plan allows parents to request a transfer to any elementary or junior high school in the city, if room is available.
It requires that applicants from outside a given district be treated fairly.


Off Floor, Onto Wall With Shelving
LIKE spring housecleaning, organizing a garage as fall and winter approach can be an annual ritual.
Taking as many items as possible off the floor is a key to "making space." One way is to buy metal or heavy-duty plastic utility shelves that stand on the floor.
Although relatively expensive -- sufficient shelving for an average garage can cost hundreds of dollars -- purchased shelves can be assembled fairly quickly and look nice.
Some styles can be arranged to provide work surfaces and storage.


A Shrine in Bosnia Is Now Illuminated by Rockets
Drawn by reports of apparitions of the Virgin Mary and miraculous cures, pilgrims jam the Roman Catholic church in this village each day to attend Mass, go to confession and pray for peace as Croats and Muslims fight 15 miles away.
Since the sightings of the Virgin were first reported in 1981, millions of pilgrims have lifted Medjugorje out of grinding poverty and transformed it into a relatively prosperous hamlet of small guest houses, restaurants and gift shops catering to the faithful.


NEWS SUMMARY
International 3-25  YELTSIN SAYS RIVALS ARE LOSING


Southern Style
GAGE &amp; TOLLNER * (718) 875-5181; 372 Fulton Street, at Jay Street, downtown Brooklyn; $$; all major credit cards.
This century-old landmark seafood house evokes Old New York with its dark mahogany dining room, rows of linen-draped tables and gas-fueled brass chandeliers.
Southern American fare is the specialty: crab cakes Freetown, beef brisket, fried rock shrimp, barbecued ribs and catfish stew. (Review: 7/7/89)


Julia A. Boss and Charles Knapp
Mr. and Mrs.
William L. Boss of Seattle have announced April wedding plans for their daughter Julia Anne Boss and Charles Norman Knapp, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Morris Knapp of Coral Gables, Fla.


Swaziland Holds Open Vote; A Heavy Turnout Is Reported
Voters crammed polling stations today after a hesitant start to Swaziland's first free elections in 20 years.
In the southern African country's capital, Mbabane, the main polling places were deluged before voting ended at 5 P.M. after a slim turnout of only a few hundred people in the morning.


A Public School Product Sees Signs of Elitism
To the Editor:
In response to "When a Product of the Private Schools Goes Public" (Sept. 19):


South Africa, Outcast No Longer
It may take a while for the reality to sink in, but South Africa is no longer a pariah state.
Two events this week signaled its return to the United Nations family.
On Friday Nelson Mandela urged the U.N. to lift economic sanctions since "the countdown to democracy in South Africa has begun." The day before, the white-led South African Parliament voted 107 to 36 to authorize a transition council in which blacks will share power until the first universal election next April.


Brazilians Not Fined
The Brazilian stars BEBETO and MAURO SILVA escaped fines for violating FIFA travel rules during their recent trip home to play on Brazil's national team, a spokesman for Deportivo de La Coruna said Friday.
Because the pair were ignorant of travel rules established by the governing body of world soccer, Deportivo's board of directors voted to drop the matter.
The players -- who failed to leave and return as scheduled -- missed one game Sept. 18 in which Deportivo drubbed Real Madrid, 4-0.
On Sept. 19, the Brazilian team defeated Uruguay by 2-0. (AP)


Works That Are Filled With Illusion
ALL is not what it seems in this year's "New Jersey Arts Annual: Crafts" exhibition.
An overview of the three galleries of the Jersey City Museum reveals a harmonious selection of handsome, well-made works by 13 craft artists.
Read the labels and discover that crafts, like paintings, can be filled with illusions.
Twenty fish, mounted on plaques on the back wall, resemble stuffed trophies in a lodge.
These are not proof of a fisherman's prowess nor a woodcarver's skill.
The size and tints are true to life with glints of iridescence on the scales and tails.
Yet Lisa Kavalos of Elberon fashioned them from marzipan, a confection of crushed almond paste and sugar that she paints with food colors.
The common name of each fish and its latin equivalent accompany the list of ingredients on each label.


Clinton Plan Will Restrict Health Care Choice; The Medicare Plight
To the Editor:
Many Medicare-eligible patients now lose their primary coverage under private health plans.
Medicare's purported fee-for-services then becomes the primary insurance, provided the patient can find a physician willing to accept Medicare patients.


A Perennial Lily
To the Editor:
It is a pity that the article on Nicholas Hytner's revival of Rodgers and Hammerstein's "Carousel"  [ "A 'Carousel' Rethought for the Age," Sept. 12 ]  didn't mention that the musical is based on Ferenc Molnar's "Liliom," which was published in 1910.
If it had, the word rethought might have had greater impact.


TOGETHER
The sunset.
The bridge.
The mystery.
The romance.
Neither of you will ever forget a single moment of it.
SO wear something memorable.


Triangle


IRAN TALKS OF BID FOR NEW ALLIANCES
Facing political isolation and a wave of diplomatic pressure over its denunciation of the Israeli-Palestinian accord, Iran proclaimed this week that it was seeking a strategic alliance with China and India.
"One of Iran's most natural partners is India, and given our situation with the United States and some Western countries, China is another suitable partner," the Iranian President, Hashemi Rafsanjani, said in an interview published in The Hindustan Times, an Indian daily.
"We have tested their honesty. If we work together we can have the last word on international issues."


In Russia, the Quest for True Legitimacy Continues
TO many of the deputies holed up in the darkened and isolated White House and their supporters raging outside, it was a genuine mystery why President Clinton and the West so automatically came out in support of President Boris N. Yeltsin in the current showdown.
Wasn't the legislature "democratically elected?" Wasn't it "constitutional?" Were deputies not the guarantors of a balance of power, like legislators in any Western democracy?
Mr.
Clinton must have "his own reasons," they insinuated, in the time-hallowed Soviet way, for supporting Mr.
Yeltsin.


Carol L. Sutcliffe, John C. Macy 2d
Carol Lynn Sutcliffe, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Jack Sutcliffe of Portland, Conn., was married yesterday to Dr.
John Curtis Macy 2d, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
J.
Thomas Macy of Franklin Lakes, N.J.
The Rev.
Thomas Richard officiated at the First Congregational Church in Nantucket, Mass.
Mrs.
Macy, 27, and her husband, 29, work at the Medical Center Hospital of Vermont in Burlington, where she is an occupational therapist and he is a resident in neurosurgery.
She graduated from Elizabethtown College.


Determined to Spread All That Jazz
MARK MORGANELLI says that he knows there is an untapped market for jazz in Westchester County and he won't stop trying to find it.
After losing what he estimates to be $15,000 of his own money on several seasons of jazz at the Music Hall here, he has lined up a new three-concert series, which begins next Saturday at 8 P.M. with the Brazilian sounds of the jazz flutist Herbie Mann.
This time, however, Mr.
Morganelli has the backing of A.T.&amp;T., and, he said in a recent interview, he is much savvier about the county.
Mr.
Morganelli, who moved to Dobbs Ferry from Manhattan two years ago, is known on the Manhattan jazz scene as a trumpeter and fluegelhorn player who leads the Jazz Forum All-Stars and also as the tireless founder and producer of the Riverside Park Arts Festival.
The festival recently ended its ninth season at the Hudson River Boat Basin on West 79th Street.


Business Diary/September 19 - 24
COMPANIES Pining for 80's-Style Takeover Battles? They're Back


REGO Is a MEGO
EGO -- A WORD formed from the first syllables of "reinventing government," the title of a 1992 book by David Osborne and Ted Gaebler -- burst on the national scene this month, propelled by a photo of the President and Vice President denouncing government waste and standing in front of forklift trucks holding obfuscatory regulations.
"From Red Tape to Results" was the selling line above the report of the National Performance Review, signed by Vice President Al Gore.


When Pretty Plants Become Too Pushy
THE asters are blooming.
The goldenrods are glowing by highways.
Chrysanthemums are filling in flower borders with gold, yellow, bronze, maroon, even white blossoms.
One would think that the growing season is winding down and the end for herbaceous plants is near.
But not for all of them.
Some plants seem to thrive in spite of all these signals.
In fact, they spread far and wide until they make plant nuisances of themselves.
Some gardeners call them weeds.
Some call them plant pests.
Others call them invasive exotics.


Bustin' Stereotypes
Rodeos are as common as dirt around here.
Though things have been changing in this manicured town of 9,200 tucked into the foothills of Washington's Cascade Range about 45 miles southeast of Seattle, where Mount Rainier looms like a snowcapped apparition, dairy farming and horse ranching have long been big businesses and livestock still outnumbers people.
So when the first Greater Northwest International Rodeo came to the King County Fairgrounds in Enumclaw (pronounced EE-num-klaw) for a weekend earlier this month, there should have been nothing about that to surprise folks.


Decisiveness in Asbestos Crisis Earns Cortines Respect
In his first days as New York City Schools Chancellor, Ramon C. Cortines risked chaos by moving to open the schools without further delay despite the asbestos crisis, and though the decision set up a harrowing trial by fire, it seems to have largely paid off, earning him a reputation for decisive action.
Mr.
Cortines's early performance has not been entirely seamless, of course.
While seeking to avoid partisanship during the city's mayoral campaign, he irritated advisers to Mayor David N. Dinkins with public remarks, apparently uncalculated, that seemed to blame City Hall for the asbestos debacle even though supporters of Mr.
Dinkins' Republican-Liberal challenger, Rudolph W. Giuliani, who control the Board of Education, could as easily be faulted.


THE DEVIL IN LONG ISLAND
I was struck by the thought that of the 10 troubled souls pictured in the article, I knew people who had had direct contact with four of them.
If John Guare's theory of "six degrees of separation" is true, their problems are, in a very real way, my problems.


And Now, Without Further Ado, We Present . . .
MANY words have been used to describe mother-daughter relationships.
Comical is not one of them.
The relationship can be close.
It can be strained.
But funny?
Enter Coco and Penny, a mother and a daughter from Massapequa who are trying to make a living being funny, together.
"We're a team," Penny, the daughter said.
"Our relationship is a business."


PIN STRIPES IN THE HOUSE
A classic gets the shout out


Nancy S. Bryan, John Ketterer 3d
Nancy Spaight Bryan, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard D. S. Bryan of Rumson, N.J., was married yesterday to John George Ketterer 3d, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
Ketterer Jr. of Lyme, N.H.
The Rev.
George J. Willis Jr. performed the ceremony at St.
George's-by-the-River Episcopal Church in Rumson.
Mrs.
Ketterer, 31, is a preschool teacher at the Town School in New York.
She graduated from St.
Lawrence University and received a master's degree in early childhood education from the Bank Street College of Education.
Her father, now retired, was an executive vice president of Chemical Bank in New York.
Her mother, Betty Bryan, is an interior designer.


Miss Mulcahy, Mr. Valentine
Kara Keegan Mulcahy, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John R. Mulcahy of Bernardsville, N.J., was married yesterday to Harry Stuart Valentine 4th, the son of Mr.
Valentine 3d of Annapolis, Md., and Elizabeth W. Gardiner of Far Hills, N.J.
Msgr.
John F. Coor officiated at the Church of Christ the King in New Vernon, N.J.
Mrs.
Valentine, 23, graduated from Villanova University.
She was until recently a media planner at Young &amp; Rubicam, the advertising agency in New York.
Her father is the president of Mulcahy Realty, a home-building company in Bernardsville.


Sea Hero Will Be Sidelined for the Rest of Year
Sea Hero, winner of the Kentucky Derby and the Travers Stakes, will not race again this year, MacKenzie Miller, who trains the 3-year-old colt from the Rokeby Stable, said yesterday.
"He has a little calcium deposit just above the right knee joint," Miller said.
"We're just going to stop on him, blister him over the winter and have him here for the spring."


Japanese Dancers to Make International Debut in Scarsdale
A STORY of grief, generosity and gratitude will reach a high point next Saturday when the Wakayagi Dancing School of Tokyo, in its international debut, presents an evening of classical Japanese dance at the Scarsdale Congregational Church.
The event, which evolved from the friendship between two women -- one American and one Japanese -- will benefit the Mark Brent Dolinsky Memorial Foundation, an organization that assists the county's youth through scholarships and awards in sports, the arts and other areas.
Fumiyo Kawashima lived with her family in Edgemont from 1986 until 1991, when her husband, Toshihide, a banker, was transferred back to Tokyo.
While living in the county, she took part in the International Cultural Exchange Program that met at the Scarsdale Community Baptist Church, studying English there with people like Muriel Dolinsky.
Mrs.
Dolinsky, an enthusiastic volunteer, also conducted field trips, sharing with the group, which included many Japanese women, her enthusiasm for local parks and museums.


IN SHORT: FICTION
IRISH STORIES LIPSTICK ON THE HOST By Aidan Mathews. Harcourt Brace, $21.95.


RESULTS PLUS
DAVIS CUP TENNIS  Germany and Australia in Final It's Germany versus Australia for the championship of the 1993 Davis Cup.
Both teams took insurmountable leads in their semifinal matches yesterday and will play for the title in Germany, Dec. 3-5.
Australia, advancing to the final for the 43d time, went up by 3-0 over India in the best-of-5 series in Chandigarh, India, when the reigning Wimbledon champions Mark Woodforde and Todd Woodbridge routed India's Leander Paes and Ramesh Krishnan, 6-2, 7-6 (7-3), 6-1.
Germany, playing this year without Boris Becker, will make its fifth appearance in the final after taking a 3-0 lead at Borlange, Sweden.
Michael Stich and Patrik Kuhnen beat Henrik Holm and Anders Jarryd of Sweden, 6-4, 6-4, 7-6 (9-7), to clinch the victory on an indoor clay court.
The Australians have yet to lose a set to the Indians, who chose the grass courts at Chandigarh to stage the series.
Wally Masur and Jason Stoltenberg beat Krishnan and Paes in the singles matches Friday.
Germany wasn't fazed by Sweden's decision to hold the match on the indoor clay, or by the presence of the former No. 1 player, Stefan Edberg.
Edberg lost to Marc Goellner in Friday's singles and Stich beat Magnus Gustafsson.
"If Boris wants, he's welcome to play," Stich said of the upcoming final.
"But it would not be fair because some other guy on this team will have to step down." Becker's presence may not aid the Germans anyway, as the team captain Niki Pilic indicated the final could be played on clay, Becker's least favorite surface.
Australia, which has won the Cup 26 times, last made the final in 1990, losing to the United States.
Its last title came in 1986. (AP)


Corrections
An article on Sept. 12 about a triplex apartment in the Hotel des Artistes in Manhattan misspelled the family name of the man for whom it was built, and misspelled his widow's given name.
He was Aaron Naumburg; she was Nettie.


Quieter Shelter Makes Friends
The hulking Sumner Armory, at 357 Marcus Garvey Boulevard, was a shelter for as many as 800 homeless men until a court ordered a cutback last summer.
Now the shelter houses about 200 men.
And as the crowds have thinned, the neighborhood has warmed.
In monthly meetings with the shelter's administrators, residents can now press their requests -- among them, that the men not congregate outside and that they seek employment; the city has agreed to these suggestions.
Also at residents' request, the entrance has been moved from Putnam Avenue, a residential street, to the more commercial Marcus Garvey Boulevard.
As a result, the neighborhood has become more accepting.


Venice in a Time of Film Fever
Venice is a movie-haunted city.
It is difficult to sail along the Grand Canal without looking over your shoulder for a sinister dwarf in a red-hooded raincoat, straight from Nicolas Roeg's chilling "Don't Look Now." And it is impossible to walk up the steps of the opulent Hotel des Bains, on the seaside of the Lido island, without recognizing the real-life setting of "Death in Venice." The hotel was named in Thomas Mann's novella and seen in Luchino Visconti's sumptuous film.
But just when you expect Dirk Bogarde to step out of that movie and head toward the beach, you spot a more familiar face.
Yes, it's Harrison Ford on the veranda of the "Death in Venice" hotel, trailed by paparazzi as he arrives at a dinner party for "The Fugitive," being shown that night at the Venice Film Festival.
In the background, the waiters wear trendy black T-shirts with white letters that say "Wanted: Richard Kimble" above Mr.
Ford's mug shot.
This is not the elegant scene Thomas Mann envisioned, but Mann later spent some years in Hollywood, so he might have understood the spectacle that the 50th Venice Film Festival became.


3 Charged With Vandalizing Jewish Graves
Three teen-age boys from neighboring Elmwood Park have been arrested and accused of spray-painting swastikas and pro-Hitler slogans on 98 tombstones in a Jewish cemetery here on Sept. 15, the eve of Rosh ha-Shanah.
The Bergen County Prosecutor, John J. Fahy, said the youths had planned the desecration to coincide with the Jewish New Year.
"They knew it was Rosh ha-Shanah," Mr.
Fahy said today.
"Basically, they wanted to upset the Jewish community, which is outrageous."


Recorder Guild to Open Season in White Plains
THERE are at least three secular reasons for going to church this week: listening to American theater songs, watching classical Japanese dance and playing in a recorder consort.
The Westchester Recorder Guild opens its ninth season tomorrow at the Roman Catholic Church of St.
John the Evangelist in White Plains.
The guild, one of 75 chapters of the American Recorder Society, meets from 7:45 until about 10 P.M. on the fourth Monday of each month, offering workshops and coaching sessions from beginner to advanced levels, and sometimes impromptu performances.
For membership information, the number to call is 429-8340.


HIGH SCHOOL FOOTBALL REPORT
C.H.S.F.L.
CONVERTING LOSS TO VICTORY: Dave Rodriguez's conversion pass to Michael Baptiste in the fourth quarter proved to be the difference in CARDINAL SPELLMAN'S (2-1) 8-6 victory over XAVIER (0-2).
The game was scoreless until the final quarter when Richard Monda, of Spellman, capped a 7-play, 60-yard drive with a 2-yard plunge.
Xavier scored its touchdown with 1 minute remaining on a rugby-style trick play that involved four laterals and left the ball in the hands of James Chiachiaro, who raced 35 yards for a score.
But Spellman sealed the victory when it stopped Xavier's 2-point conversion attempt.
Other than Xavier's scoring play, the Falcons defense, led by defensive Tom Amadeo (2 sacks), did not allow Xavier to Spellman's 40-yard line.


This Autumn in New York, Fear of Asbestos Is in the Air
SOMEDAY, maybe every pollutant will be famous for 15 minutes.
Right now it's asbestos's turn.
In a city filled with threats, environmental and otherwise, asbestos has nearly become an obsession.
New York City had a crash program to find and remove dangerous asbestos in schools after a 1986 Federal law.
Now it has another.
Politicians rage, parents protest, investigators investigate and lots of people worry, including kids who are attending schools marked by the modern version of a witch's hex mark, duct tape.


I'm a Travelin' Man
Going away again?
Imagine all those stone bridges, quaint inns, warm fires, lucrative contracts.
Remember severe wardrobe edit, indifferent cabbies, dehydration, wrinkled linen, snapshot junkies, foreign customs, U.S.
Customs.
Don't forget to write. *
Reservations.
Confirmations.
Aggravations.
Why bother?
Find a good travel agent.
They know nice hotels.
They ask questions you don't until you get there.
They know people, make deals and save money, because they cost you nothing.
That's right, nothing.
In case no one's told you, their commissions come from the other side.


Quaffing the Heady Brews of Belgium
IN tiny Belgium, a country the size of Maryland with about 10 million inhabitants, a beer enthusiast might sample a different Belgian brew every day of the year and still leave several dozen untasted.
The love of beer and respect for native brewing traditions are among the few things besides king and currency that remain common to Belgium's rival communities, the Francophone Walloons and Dutch-speaking Flemish.
On the equivalent of a pub crawl through officially bilingual and bicultural Brussels, visitors can easily manage to visit any number of attractive cafes, taste Trappist ales, cherry-flavored krieks and other unusual beers and never repeat an order.
Chez Marcel, a sidewalk cafe on the Place du Jeu de Balle serves light lunches, so an appropriate beer there might be a Cantillon gueuze ($2.85 for a 100-centiliter bottle that serves three glasses, calculated at the rate of 35 Belgian francs to the dollar).
Frothy and tart, with a hint of apples, gueuze is a thirst-quenching specialty native to Brussels, and was once the drink of choice of working people living in the surrounding area known as Les Marolles.


Edible Souvenirs
To the Editor: I have been following Susan Allen Toth's advice ("On English Supermarket Shelves, Edible Souvenirs," Aug. 22) for quite some time, not just in England, but anywhere I travel.
A few suggestions: The food section of Marks &amp; Spencer department stores has quite reasonable prices.
For example, on a recent trip a jar of St.
Michael's Fresh Fruit Orange Marmalade was a mere 99 pence (about $1.50).
One word of caution: Buy English baked goods, which contain few preservatives, at the last possible moment.
A bit more expensive, but an endless source of possibilities, are the Food Halls of Harrods.
The Millinery Style Fruit Drops in designer tins, featuring portraits of turn-of-the-century women, makes a fine gift at $:2.50 ($3.75).
Harrods also has an airport shop at Heathrow.


The Subject Was Close to Home
The French Impression-ist painter Pierre Bonnard (1867-1947) was a deeply private person of legendary modesty and little interest in the world of men.
A compulsive observer who leaned toward the azure blues and fiery reds of the Fauves, he was a painter who saw the exotic in the everyday.
"Art will never be able to do without nature," Bonnard once wrote, a belief emphasized in his diary, which in 20 years contained but three short reflections on society.
Instead, its pages of crablike script were devoted to precise notations on the weather and scores of pencil sketches executed in or around his home at Le Cannet, the sun-drenched village in the south of France where he lived for most of each year.
Jean Leymarie, an art historian and an acquaintance of Bonnard's, and Michel Terrasse, the painter's great-nephew, have coupled their memories of the painter, his house and gardens with more than 130 related illustrations, 77 in color, to illustrate the sources of Bonnard's art and methods.
The result, BONNARD AT LE CANNET (Thames and Hudson, paper, $24.95), is a handsome book, unusual for the intimate portrait it presents of the painter's private world and for the poetry of its text, which shimmers with detail.
Mr.
Leymarie, in his preface, and Mr.
Terrasse, in the main text, have caught small, significant moments -- snippets of conversation, the decorations of a room, the quality of light during an early morning stroll -- and shared them with the reader.
The photographs have been arranged by setting and divided into sections (the garden, the dining room, the studio and so on), each introduced by a small drawing or a page from Bonnard's diary.
Fourteen penetrating photographs of Bonnard in his rooms by Henri Cartier-Bresson echo the intense symbiosis between the artist and his domestic world.
"Every true artist finds the subjects that he needs," said Bonnard, who found them all close to home.
ANDREA BARNET


Next Polish Leaders Try to Ease West's Fears
The former Communists who finished first in parliamentary elections last Sunday have tried to assuage the concerns of foreign governments by telling diplomats here they will not make radical changes.
The leaders of the Democratic Left Alliance, the successor party to the Communists who ruled Poland for 40 years, said Friday at a meeting with diplomats that there would be "no purges" in their new administration.


Corrections
An essay on Aug. 29, about an unconventional book called "Agrippa (A Book of the Dead)," misstated the past relationship between Kevin Begos Jr., a publisher of luxurious limited editions, and the Limited Editions Club, another such publisher.
Mr.
Begos was a production consultant to the Limited Editions Club from fall 1989 to spring 1991; he was not its publisher.


DOWN TIME
If something good is to emerge from the tragedy of Vincent Foster, it might be a greater public awareness of the symptoms and treatment of depression.
Public education about this common illness would be more helpful than facile parallels between Foster's death and Woody Allen movies or recent best sellers.
JOHN C. MARKOWITZ, M.D.
Assistant Professor of Psychiatry, Cornell University Medical College New York, N.Y.


INSIDE
Inner Conflicts in Sarajevo
The defense of Sarajevo rests on a fractious alliance between ethnically mixed army units and paramilitary groups that are increasingly at odds with one another.
Page 20.
Competing Claims in Amazon
Oil drillers and "nature tourist" companies argue that Ecuador's wealthy Amazon region isn't big enough for both industries.
Page 3.
Clinton in New York City
President Clinton's arrival in New York today will mean more traffic delays than usual due to security concerns from the trade center bombing trial and fears of terrorism.
Page 39.
Punishment in Los Angeles
Tomorrow, the two police officers convicted in the beating of Rodney G. King join a tormented fraternity of imprisoned law officers.
Page 26.
Barge Company Under Cloud
Entangled in the Amtrak crash is a major barge-towing company with a sterling safety record.
Page 28.


Editorial Notebook; Who Owns the Gold of Troy?
In late August, Russia's Minister of Culture confirmed an astonishing report that the lost treasure of Troy had been hidden for decades in a secret depot in Moscow.
This was the glittering trove that Heinrich Schliemann found in 1873 at the site of Troy in Turkish Asia Minor.
What Schliemann mistakenly called the "Treasure of Priam" was presented to his native Germany and exhibited in Berlin.
During World War II the treasure was stowed in an antiaircraft bunker until it vanished in 1945 as the Red Army entered Berlin.


Edible Souvenirs
To the Editor: I too come home laden with English edibles after visiting my daughter in Cheltenham.
Another supermarket item is Branston Pickle, a poor man's chutney, which adds zest to cold meats and chicken.


A Star With Lofty Ambitions
Burt Young has acted with stars like Sylvester Stallone and Mickey Rourke, and in films like "Last Exit to Brooklyn" and "Once Upon a Time in America." But these days he's working in a cramped loft above a supermarket on Arthur Avenue.
The loft is actually the Belmont Italian-American Playhouse, a 70-seat theater that three men from the neighborhood -- a merchant and two actors -- opened more than two years ago with grand visions of bringing a slice of Broadway to the Bronx.


Data Bank/September 26, 1993


Whatever the Skin Color, Cruelty Is Unacceptable
To the Editor:
Son, you should know that the great-great-grandfathers of those kids who stole the bike were sold into slavery by rival African tribes and dispersed to the Americas to work the soil with no rights whatsoever.
They were not treated or regarded as human beings but machines.
A good deal of America's history has revolved around settling black/white issues.
These children still view the struggle as continuing, not necessarily as much black/white as money and power.


Wall Street; At Investment Companies, a Cut in Ad Spending
PRINT and cable television advertising by mutual fund companies and full-service brokers declined in the first half of the year.
Funds spent $94.7 million (down 5 percent) and full-service brokers $53 million (down 14 percent) promoting their investment products.
But banks played catch-up, spending $10 million in the first half of the year, up from $5.4 million in the first half of 1992.


The Primary Runoff
The Democratic primary runoff between Alan G. Hevesi and Elizabeth Holtzman for city comptroller will be held on Tuesday, from 6 A.M. to 9 P.M.
For addresses of polling places, call (212) VOTE-NYC or (212) 868-3692.


Ready for Fall
Last call to bring house plants indoors.
Check the leaves for insects or disease, and if necessary, wash with water or a mild soap solution (I chip off flakes from a bar of Ivory).
Start raking leaves as they fall, and put them on the compost pile.
Too many leaves on the lawn will inhibit top growth and root development.


CONNECTICUT GUIDE
'MERCHANT OF VENICE'
Mark Lamos, executive director of the Hartford Stage Company since 1980, has taken on his 11th Shakespeare production with "The Merchant of Venice," opening Oct. 8 and running through Nov. 6.
Previews begin on Saturday and run through Oct. 7.


Diverse Fare Where Tellers Once Reigned
RESTAURANTS on Washington Street in South Norwalk have clustered on the south side but the new Amberjacks is on the north side in space once occupied by the Connecticut National Bank.
All traces of the bank are gone except for the legacy of a vast space, center columns and high ceilings.
Amberjacks has painted the ceiling dark blue to suggest a sky, with tiny star-shape lights twinkling overhead.
The walls have been sponged a neutral creamy tone; sails with marine signal flags are draped along one wall for a suggestion of the sea.
Banquettes in a dark blue fabric line both sides of the wide room, while the front of the building is given over to a bar.
On our visits, the bar was hopping, mostly with younger patrons, though the recorded music that wafts through the room is varied enough to satisfy most age groups.


Commercial Property/Specialized Buildings; Filling Up Space With Like-Minded Tenants
LIKE many not-so-new and not-so-fancy Manhattan office buildings, 1040 Avenue of the Americas couldn't make a dent in its 25 percent vacancy rate.
Its 39th Street location was not a great draw, and it had no particular amenities.
Then a couple years ago, the Winoker Realty brokers who manage the building started marketing it to textile companies.
They stressed that the building was just one block from the garment district (albeit a very long one) and that by clustering in the building tenants could offer one-stop shopping for textile buyers.


A Block Association Lesson: There's Power in Numbers
WE SIT in a basement room strewn with blocks and tricycles.
Our agenda: a litany of stabbings and drug deals and late-night brawls.
We talk strategy and assign tasks.
We are the leaders of a block association on the Upper West Side.
There was a time when I viewed block associations as glorified kaffeeklatsches preoccupied with parties, bake sales and crumbling real-estate values.
Now I know better.
We have made our neighborhood safer, persuaded slumlords to clean up their act, tackled everything from garbage to graffiti.


Conversations/David Satcher; C.D.C.'s New Chief Worries as Much About Bullets as About Bacteria
"I LIKE to quote John Gardner, who said life is full of golden opportunities disguised as irresolvable problems," said David Satcher, the 52-year-old President of Meharry Medical College in Nashville, who last month was named the new director of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention here.
"I've had that experience in my own life, and I bring that perspective to the problems of this nation as it relates to health care."
What makes Dr.
Satcher's views of note is less what he says than what he has done.
In a nation where it's almost impossible to flip across a radio dial without hearing the standard talk show litany of what government and society can't do, his life has been an exercise in walking up to locked doors and somehow finding a key.


Slow Fade To Blue. And Cut.
Derek Jarman, the British director of films like "Caravaggio" and "Edward II," has sadly decided that his newest film will also be his last.
The movie, "Blue," which will be shown Oct. 3 as part of the New York Film Festival, is starkly unconventional.
Just 76 minutes long, it consists of nothing but a blue screen and dialogue.


The Art of Peace
RALPH BUNCHE An American Life.
By Brian Urquhart.
Illustrated. 496 pp.
New York: W.W.
Norton &amp; Company. $27.50.


A Ray of Sun on a Day of Self-Examination


Suzuki's Sidekick: Useful, Thrifty and Entertaining
YOU don't hear much about Suzuki these days, but Japan's No. 6 automaker just keeps on truckin'.
In fact, American sales for 1992 were up 15 percent from the year before, and the company expects '93 results to be 12 percent better than that.
And while the numbers are not huge -- 25,000 to 30,000 vehicles a year -- any double-digit increase in today's market is worth noting.


SEPTEMBER 19-25: Donors' Conference; Clinton Looks for Help To Finance Mideast Peace
As the Israeli-Palestinian accord progressed last week -- with the Israeli Parliament ratifying it over less-than-expected right-wing opposition -- President Clinton designated himself as the global fund-raiser for Middle East peace.
He has sent out invitations to more than two dozen leaders of the world's richest countries, asking them to send their representatives to Washington this week to pledge enough money to make the Palestinians' experiment with autonomy work.
The United States last week promised $250 million over the next two years -- less than half of what the World Bank estimates the Palestinians will need during that period and a fraction of the $5.1 billion in annual American aid for Israel and Egypt.
Those two countries made their peace in the 1970's at Camp David; their American assistance has been linked by an unchanging formula ever since.


Amid Turmoil, Holtzman Is Top Fund-Raiser
In a period when her integrity was under near-constant fire, Elizabeth Holtzman managed to raise more campaign contributions than her rivals for city comptroller, Assemblyman Alan G. Hevesi and Herman Badillo, campaign finance reports show.
Between Sept. 7 and last Monday, Ms.
Holtzman received $266,100 in contributions while Mr.
Hevesi received $229,494 and Mr.
Badillo, $127,970, according to summaries of reports sent to the city's Campaign Finance Board yesterday.


New Housing for People With AIDS
After years of intense debate, five new housing projects for people with AIDS are on the way on the Lower East Side.
The projects -- along with another in Greenwich Village -- have ignited battles among politicians, leaders among the gay community and advocates for people with AIDS, even though all parties agree on the need for group residences for homeless people with AIDS who do not require hospitalization or placement in nursing homes.


When in Rome . . .
To the Editor:
While it may be encouraging that some companies are beginning to appreciate multilingual managers ("When a Deal Can Turn on a Turn of a Phrase," Sept. 12), I consider the more typical case to be that of a company that will send an English-speaking executive to another country without any preparation whatsoever.
Several years ago I informally briefed a woman acquaintance, a high-level sales manager being sent by her multinational pharmaceutical company to Japan for the first time.
Although well educated, she knew absolutely nothing about Japanese society or mores -- and neither she nor her company felt it worth her time to read even one general book on Japanese society before going off to participate in million-dollar transactions.
Similarly, I recall a seatmate on a plane, a banker going off to Canada, who assumed Canada was no more than an extension of the United States.


Who's Bashing Whom?
To the Editor:
Thank you for the review of my book "The Power and the Money: Inside The Wall Street Journal" (Aug. 15).
However, I do wish to clarify two statements made by the reviewer.


Some Updates on the Pot Pie
ON a fall night after a season of grilled food and salads, I love an old-fashioned pot pie.
When you slice into the crust, a wonderful aroma is released, great for appetites sharpened by cooler weather.
Several years ago David Bouley (chef at the renowned Bouley restaurant in Manhattan) gave me a recipe for pot pie made with Cornish hens instead of the traditional chicken.
It made perfect sense, for the hens can be cut into smaller pieces to fit more easily into individual pie dishes.


Caroline Earle, Eric F. Walsh
Eleanor F. Owens Earle of Narragansett, R.I., and Ralph Earle 2d of Washington, have announced the engagement of their daughter Caroline Ewing McKenzie Earle to First Lieut.
Eric Ferguson Walsh, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Laurence S. Walsh of Providence, R.I.
An April wedding is planned.
Miss Earle, a graduate of Harvard University, is an English teacher at the Harbor Day School in Corona del Mar, Calif.
Her father, the chairman of the Lawyers' Alliance for World Security in Washington, was a director of the United States Arms Control and Disarmament Agency and the chief negotiator for the second Strategic Arms Limitation Treaty.
Her mother is an archeological researcher specializing in Etruscan studies.
The future bride's paternal grandfather, the late George H. Earle 3d, was the Governor of Pennsylvania from 1935 to 1939.


Suffolk Boces Weighs Plan to Consolidate Three Districts
A showdown is looming over the fate of the three Boces districts in Suffolk County, which have been the subject of increasing attention since the disclosure of a large benefit package for a retiring superintendent.
When two of the three Boces superintendents retire this year, officials will decide whether to replace or reorganize the districts.
State law requires the evaluation, said the Superintendent of Boces 2 in central Suffolk, Dr.
Edward Milliken.
When a superintendent's office becomes vacant, he said, the State Education Department has to determine whether there should be a reorganization or if a successor should be appointed.


An Insiders' Guide to the World of Film Festivals
What is a Film FEStival?
A boulevard of starlets, agents, movie moguls and poseurs?
A group of cineastes rubbing elbow patches and contemplating Fassbinder?
Locals jockeying for a look at Madonna?
Sometimes it is all of these.
From the de trop spectacle of Cannes to the more laid-back festivals in Seattle and San Francisco, each has an assigned role.
The splashier venues get media attention for big movies; smaller festivals start word of mouth; all are good for the towns.


Bang! 14 Boats Go Round the World
On a gloomy English day that gave only a hint of the high winds, rough seas and foul weather that lay before them, 14 boats set out today on the Whitbread Round the World Race, a 32,000-mile, nine-month test of technology, sailing skill and sheer endurance.
Having attracted the world's best-known skipper, Dennis Conner, many other of the world's best sailors and a slew of new corporate sponsors, the race has generated more public attention than any of the previous five Whitbreads.


They Must Have Practiced
A storm didn't spoil Carnegie Hall's 103d opening night, Sept. 23.


Sailing Back in Time


THE TRIALS OF BOB PACKWOOD
Guilty of what?
Bob Packwood may be guilty of suffering from a mood disorder that often accompanies intellectual brilliance.
In Trip Gabriel's exposition, the Senator exhibits mood swings, ranging from almost total loss of self-esteem to campaign work of manic proportions to amorous outbursts.


An Open Mike, a Loudmouth Live, and Thou . . .
IT was the ultimate tribute to the power of talk radio: Bill Clinton was taking questions.
Last week, as part of the media blitz surrounding the President's health care proposal, the Clinton Administration held the first-ever White House briefing for hosts of the nation's radio call-in programs.
Roughly 200 hosts showed up.


F.Y.I.
Park Markers Q.  What are those numbers attached to the lampposts in Central Park?
Do they signify something that strollers should know about?
A.
Every lamppost in Central Park has a little metal plate attached to its base that shows a four-digit number.
The first two numbers indicate the nearest cross street, so if the plate says 6325, 63d Street is nearby.


Of Guns and Grammar
To the Editor:
How clever of you to have G. Gordon Liddy review Tom Clancy's latest book.
Presumably, Mr.
Liddy knows something about covert operations and weaponry, so his comments are worth noting.
On the subject of English, however, Mr.
Liddy misfires.
Tom Clancy and I attended the same Jesuit high school and college in Baltimore as contemporaries.
Consequently, we had many teachers in common.
Before we ever marched up the grassy knoll at Blakefield to receive our diplomas, the Jesuits made sure we knew the finer points of grammar in English, Latin and Greek.


In America; Courage And Blind Courage
"I love his courage," said Representative Dan Rostenkowski, chairman of the House Ways and Means Committee.
"And I recognize the dilemma we're in. There could be a catastrophe if we don't do something about health care."
He then laughed and said he hoped that President Clinton's courage in pursuing health care reform was not "blind courage."


EUROPE: FALL AND WINTER: What's New, From Soho to Salamanca -- Germany; Berlin revitalized, new train route south
Reunited Germany is still a new country, and its people are enjoying the sensation of being back at the heart of Europe.
Great amounts of public and private money are being spent here, and visitors can enjoy many of the benefits.
Berlin, the once and future capital, pulsates with life.
Its museums offer a dazzling variety of exhibitions, including several blockbusters scheduled for the coming months.
At the Brucke Museum, 9 Bussardsteig; (030) 831 2029, a new show of the work of Ernst Ludwig Kirchner, the influential German Expressionist artist, will run until Jan. 9.


In Asia, a Self-Styled Queen Falls and a King Rises


Sally Collier, Brian Lovegrove
Sally McQueen Collier, the daughter of Christopher Collier of Orange, Conn., and Virginia Collier of West Redding, Conn., was married yesterday to Brian Clark Lovegrove, a son of Dr.
Robert and Sandra Lovegrove of Darien, Conn.
The Rev.
Dr.
Lawrence M. Horton, a Presbyterian minister, officiated at the Talmadge Hill Community Church in Darien.
Mrs.
Lovegrove is a librarian at the John C. Hart Memorial Library in Shrub Oak, N.Y.
She graduated from Drew University and received a master's degree in library science from Southern Connecticut State University.
Her father is the Connecticut state historian and a professor of history at the University of Connecticut, in Storrs.
Her mother, now retired, was a teacher at John Reed Middle School in West Redding.


Style Hopping
Recipe for a new style: a dash of hip-hop, a smidgen of deconstructionism and a big dollop of white cotton shirt with shirttails hanging and cuffs flapping.
Wrap it up with a vest in any length, and you have the fall look for the 90's -- slightly disheveled but with none of the street-smart extremes.
A perfect example was Karl Lagerfeld's fall collection, in which he deconstructed the traditional Chanel formula.
Many people laughed when it was first shown, but a few of the traditionalists are now wearing it on the streets of New York (photo right), just as he showed it.


Gentlemen, Stop Your Engines Please
The Police Department's battle for control of Francis Lewis Boulevard, a notorious strip for cruising and drag racing, has come down to this in recent weeks: issuing hundreds of traffic summonses, impounding cars and sending nearly two dozen drivers to jail.
Francis Lewis, which winds through Fresh Meadows, Bayside and Whitestone, has for years been a place where young people cruise for dates and test the limits of their bravado at the wheel of cars with souped-up engines.


SURFACING
TELEVISION -- Old hits/"new" theme songs: In the same spirit in which "Murphy Brown" panders to baby-boomer sentimentality with Motown hits, two new CBS shows are drawing their theme songs from anthems of days gone by.


The Health Plan; Rising Expectations And Fear of the Bills Create an Opening
IT was only a wallet-size piece of red, white and blue plastic with two gold stars that President Clinton flashed to millions of Americans.
But this "health security card" would be enough, he assured the public, to to safeguard Americans from a recurring nightmare: losing not only their health, but their ability to afford a cure.
Nearly 50 years after President Harry S. Truman proposed national health insurance, a consensus has finally emerged among Republicans, Democrats, labor and business groups that the nation needs to change the system.
The desperation is so great that the same public that often says that Government cannot do anything right is now accepting the idea that Washington can be trusted to create a system that will control the most important, intimate and expensive aspects of American life.


Time for Punishment in King Case
Officer Laurence M. Powell is terrified, unsure if he will emerge from prison alive.
Sgt.
Stacey C. Koon, a tougher man, has steeled himself by studying everything he can about the ordeal that lies ahead.
By noon on Monday, the two police officers convicted in the videotaped beating of Rodney G. King must report to the authorities to begin serving their sentences of two and half years in prison.
They will become members of a small, tormented fraternity of imprisoned law officers, who face special dangers among a prison population that hates them.


Q and A
Federal Tax Exemption Q. My husband and I are close to retirement and own two houses.
One is our permanent residence and the other is a summer or vacation home.
We know there is a once-in-a-lifetime Federal tax exemption of $125,000 when you sell your residence.
We would like to know if it is possible for my husband to take his tax deduction in one of the houses and for me to take the deduction on the other.


'My Bum Bill': Horrendously Demeaning?
To the Editor:
In the Sept. 12 column called "Coping," Robert Lipsyte's reference to the man struggling to survive on a street corner as "My bum Bill" was horrendously demeaning.


60 U.S. Cultists Still Being Held in Argentina
More than three weeks after the Argentine police raided 10 homes of a religious group formerly known as the Children of God, nearly 60 Americans remain in custody, constituting the largest group of United States citizens being held by a foreign court.
Of that number, 7 adults have been charged with crimes that include sexually abusing children, hiding minors, corrupting minors, violating their rights and racketeering.


Votes in Congress
Tally Last Week in Connecticut, New Jersey and New York
Senate
1.
Base Closings: Vote to overturn the recommendations of the Defense Base Cloture and Realignment Commission.
Rejected 83 to 12, Sept. 20.
2.
Space Station: Vote to kill an amendment to a spending bill for various Federal agencies that would delete funds for the proposed space station.
Approved 59 to 40, Sept. 22.
3.
Foreign Aid: Vote on passage of a bill providing $12.5 billion for foreign aid programs in the 1994 fiscal year including $2.5 billion for Russia.
Approved 88 to 10, Sept. 23.
1
2
3
Connecticut
Dodd (D) . . .
N
Y
Y
Lieberman (D) . . .
N
Y
Y
New Jersey
Bradley (D) . . .
N
N
Y
Lautenberg (D) . . .
N
N
Y
New York D'Amato (R) . . .
A
N
Y
Moynihan (D) . . .
N
N
Y
House
1.
U.S.
Workers: Vote on passage of a bill that would lift many restrictions on political activity by Federal employees.
Approved 339 to 85, Sept. 21.
1
Connecticut
1. Kennelly (D) . . .
Y
2. Gejdenson (D) . . .
Y
3. DeLauro (D) . . .
Y
4. Shays (R) . . .
Y
5. Franks (R) . . .
N
6. Johnson (R) . . .
N
New Jersey
1. Andrews (D) . . .
Y
2. Hughes (D) . . .
Y
3. Saxton (R) . . .
Y
4. Smith (R) . . .
Y
5. Roukema (R) . . .
Y
6. Pallone (D) . . .
Y
7. Franks (R) . . .
Y
8. Klein (D) . . .
Y
9. Torricelli (D) . . .
Y
10. Payne (D) . . .
Y
11. Gallo (R) . . .
Y
12. Zimmer (R) . . .
Y
13. Menendez (D) . . .
Y
New York
1. Hochbrueckner (D) . . .
Y
2. Lazio (R) . . .
Y
3. King (R) . . .
Y
4. Levy (R) . . .
Y
5. Ackerman (D) . . .
Y
6. Flake (D) . . .
Y
7. Manton (D) . . .
Y
8. Nadler (D) . . .
Y
9. Schumer (D) . . .
Y
10. Towns (D) . . .
Y
11. Owens (D) . . .
Y
12. Velazquez (D) . . .
Y
13. Molinari (R) . . .
Y
14. Maloney (D) . . .
Y
15. Rangel (D) . . .
Y
16. Serrano (D) . . .
Y
17. Engel (D) . . .
Y
18. Lowey (D) . . .
Y
19. Fish (R) . . .
Y
20. Gilman (R) . . .
Y
21. McNulty (D) . . .
Y
22. Solomon (R) . . .
Y
23. Boehlert (R) . . .
Y
24. McHugh (R) . . .
Y
25. Walsh (R) . . .
Y
26. Hinchey (D) . . .
Y
27. Paxon (R) . . .
N
28. Slaughter (D) . . .
Y
29. LaFalce (D) . . .
Y
30. Quinn (R) . . .
Y
31. Houghton (R) . . .
Y
KEY: Y Yea; N Nay; (A) Absent or did not vote; (P) Present.


Irving R. Wisch, 82, a Leader Of New York's Dairy Industry
Irving R. Wisch, who learned to milk cows as a boy at his family's dairy in Brooklyn and grew up to head the milk industry in metropolitan New York, died on Friday at a hospital in Norwalk, Conn.
He was 82 and lived in Boca Raton, Fla., and Westport, Conn.
The cause of death was cardiac arrest, his family said.


Helping Sellers In a Soggy Market
To the Editor:
As you pointed out in "When a Home is Worth Less Than Its Mortgage" on Aug. 8, individuals who purchased homes during the 1980's when real estate values had skyrocketed are now finding themselves in a situation where their property is worth far less than their mortgage.


One Fish That Got Away
To the Editor:
You report that bands with the word "fish" in their names are "Surfacing" (Sept. 5).
Much to my chagrin, you neglected to mention the Washington neo-funk band Toadfish.
ERIC GOLDBERG  Bassist, Toadfish Bethesda, Md.


First He Imitates De Niro, Then He Stars With Him
Lillo Brancato, the 17-year-old first-time actor who plays Robert De Niro's son in the new film "A Bronx Tale," could have learned his speech and swagger from the movies that have taught the world about Italian-Americans.
He has the natural jitters of Johnny Boy, the character in Martin Scorsese's "Mean Streets" that 20 years ago launched Mr.
De Niro's star.
Mr.
Brancato's small talk is like Scorsesean dialogue, rapid-fire dese and dose, a liberal sprinkling of meaningless participial obscenities.
If you didn't know he was from Yonkers, you'd swear he came from central casting.
A handsome young man with powerful angles in his face and a pug's crooked nose, he could, in fact, pass for a De Niro scion.
He's friendly, earnest, sweet-tempered, a fast talker, a salesman, the kind of goofy tough guy that once upon a time used to hang out on a city street corner but now you'd find at the mall.
Or maybe Jones Beach, which is where a casting agent for "A Bronx Tale" came upon Mr.
Brancato last summer.


Teaching Crafts to Homeless Women
IN a hotel basement dining room, where the odors of last night's dinner linger, half a dozen women sit quietly working at pieces of fabric stretched taut over embroidery hoops.
Using little more than glue guns, scissors and their imaginations, the women rummage through shopping bags full of donated clothes to find items that they can incorporate in their own designs, like a Little Mermaid cloth figure from a child's discarded sweatshirt or perhaps an intact image of a colorful bird from an otherwise frayed robe.
What might appear to be a suburban sewing circle is actually a crafts program, which Margarita Rivera, who runs the Soup Kitchen and Daily Bread programs for the Grace Episcopal Church Community Center in White Plains, began last May.
Run primarily by Ms.
Rivera, with some help from community volunteers, the program offers the homeless women who live at the Coachman Hotel a chance to learn crafts and sewing skills.


Police Corruption Panel Goes Public This Week
When a mayoral panel began looking into police corruption in New York City in the summer of 1992, one of its main goals was to avoid getting enmeshed in politics.
But the panel, known as the Mollen Commission, will begin unveiling its findings through witness testimony tomorrow, and many political experts say the results could significantly influence the mayoral election, only five weeks away.
Many independent political experts believe that revelations of police wrongdoing and abuses that the commission is expected to expose will damage the re-election prospects of Mayor David N. Dinkins, a Democrat, against his chief opponent, Rudolph W. Giuliani, running as a Republican-Liberal.


Nerds: The Next Generation
To the Editor:
I was delighted to see your article on women and computing ("Woman, Computer Nerd -- and Proud," Aug. 29).
In years to come they should have more female company at work.
In my Computer Equity Expert project, 200 K-12 educators representing every state in the nation learned how to encourage girls to persist in computing as well as math and science.
They achieved many results in their schools like the following:


If Concepts Be the Food Of Love . . .
Two big stories in the classical-music business during the summer made more sense after an item appeared in this newspaper about artists handing out $10 bills to illegal immigrants in Southern California.
One of the artists, David Avalos, said that giving away money signed by him and his colleagues was both art and political statement: in his terms, "the interaction of physical space with intellectual space and civic space."
What you do becomes less important than what you think about what you do.
The idea comes first; the execution is less interesting.
Pity the poor performance-art critic asked to review Mr.
Avalos in action.
Does one admire the motion of the wrist as $10 pass from one hand to the next, the ethereal crackle of new bills in passage, the virtuoso fleetness of recipients as they repair to the nearest cantina?


Oil and Tourism Don't Mix, Inciting Amazon Battle
Standing on a riverbank outside his Amazon tourist lodge, Pieter Jan Brouwer raised his rifle one day last year and shot out the tires, headlights and windshields of a dozen trucks and bulldozers that were dredging gravel for an American oil company road.
"I had the disaster of having the hotel full and 14 guests pounding on my door at 4 A.M. threatening to sue me," Mr.
Brouwer recalled of the round-the-clock dredging operations by a subcontractor for Maxus Ecuador Inc., the oil company.
"If you come to see the rain forest, to watch birds and to enjoy tranquillity, you can't imagine what it is like to wake up and see dump trucks and bulldozers."


P. T. Barnum Was A Past Master
To the Editor:
As executive director of the Barnum Museum, I read with interest the article "For Museum Shows, the Name Has to Say It All"  [ Aug. 29 ] , in which Steven Millhauser's book about our museum is mentioned.


A Crackdown Is Protested And Praised
Greenwich Village leaders are applauding a crackdown on noise and other violations as a step toward restoring civility to their neighborhood, but some critics say the police are overreacting and abusive.
A prime enforcement target is youths cruising in sporty cars with blasting boom-box radios, a late-night ritual now being curbed with traffic tickets and impounded automobiles.


Barney's What's Least Wrong With TV; Listen to the Message
To the Editor:
I'm 11 and read your Sept. 15 editorial "Regarding Barney" (the purple dinosaur) and it made me a little sad.
My 2 1/2-year-old sister loves Barney and his songs, which express love within families.
It's a shame some people feel the need to sing Barney songs to the tune of hatred.
Although the songs were written for younger children, our country would be a lot safer if everyone listened to his message rather than to the song of those who would shut him up with guns.
MICHELLE BOTTALICO Voorhees, N.J., Sept. 15, 1993


Klein Passes for 409 Yards as C. W. Post Defeats Marist
C. W. Post 31, Marist 10
Quarterback Perry Klein, a transfer from California-Berkeley, completed 26 of 42 passes for 409 yards and two touchdowns as C. W. Post trounced previously undefeated Marist, 31-10, yesterday afternoon at Leonidoff Field in Poughkeepsie, N.Y.


Poor Crop Forces Japan to Consider Rice Imports
Japan, which has long resisted international calls to open its rice market, is now preparing to authorize emergency imports to cope with a shortage caused by the worst harvest in decades.
"The rice harvest this year dropped drastically, to the extent that we might have to import some rice," Prime Minister Morihiro Hosokawa said in an interview with American correspondents on Friday night.


Big Cases May End in Small Settlements
UNTIL recently, Eileen Foreman, 46, who had her breasts enlarged 11 years ago with silicone, dreaded not only the prospect of serious illness resulting from her implants but also the likelihood of years of legal wrangling to get any redress.
But when the Pleasanton, Calif., resident learned that there might be a $4.74 billion settlement fund established to quickly compensate women injured by silicone implants, she took heart and immediately thought of contacting a lawyer.


Corrections
The answer to a question in the Streetscapes column on Sept. 5, about the redesign of the apartment house at 910 Fifth Avenue in the 1950's, referred incorrectly to the architectural firm in which Robert Bien is a partner.
It is the Eggers Group, no longer known as Eggers &amp; Higgins.


Elvis Discovered in a New Jersey Basement!
ROB LEVY, a piano dealer from Elizabeth who collects records, is no stranger to basements, attics and old record shops, where he has found all sorts of minor treasures.
But what he found in a basement in New Jersey took his breath away: believed to be a one-of-a-kind 1957 Elvis Presley Christmas album, pressed in red vinyl as a keepsake by an RCA engineer.
"We've found what is probably the rarest record in the world in mint, pristine condition," Mr.
Levy said.
"The black vinyl 1957 Elvis Presley Christmas Album is one of the most collectible albums on the market today, and we have the only one in red vinyl."


A Correction:


A Musical Tribute To Buddy Holly
WARNING: No gate-crashing at the Gateway Playhouse in Bellport.
No second-acting either.
You cannot mingle with the intermission crowd and then slink unobtrusively into an unsold seat when the lights go down.
That old Broadway trick will not work in a pristine suburban theater like this.
Besides, the Gateway production's first act of "Buddy: The Buddy Holly Story," which is on through next Sunday, is less laborious than the Broadway version in 1990, having been mercifully shorn of book though not of song.
So, even though the show does not shake and rattle the rafters until the last hour, more or less, at least it rolls on amiably enough to justify the price of a ticket.


When Pretty Plants Become Too Pushy
THE asters are blooming.
The goldenrods are glowing by highways.
Chrysanthemums are filling in flower borders with gold, yellow, bronze, maroon, even white blossoms.
One would think that the growing season is winding down and the end for herbaceous plants is near.
But not for all of them.
Some plants seem to thrive in spite of all these signals.
In fact, they spread far and wide until they make plant nuisances of themselves.
Some gardeners call them weeds.
Some call them plant pests.
Others call them invasive exotics.


Some Updates on the Pot Pie
ON a fall night after a season of grilled food and salads, I love an old-fashioned pot pie.
When you slice into the crust, a wonderful aroma is released, great for appetites sharpened by cooler weather.
Several years ago David Bouley (chef at the renowned Bouley restaurant in Manhattan) gave me a recipe for pot pie made with Cornish hens instead of the traditional chicken.
It made perfect sense, for the hens can be cut into smaller pieces to fit more easily into individual pie dishes.


David Brooks and Marta Bolstad
Marta Alexis Bolstad, the daughter of Judge Rita Bolstad and Dr.
Richard Bolstad of the Bronx, was married in New York yesterday to David Glenn Brooks, a son of Marylin Brooks of Rochester Hills, Mich., and Dr.
Richard Brooks of Punta Gorda, Fla.
The Very Rev.
James Parks Morton, dean of the Cathedral of St.
John the Divine, performed the Episcopal service at the cathedral.
Mrs.
Brooks is a lawyer at Legal Services for the Elderly, a nonprofit agency in Rego Park, Queens.
She graduated from Sarah Lawrence College and Brooklyn Law School.
Her father retired as president of Atramax in Paterson, N.J., a chemicals manufacturer.
Her mother is a State Family Court judge in the Bronx.


Goalie Brodeur Is Closer To a Spot With the Devils
Martin Brodeur had the ability and temperament to be a goaltender in the National Hockey League from his first training camp with the Devils in 1990, the year he was drafted in the first round.
But his chances were limited, with Sean Burke, Chris Terreri and Craig Billington around.
Brodeur was sent back to his junior team for two years and then to the Devils' top minor-league affiliate last season.


You've Got the Head For It
Claiming you look terrible in hats is like saying you don't have the right feet for socks.
Think smart.
Stay Warm.
Get used to them.


Every New President Gets a Rematch
"BRING them home!" Senator Robert C. Byrd of West Virginia thundered on the Senate floor the other day, as he pondered aloud the mounting risks facing American troops hunting down warlords in Mogadishu.
"I do not intend for the Senate just to roll over and play dead to this Administration!"
Well before a rocket-propelled grenade downed a U.S.
Blackhawk missle in the Somali capital Saturday, killing three American soldiers, these words gave evidence of Congress's increasing restiveness over the Somalia mission in particular and and foreign affairs in general.


A World of Food, River to Slope
AUNT SONIA (Article)  (718) 965-9526; 1123 Eighth Avenue, at 12th Street, Park Slope; $$; AE, MC, V
This down-home, casual place, named for the nearby Ansonia Clock Building, serves engaging fare at bargain prices.
The chef, Michael Schrieber, is a self-taught cook who, with his partner, Wayne Perez, turned a former bric-a-brac shop into a pleasant neighborhood restaurant.
The dining room has a bar on one side, a black-and-white tile floor, a high pressed-tin ceiling and blue-speckled Formica tables.
The menu changes often.
On the current list of offerings are apple pecan fritters with bourbon creamed corn; grilled eggplant and roasted pepper salad; avocado, jack cheese and blackened chicken tortilla, and a tart of grilled onion, sweet Gorgonzola and pear.
Among the entrees, there are Maryland crab cakes with a caper sour cream sauce, mashed potatoes and greens; seared pork chops with an apricot-jalapeno sauce; vegetable curry with coconut, lime and ginger, and a napoleon of tuna in a pool of savory caramel sauce. (Article: 9/23/90)  CUCINA ** (718) 230-0711; 256 Fifth Avenue, near Garfield Place, Park Slope; $; no credit cards
This stretch of Fifth Avenue in Park Slope is not the most picturesque, but that has not deterred discriminating diners from flocking to Cucina, a handsome, casual spot serving some of the most sophisticated Italian food in the borough.
The original dining room is the more charming of the two, with a painted tin ceiling, pale yellow walls, a wall montage of vegetables and vines, and fine old wood serving tables.
The larger, newer room, which brings the restaurant's capacity to 140, is more austere and produces echoes.
An antipasto buffet offers a selection of tantalizing appetizers.
Among the best are the grilled shrimp with white beans and escarole; terrine of eggplant and roasted peppers; grilled shiitake mushrooms and fennel salad, and Tuscan lentil salad with pancetta and garlic.
Pizzas, have thin, dense crusts.
The toppings are fresh and brightly seasoned.
The Cucina pizza, for example, has artichoke, grilled eggplant, salty soppressata (a smoked sausage of pork and bacon), fennel, tomato and mozzarella.
Superior entrees include osso buco in a Barolo wine sauce, served with pappardelle; roast rack of lamb with rosemary potatoes and fresh mint sauce; grilled salmon with escarole and plum tomatoes, and linguine nostra, combining lobster, shrimp and mussels in a tomato-basil sauce. (Review: 5/21/93) GARDEN CAFE ($25 and Under)  (718) 857-8863; 620 Vanderbilt Avenue, Prospect Heights; $; AE, V, MC
This homey mom-and-pop operation is a fantasy come true for Camille and John Policastro, who opened a little corner cafe in Prospect Heights seven years ago.
John tends a busy kitchen turning out zesty home-style food, while Camille warmly greets neighborhood patrons in the 25-seat dining room.
Portions are generous indeed, even for the bread, which may be a sesame-seed baguette one evening, a crusty peasant loaf the next.
Among the appetizers are grilled mozzarella panini with a pesto of roasted red peppers; cod croquettes with an arugula-and-garlic sauce, and shrimp kebabs with lentil salad and a citrus-and-parsley sauce.
Other specialties include fillet of beef served with a white peppercorn and port-wine glaze; deviled crab cakes with a green curry sauce, and a seafood stew with feta cheese and fresh tomato.
All entrees come with vegetables and a choice of potatoes or rice. ($25 and Under: 3/27/92) MOROCCAN STAR (Article)  (718) 643-0800; 205 Atlantic Avenue, between Court and Clinton Streets, Brooklyn Heights; $; MC, V
One of a dozen or so Middle Eastern and North African restaurants along Atlantic Avenue, this unpretentious family-run establishment stands out for its vibrant mix of Arabic and European dishes at bargain prices.
Ahmed Almontazer, the chef, formerly worked at Luchow's, the Four Seasons and the Brasserie in Manhattan, which explains the Continental accent in his cooking.
Recommended dishes include pastella, a semisweet pie made here with chicken, raisins, garlic and spices.
You can also get good couscous, with either lamb or chicken.
Another good bet is the intensely juicy lamb steak.
Moroccan Star does not serve beer or wine, but you may provide your own. (Article: 10/19/90) NEW PROSPECT CAFE (Article)  (718) 638-2148; 393 Flatbush Avenue, at Eighth Avenue, Park Slope; $$; AE
This bustling little neighborhood restaurant on busy Flatbush Avenue offers consistently good and lively fare at low prices.
Among the winning starters are skewered chicken breast and buckwheat noodles in a spicy peanut sauce and Parmesan-laced polenta with roasted whole garlic.
Entrees include chicken with a rosemary-scented gravy, served with mashed potatoes; pecan pesto gnocchi with sauteed spinach; game hen with wild mushrooms, garlic and bourbon, and catfish creole with grilled jalapeno corn bread. (Article: 9/23/90) PETER LUGER * (718) 387-7400; 178 Broadway, Williamsburg; $$$; Peter Luger card
Built in 1887 in the shadow of the Williamsburg Bridge, this historic steakhouse has always attracted a colorful crowd of serious eaters.
The restaurant has a well-worn charm: a long oak bar, elbow-worn to a patina, and dining rooms with exposed wooden beams, brass chandeliers and weathered beer-hall tables.
No-nonsense waiters appear to have worked there forever, and if you ask for a menu, one might respond: "No menu. How do you like your steak?"
Actually, there are a few other options, although steak is king here.
You can get a well-broiled porterhouse steak, dry-aged and full of flavor (portions serve one to four); thick double lamb chops, and good broiled fish. (Review: 4/23/93) RIVER CAFE 88 (718) 522-5200; 1 Water Street, Brooklyn Heights; $$$$; AE, V, MC, DC
The River Cafe, set on a barge under the Brooklyn Bridge, remains unparalleled for its views.
The glass-enclosed dining room faces the towers of lower Manhattan and provides a perfect perch for watching busy harbor traffic.
The food, while uneven during recent visits, still can match the setting for thrills.
Among the starters are a roast squab, marinated in soy and honey, with fried lotus root and enoki mushrooms and a towering parfait of tuna and salmon tartars with two kinds of caviar.
Main courses include pan-roasted lobster with cucumber linguine and a chive broth; yellowfin tuna crusted with roast garlic; salmon coated with black pepper along with fried oysters, and seared rack of lamb with a rosemary-and-mustard sauce. (Review: 9/17/93) The Star System The New York Times's star system rates restaurants on the following scale. ****
Extraordinary ***
Excellent **
Very Good *
Good None Poor to Satisfactory Price Range The price symbols are based on the cost of a three-course dinner with tax and a 15 percent tip (drinks not included).
Capsule summaries are culled from reviews, Diner's Journal and the $25 and Under column.


Christopher Flynn, Maureen Marren
Maureen Elisabeth Marren, a daughter of Florence Warner of Ridgefield, Conn., was married there yesterday to Christopher Robert Flynn, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert J. Flynn of Scituate, Mass.
The Rev.
Pierre Botton officiated at St.
Mary's Roman Catholic Church.
The bride, 29, and her husband, 31, are bond traders in New York, she at Furman Selz Inc. and he at Dean Witter Reynolds Inc.


Edible Souvenirs
To the Editor: Susan Allen Toth certainly wakened the taste buds with thoughts of such delightful and reasonably priced treats, but I fear she might be breaking the law, if she were to bring back all of the items she mentions, plus those shown in the witty illustration that accompanied her article.


In Own Way, Rockies on Rise
Just as a team like the Atlanta Braves can use the entire 162-game season to get themselves together, make a run at the teams ahead of them, overtake them and claim first place as theirs, a team at the bottom of the standing can stage a similar scenario.
In this way, the expansion Colorado Rockies have matched the rise of the Braves.
Engineering the upward development in front of a record number of fans but with virtually no recognition, the Rockies have leapfrogged past the other expansion team, the Florida Marlins, for expansion bragging rights and past the San Diego Padres for sixth place in the National League West.


NOTES
The San Francisco restaurant scene is attracting celebrities.
Christy Turlington (left), who grew up in nearby Danville, Calif., has just become an investor in the Up and Down Club, a restaurant and jazz club in the city's South of Market district.
"I like dark places that have jazz music," said Ms.
Turlington, who jointly owns a half share in the club with her sister Erin (right) and Erin's boyfriend, Eric Whitaker.


Some Updates on the Pot Pie
ON a fall night after a season of grilled food and salads, I love an old-fashioned pot pie.
When you slice into the crust, a wonderful aroma is released, great for appetites sharpened by cooler weather.
Several years ago David Bouley (chef at the renowned Bouley restaurant in Manhattan) gave me a recipe for pot pie made with Cornish hens instead of the traditional chicken.
It made perfect sense, for the hens can be cut into smaller pieces to fit more easily into individual pie dishes.


Japan: Sent Up, Put Down
Japan, when you think about it, is a pretty serious place.
Whether manufacturing cars, performing the tea ceremony or negotiating trade deals, the Japanese pursue things with unrelieved earnestness.
Indeed, to foreigners trying to make sense of this sober-minded country, or even to the overworked Japanese just trying to get by, daily life is usually not the stuff of belly laughs.
At least that seemed so before Issey Ogata came along.
Mr.
Ogata is something rare, an inventive, occasionally silly and seriously funny monologuist who finds comedy where most Japanese find only headaches, in the daily humiliations ordinary people endure here.
He is a guide on a sort of underground tour of Japanese society as it strikes the average Japanese.
From Thursday through Saturday, Mr.
Ogata will bring his monologues to the Japan Society in Manhattan, offering a glimpse into a much more human and slightly more riotous world than the Japan envisioned by many Americans. (English translations will be provided.)


5 Families in Midwest Cheer Promise of Health Security
For five families in the middle of America, President Clinton's promise of health care coverage "that can never be taken away" has hit home, addressing what is clearly a shared yearning.
In interviews this week and after the President's speech to Congress and the nation on Wednesday night, the families, including people who are insured and uninsured, employed and unemployed, healthy and sick, all said they welcomed the promise of secure health insurance for all.
The New York Times first interviewed the families in May about their health and their needs.


A Fee-Only Alternative
To the Editor:
After reading "Weighing the Sales Loads" (Sept. 5), I could not resist responding with an alternative not mentioned. .


World Markets; Will Mayhem Maul Italy's Market?
WITH all the turmoil, you would think Italy to have been a place to avoid.
Yet investors did the opposite.
From January of this year, even as criminal investigators jailed businessmen, politicians and mobsters, and as resignations crippled Consob, Italy's anemic stock market regulator, Milan's stock market index stubbornly climbed 42 percent, outpacing larger markets in Frankfurt, Paris and London.
Yet as summer turns to fall, the steam seems to be going out of Milan; trading has been sluggish since its August peak, and the Banca Commerciale Italiana's Comit index has fallen about 6 percent.


Chile Refuses To Forget Crimes of Past
IT was to have been democratic Chile's way of reconciling the hatreds of the "dirty war" of the 1970's, in which more than 2,000 opponents of the Pinochet dictatorship were killed or made to "disappear." Under a proposed law, all pending cases, involving more than 200 military officials accused of killings, torture, rape and beatings, would be disposed of in secret civil-court hearings under special judges, with most testimony and the officers' names kept secret.
It was not unlike the formulas used in neighboring countries to bury divisive feelings lingering from recent periods of military rule and civil war.
In Chile, the military and political right favored this "Aylwin Law," named after President Patricio Aylwin, whose democratic government took over from Gen.
Augusto Pinochet in 1990.


Sports of The Times; Fernandez Finds Life After Mets
THE Yankees must feel like Paul Newman watching Jackie Gleason come out for the ultimate pool match, in a beautiful fresh suit, all pink and glowing after a bath and a shave.
Remember how Fast Eddie's jaw hung open as he gazed at Minnesota Fats?
Fast Eddie knew he was done.
The Yankees looked across the field at the Blue Jays during yesterday's 3-1 loss and could see more talent than they have.
They know this club is better than last year, when it won the World Series.
They know.


The Nutcracker Suite
THEY ARE ROOMS OF SUCH DRAMA AND sweep that Nureyev must have felt right at home: 14-foot ceilings, massive windows and doors and a collection of old-master paintings -- huge in size, heroic in subject -- that lends the place the air of a late-19th-century art salon.
Rudolf Nureyev's six-room pied-a-terre in the Dakota -- one of seven homes he owned -- was a repository for the dancer's acquisitive ways.
When he died in January at 54, the choreographer and collector had amassed thousands of works of art, textiles, sculptures, maps, prints, costumes and furniture, which will be sold by Christie's in 1995 to benefit two dance foundations.


Their Slice of the American Dream
Every day for months, Yasmin Saunders took a few minutes out of her frenetic schedule to drive to a building site on a residential street just off the Southern State Parkway and watch the workers frame, hammer and paint the town house she had never dreamed she would own.
It had been such an arduous journey to this juncture in the life of Ms.
Saunders, a 37-year-old single mother who had worked at two and sometimes three jobs at a time, that she was drawn to the site each day, not just to savor the achievement of buying a town house, but also to remind herself of how far she had come.


THE BULLY OF THE SKIES CRIES UNCLE
Robert Crandall complains about "bankrupt" carriers competing unfairly.
Some of the carriers operating under bankruptcy-court protection were the victims of hostile takeovers by people who didn't want to run an airline, but preferred rather to milk it for all it was worth.
Carl Icahn's raid on T.W.A. was a perfect example of this.
The employees agreed to take massive cuts in pay and benefits just to get him out of the picture.
In doing so, they became the owner-operators of the company.
That action may foreshadow the future of many of the other airlines.
ROBERT P. ODENWELLER Bernardsville, N.J.


Residents Fight to Save Their Small Park
Faced with the imminent conversion of a waterfront park into an eight-level garage, some residents have stepped up a nine-year battle to save the small stretch of land, which straddles the edges of Brooklyn Heights and Cobble Hill.
The City Council voted 38-8 earlier this month to allow the Long Island College Hospital to build the 430-car garage in Upper Van Voorhees Park, which sits across Atlantic Avenue from the hospital's main entrance.


At Work; Relief for Child-Care Workers
AMONG small-business employees, child-care workers may have much to celebrate if President Clinton's health care proposal survives in anything like its current form.
Barely a third of them now have health benefits, and though many are young and healthy, the work they do puts them at the mercy of the microbial free-for-all that is the immature immune system.
Colds and flus are endemic, as are back problems from hefting and carting young children all day.
Under the Clinton plan, workers would get benefits from their employers, who would probably qualify for an expense cap of from 3.5 percent to 7.9 percent of payroll.
Self-employed family day-care providers would buy their own insurance but qualify for the 100 percent health insurance tax deduction.
Making health care a fact of workers' lives would almost certainly improve quality by reducing turnover.
But child care is a peculiar economic institution.
Technically, it is a small business, but one lacking many of the market options of other small businesses.
"Over all, the change is going to be a good thing, but we have to pay attention to consequences for child care," said Barbara Reisman, executive director of the Child Care Action Campaign in New York.


CURRENCY
Last
Prior
Year
Week
Week
Ago
Japanese Yen
105.95
104.45
120.90
per Dollar
German Mark
1.6380
1.6140
1.4835
per Dollar
Canadian Dollar
1.3198
1.3133
1.3395
per U.S. Dollar
British Pound
1.5085
1.5310
1.7145
U.S. Dollar per British Pound
Gold
$357.40
$350.75
$349.90
Republic National Bank
Currency: Friday NY Close


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
HOMOSEXUALS IN THE MILITARY EXCLUSION  Homosexuals and the Right to Serve.
By Melissa Wells-Petry.
Regnery Gateway, $20.


Spanish Hotels Drop to 4 Stars
More than a dozen hotels in Spain formerly in the Government's five-star category have voluntarily dropped their ratings to four stars to avoid a 15 percent value-added tax on luxury accommodations.
Hoteliers say the lowered classification, which is obtained by petitioning the Government, will not diminish the service.
They contend that the 15 percent luxury tax imposed last August makes them uncompetitive.
Three- or four-star hotels are subject to only a 6 percent tax.
At the Palace Hotel in Madrid, which went from five stars to four stars at the beginning of July, the tax on a typical $264 double room went down from about $40 to about $16.
The lowered tax applies to the entire bill, including meals, drinks and entertainment.


Mr. Foley's Decoy
House Speaker Tom Foley's war of attrition on campaign reform is succeeding.
He stalled through the spring and summer, hoping that public demand for clean politics would subside along with President Clinton's memory of his inaugural pledge to clean up Washington.
Now, with fall upon us, Mr.
Foley appears poised to reach deep into his Congressional trick bag and pull out a piece of decoy legislation.
Passing this lame substitute will make this "the reform Congress," he says.


Eyelets on The Stars
Only Jed Clampett used to pair clunky boots with three piece suits.
But they're all spiffy now, and still great for climbing, especially when conquering limestone, granite and marble.


Corrections
An article in the Arts and Leisure section on Sept. 12 about Paul Simon misidentified the album in which his song "Me and Julio" appears.
It is "Paul Simon," not "Bridge Over Troubled Water."


The Waldorf Is the Star
Landmarks Conservancy honors the hotel on its 100th, Sept. 21.


Lise Christensen, Gregory J. Godvin
Lise Christensen, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Poul Erik Christensen of Madison, Conn., was married yesterday to Gregory John Godvin, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
David Godvin of Rumson, N.J.
The Rev.
Edward Anderson, a Unitarian minister, and the Rev.
John Hanwell, a Roman Catholic priest, officiated jointly at the Siasconset Chapel in Nantucket, Mass.
Mrs.
Godvin, a graduate of Hamilton College, is a senior vice president at Teeman, Allison, Perley Inc., an executive search company in New York.
Her father is the president of Masten-Wright, an export management company in New Haven.


Traci Richardson, Terrance Jackson
Traci Lynn Richardson, the daughter of Gertrude and William Richardson of Teaneck, N.J., was married yesterday to Terrance Victor Jackson, a son of Christina and Warren Jackson of Hartsdale, N.Y.
The Rev.
Gregory Jackson, a Baptist minister, officiated at the Manor, a restaurant and catering hall in West Orange, N.J.
The Rev.
Raynor W. Hesse, an Episcopal priest, took part in the ceremony.
Mrs.
Jackson is a sales representative at Ortho Pharmaceuticals in Raritan, N.J.
She graduated from Howard University.
Her father is a vice president of community and trade relations at Schieffelin &amp; Somerset, a beverage importing company in New York.
Her mother retired as a special-education teacher at Hawthorne Elementary School in Teaneck.


Miss Prezzano And Mr. Durfee
Katherine Prezzano, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
E.
Peter Prezzano 2d of Bedford, N.Y., was married there yesterday to Sherman Brayton Durfee Jr., a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Durfee of Katonah, N.Y.
The Rev.
Heather E. Cook performed the ceremony St.
Matthew's Episcopal Church.
Mrs.
Durfee, 26, is a media planner at Jordan, McGrath, Case &amp; Taylor, a New York advertising agency.
She graduated from Franklin and Marshall College.
Her father is an orthodontist in Mount Kisco, N.Y.


Mapping Health Plan's Tortuous Path
Hillary Rodham Clinton's presentation of the Administration's health care plan to five Congressional committees in three days next week will be a fast-forward preview of the legislative path the program itself must sluggishly follow for many months.
After a staggering total of 130 meetings with lawmakers before President Clinton announced the plan last week, she is no stranger on Capitol Hill.
But, starting with an appearance before the House Ways and Means Committee on Tuesday morning, her missionary work will now be conducted in public -- and will be open to challenge and sharp questioning.


Miss Zimand, Mr. Carpenter
Patricia Folks Zimand, a daughter of Ingeborg R. Zimand and Harvey Folks Zimand, both of New York, was married yesterday to Edmund Mogford Carpenter Jr., the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Carpenter of Greenwich, Conn.
Dr.
Herbert B. Anderson officiated at the Brick Presbyterian Church in New York.
Mrs.
Carpenter is an associate at Carter, Ledyard &amp; Milburn, a New York law firm.
She and her husband graduated from Duke University, and she received a law degree from Washington University in St.
Louis.
Her father is a partner in Kelley, Drye &amp; Warren, a New York law firm.


Frequency Fliers
Making a decision that could fundamentally change the simple act of talking on the telephone, the Federal Communications Commission paved the way last week for a new era of wireless communications.
Almost 10 years to the day after cellular telephones made their commercial debut in the United States, the F.C.C. adopted final rules to license as many as seven new "personal communications services" in every city and town.


TODAY'S SECTIONS
Special Today: Men's Fashions/Magazine Part 2  *
A little nerve: it's all you need to enjoy the fall clothes.
* Suits, in the shape of things to come.


Corrections
A picture caption last Sunday about the Carvel Inn, a former school for franchise owners, misstated its location.
It is in Yonkers, not Hartsdale.


Hopefully, A Suitcase That's Cat-Proof
The Commuter Carry-On ($139.95, on sale, at Lexington Luggage) from the American Tourister Genesis Collection looks black to me, but the label says it's gray.
I expect this to solve my travel-baggage problem once and for all, as long as I can keep it away from the cat.


Giants Getting Kicks From Campaign
"When I was in Buffalo, I once kicked one 92 yards with the wind," Giants kicker Brad Daluiso said.
A kickoff? Ninety-two yards? You sure?


Man, 62, Shot Dead In Bronx Apartment
A 62-year-old Bronx man who had just picked up his wife at the airport was shot to death in the hallway of his apartment building yesterday shortly after returning home, the police said.
The man, Juan DeMaria, an immigrant from the Dominican Republic, and his son-in-law had taken several suitcases up to their fifth-floor apartment at 1738 Crotona Park East, in Morrisania, and returned downstairs to park their van, said Sgt.
Herbert Massett, supervisor of detectives in the 42d Precinct in the Bronx.


The Guild Dines Out
The Metropolitan Opera Guild celebrates at the new Four Seasons Hotel, Sept. 20.


U.S. Terms Set for Bosnia Role
President Clinton's foreign policy advisers set conditions for sending American troops to Bosnia, an Administration official said.
Page 21.


More Than a Revival, a Revelation
Dame Ninette de Valois, The Irish-born dancer who founded Britain's Royal Ballet, turned 95 this year.
The company celebrated the occasion by demonstrating that she is not only a remarkable organizer but also a gifted choreographer.
Her directorial genius is legendary.
In 1931, she formed a group known as the Vic-Wells Ballet, after the theaters in which it performed: the Old Vic and Sadler's Wells.
Later, it changed its name to the Sadler's Wells Ballet, moved to the Royal Opera House after World War II, made a triumphant American debut in 1949 and became the Royal Ballet in 1956.
Although Dame Ninette retired as director in 1963, she continues to serve the Royal as an adviser.
The organization now consists of two large troupes, the London-based Royal Ballet and the Birmingham Royal Ballet.


Disintegration as Integral Part of an Exhibition
DAVID GEISER enhances his paintings with appliques of cardboard, cloth and other materials.
Stanley Smokler welds sculptures out of metal that has already served industrial purposes.


Identity Crisis


THE ANGUISHED POLITICS OF BREAST CANCER
Among issues facing breast-cancer victims is the refusal of many major insurance companies to reimburse for bone-marrow transplant, a treatment that is often the only hope for women with advanced disease.
Coverage is often denied by insurers who say this procedure is experimental for carcinoma of the breast but who cover it for other forms of cancer (Hodgkin's disease, lymphoma, leukemia and testicular cancer).
Women are forced to forgo the procedure or become involved in lengthy and expensive lawsuits at a time when they need all their energy to battle their disease.
SUZANNE B. DORFF Irvington, N.Y.


For a Theater, Sound and Fury
When a small East Village theater tried to muzzle the trendy but highly amplified restaurant Cafe Tabac, it discovered that New York City's noise control law has a little-known loophole big enough for a sonic boom.
And now the city says it is reviewing the law to see if the loophole can be closed.
The city code provides penalties for excessive noise that disturbs people at home -- but does not protect them in any other setting, be it a church, library, funeral home, office -- or Shakespearean theater.


The Yings Come to New York, And an Iowa Town Leads the Cheers
Classical music, they say, is having a hard time finding new audiences.
Some consider it too highbrow, too elite, for an era that preaches diversity while practicing homogenization, serving up a watery cultural gruel of lowly common denominators.
But Jesup is a town that ideology forgot.
In this farming community of 2,000, just off the main road from Dubuque to Waterloo, classical music of a sort is booming.
More than 500 listeners, a quarter of the citizenry, turn out to hear imposing examples of the rarefied literature for string quartet played by the Ying Quartet, a young group that has quickly caught the attention of chamber-music specialists nationwide.
Its work here, and the enthusiastic response of the populace, also drew national attention last spring on CBS's "Sunday Morning."


Candidates Attack The Squeegee Men
The squeegee men who rise up across the windshield at stop lights may be among the most addiction-addled New Yorkers, but even they are noticing themselves being denounced in this season's mayoral campaign speeches as they hustle on the dank urban cusp between plain begging and outright intimidation.
"Why they be doing that?" Michael Robinson, a 37-year-old squeegee man, asked the other day, wary of the heightened notice of candidates as well as the police as he moved with something of a stagger among a line of cars stalled in midtown near the exit from the Lincoln Tunnel.


Urban Cowboys Shouldn't Rule the Range
To the Editor:
"Higher Grazing Fees Have Ranchers Running Scared" (Sept. 12), on the rangeland reforms proposed by Secretary of the Interior Bruce Babbitt, points out that the "proposals would make it easier to terminate leases to ranchers who abuse the land." That may sound reasonable, but far more frightening is that the proposals would provide new, undefined reasons that a Federal employee could decide a rancher should lose his lease.
"Shortening grazing seasons, curtailing use of pesticides," even micro managing from Washington to the extent of saying where salt can be placed, are part of this document that is obviously authored by people who know virtually nothing about resource management in the West or the diverse systems requiring local knowledge and input that abound.


County Getting Tough With Gang Members
THE county last week released its Westchester Gang Task Force report and simultaneously introduced a five-point, get-tough program to combat gang-related activity.
The County Youth Bureau's report on gangs, which was released on Tuesday, said that five cities, four towns and four villages in Westchester have identified 70 gangs with 1,500 members.
Greenburgh, Larchmont, Mount Kisco, New Castle, New Rochelle, North Castle, Pleasantville, Port Chester, White Plains and Yorktown reported having at least some problems with gangs.
But Yonkers said it had 30 gangs, Mount Vernon reported 10 and Peekskill said it had 5 to 10.


Off Floor, Onto Wall With Shelving
LIKE spring housecleaning, organizing a garage as fall and winter approach can be an annual ritual.
Taking as many items as possible off the floor is a key to "making space." One way is to buy metal or heavy-duty plastic utility shelves that stand on the floor.
Although relatively expensive -- sufficient shelving for an average garage can cost hundreds of dollars -- purchased shelves can be assembled fairly quickly and look nice.
Some styles can be arranged to provide work surfaces and storage.


Valerie Cabral, Robert Caldwell
Valerie Jeanne Marie Cabral, a recruitment coordinator and premedical adviser at New York University, was married yesterday to Dr.
Robert Jeffrey Caldwell, a dentist in Alexandria, Va.
The Rev.
Charles Temple performed the Episcopal ceremony at the Church of the Transfiguration in New York.
Ms.
Cabral, 35, is keeping her name.
She and her husband graduated from N.Y.U.
She is a daughter of Rosaline Oliveira Cabral of New York, and Floyd L. Carr of New Bedford, Mass.


When Pretty Plants Become Too Pushy
THE asters are blooming.
The goldenrods are glowing by highways.
Chrysanthemums are filling in flower borders with gold, yellow, bronze, maroon, even white blossoms.
One would think that the growing season is winding down and the end for herbaceous plants is near.
But not for all of them.
Some plants seem to thrive in spite of all these signals.
In fact, they spread far and wide until they make plant nuisances of themselves.
Some gardeners call them weeds.
Some call them plant pests.
Others call them invasive exotics.


Miss Holthusen, Mr. Bitler
Margaret Anne Holthusen, a daughter of Dr.
Gregory G. Holthusen of Winston-Salem, N.C., and the late Sandra S. Burr, was married yesterday to Paul Robinson Bitler, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Glenn F. Bitler of Raleigh, N.C.
The Rev.
Charles Riddle performed the ceremony at St.
Paul's Episcopal Church in Winston-Salem.


'Paper Moon' Changes Its Outlook as a Musical
YOU don't have to see "Paper Moon," the movie, to disbelieve "Paper Moon," the musical.
What must be meant as an alternately racy and heart-tugging story about a Bible-selling con man, Moses Pray, and his protegee, a little orphan, Addie, who usually outfoxes him, appears entrapped by the trappings of a musical.


Forsberg to Join Quebec
The Swedish hockey star PETER FORSBERG will sign a $10 million, four-year contract with the Quebec Nordiques, the newspaper Le Soleil reported yesterday.
Le Soleil, quoting an unnamed source, said the 20-year-old forward would join the Nordiques after the Winter Olympics in Norway in February.
Until then, he will continue to play for MoDo in the Swedish Elite League. (AP)


Justices Quash Entrepreneur's Move on the Court
Galled by the actions of a professor who is selling tapes of Supreme Court arguments for $75 a set, the Court has told the National Archives not to let the man copy any more argument tapes without the permission of the marshal of the Court.
Given the Court's response to the affair so far, it is highly unlikely that permission would be forthcoming.


State Reaches Out to Homeless Veterans
WHEN Ernest Parrish of Hartford was an Army medic in Vietnam, one of his jobs was to pick up his dead comrades and put them into body bags.
He began drinking to wipe the horror of those experiences from his memory and to alleviate the anxiety of wondering whether he would be alive the next moment.


Accident Puts Barge Owner in Spotlight
The Warrior and Gulf Navigation Company, owner of the towboat and barges entangled in the deadliest train wreck in the history of Amtrak, is a major player in the gritty and less glamorous part of the port business here.
While the eye-catching ocean-going vessels attract most of the attention as they steam in and out of Mobile's harbor, there is a vigorous commerce in coal, wood chips, chemicals, petroleum products and other goods traversing the inland waterways.


Whatever the Skin Color, Cruelty Is Unacceptable
To the Editor:
When institutional inequities exist, thinking and decent people must continually meet the challenge to question the automatic and accepted responses they make both personally and as members of a group.
They must also question their assumptions regarding the reasons for others' behavior.


Anticancer Efforts Gaining Support
MORE Long Islanders are getting involved in pressing for action against the rising tide of beast cancer on the Island.
Beginning with the creation three years ago of a group called 1 in 9, others have become involved in public education, lobbying for research money and focusing attention on the reasons for the development of breast cancer.


Q and A
Fishing in Japan
Q.
I am planning on visiting Hokkaido, in northern Japan, and I would like to fish for trout and salmon.
Can you help with the names of outfitters and other facilities for fishing? -- Julian Malkiel, Stowe, Vt.


POSTINGS: New City Status for 3; Landmarks Designated
A firehouse, a police station and a textile mill, all built near the turn of the century, have been added to the list of the city's landmarks.
The Landmarks Preservation Commission voted last week to honor the Engine Company No. 7/Ladder Company No. 1 Firehouse in TriBeCa, the Joseph Loth &amp; Company Silk Ribbon Mill in Washington Heights and the former 19th Precinct Station House and Stable in Brooklyn.
The three-story Beaux-Arts firehouse at 100-104 Duane Street, built in 1904-05, housed two of the city's oldest fire companies.
One, Hook and Ladder No. 1, was founded before the Revolution.


Susan Sommer, Jeffrey Futter
Mr. and Mrs.
A.
A.
Sommer Jr. of Bethesda, Md., have announced February wedding plans for their daughter Susan Elizabeth Sommer and Jeffrey Leesam Futter, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Victor Futter of Port Washington, L.I.
Ms.
Sommer graduated from Wittenberg University and received master's degrees in education and business administration from the University of Virginia.
She is an account manager for Organizational Dynamics, a management consulting company in Purchase, N.Y.
Her father, formerly a member of the Securities and Exchange Commission, is a senior partner in the Washington law firm of Morgan, Lewis &amp; Bockius.


Note to Readers
The Op-Ed page welcomes unsolicited manuscripts.
Because of the volume of submissions, however, we regret that we cannot acknowledge an article or return it unless it is accompanied by a self-addressed, stamped envelope.
If manuscripts are accepted for publication, authors will be notified within two weeks.


Ethnic Rift Divides Sarajevo's Defenders
As Bosnia's Muslim-led Parliament prepares for a bitter debate and unpredicatable vote on an international peace plan, the country's leaders are struggling to head off a split within the ethnically mixed forces defending Sarajevo from Serbian nationalist troops.
Since the siege began nearly 18 months ago, the defense of the Bosnian capital has rested on an uneasy and often fractious alliance of professional military units and paramilitary groups, formally known as the Bosnian Army.
Added to these predominantly Muslim units is the H.V.O., the acronym for the nationalist Croatian troops that have been the third force in the Bosnian war.


SEPTEMBER 19-25: Senate Raves; Gen. Shalikashvili Makes the First Cut
President Clinton's choice for Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff received rave reviews in his Capitol Hill debut last week, even as he defended the controversial idea of sending American troops to Bosnia under NATO command.
Gen.
John M. Shalikashvili, named to succeed Gen.
Colin L. Powell, gave strong support for sending 50,000 heavily armed troops -- half of them American -- to help enforce any peace settlement reached in Bosnia.
But he warned the Senate Armed Services Committee that NATO commanders must establish a proper command structure and that the warring factions must commit themselves to the accord before any enforcement mission could succeed.


Corrections
A picture caption today on page 14 of the Travel section, with an article about the music season in Europe, misstates Riccardo Muti's affiliation with the Philadelphia Orchestra.
He is its laureate conductor as well as music director of La Scala; he is no longer music director in Philadelphia.


Exchange Student Dies After Being Dragged by a Stolen Jeep
Valentina Popovic, an engineering student who was hit and dragged by a stolen Jeep in upper Manhattan, died early yesterday at St.
Luke's-Roosevelt Hospital Center of cardiac arrest as a result of "massive injuries," said a hospital spokeswoman, Judy Pommett.
Ms.
Popovic, a native of Valjevo, Serbia, left her war-torn country only to be a victim of the random dangers of New York City, where she held different odd jobs to help pay her tuition at City College.


CHANGING OF THE GARDEN
UNTIL RECENTLY, looking for a vegetable in London was like trying to locate a constellation in a dense night sky.
It wasn't that vegetables didn't exist, they were just unrecognizable, having been cooked to a porridge-like state.
"Yes mum, a carrot to be sure," a waiter reassured me during a winter I spent in London as a student.
On subsequent visits, I continued to need such elucidation, partly because the nation's meat-centric menu left me craving cellulose, and partly because the cellulose available was so well disguised.


Showing Your Class
To the Editor:
Letting the bottoms of boxer shorts show below cutoffs is described by Harold Koda, associate curator of the Costume Institute, as "the reverse Marky Mark" (Thing, Sept. 12).
In the 18th century, when Spaniards first settled in California, the males among the gentry, who worked in the fields, let their lace-trimmed underwear show beyond the hem of their shorts as visible evidence of their social standing.
After all, they owned underwear.


The Good Parts
THE INVENTION OF PORNOGRAPHY Obscenity and the Origins of Modernity, 1500-1800.
Edited by Lynn Hunt.
Illustrated. 411 pp.
Cambridge, Mass.: Zone Books/The MIT Press. $26.95.


Sound Bytes; To This Microsoft Executive, the 'Suite' Smells of Success
Pete Higgins is vice president for desktop applications at the Microsoft Corporation, responsible for the development of Windows and Macintosh versions of Microsoft Word, Microsoft Excel, Microsoft Powerpoint, and the hottest product of the moment, Microsoft Office.
Office is a "suite," or collection of programs that includes Word, Excel and Powerpoint plus Microsoft Mail and Microsoft Access, all sold in a bundle.
All told, desktop applications generate about half of Microsoft's revenue each year.
Word processing alone is worth half a billion dollars a year, and despite the hoopla about Microsoft Windows 3.1, Mr.
Higgins's Macintosh applications group reportedly generates as much revenue as does Windows.
In his spare time, Mr.
Higgins oversees Microsoft's Usability Labs, an ambitious effort to make software easier to use, and the Interoperability Design Group, which develops core integration technologies for all Microsoft products.


A Medium is the Message
THE COVER: New York Mets cap THE REVELATION: I'm a native, but I don't know from the Bronx or Brooklyn.
In fact, I'd kill to live in West Palm Beach.


Why Bother With Free Trade?
To the Editor:
In "Nafta: Spread the Pain, Spread the Gain" (Viewpoints, Sept. 12), there is a glaring myopia regarding the taxes and strictures that can be applied to American companies that gain from Nafta.
Just as economic effects overflow borders, so do more and more companies.


Angry Marseilles Fans Spar With the Police
Marseilles team officials verbally blasted a referee yesterday after disputed calls angered fans, who flooded the field and clashed with the police.
Nineteen people were injured and the game was suspended.
The incident Friday night, which could result in new penalties for Olympique Marseilles, was the latest blow to a team stripped of its championship title because of a payoff scandal.
Metz was winning, 3-0, when the game was halted three minutes before the end, and Marseilles fans threw objects and ran onto the field after the referee threw two of their team's players out of the match, including the team's star, BASILE BOLI.
The clashes around the Marseilles stadium injured 11 police officers and 8 fans, officials said.
Four people were arrested.
Marseilles booster clubs are known to be among France's rowdiest.


A Little Nerve
THOSE WHO BEG OFF CHANGE WERE ONCE DECISIVE, HOWEVER generic the actual protest.
"You're not going to get me in that. No way." But withing the last year, the disinclination has gotten much more customeized but far more tentative.
Now, the retreaters are more likely to start with, "It's not that I don't like it. It's just that . . . " and then they choose from a wide selection: 1) "I'm too old"; 2) "I'm too short"; 3a) "I have no place to wear it"; 3b) "I can't wear that to work"; 4) "My wife'd kill me"; 5) "My kids would laugh at me"; 6) "I'd feel funny"; and my favorites - 7) "It's not my style" and 8) the existentially classic "I don't know." Combinations occur, but that about covers it.
Well, it's a step.
At least it shows there are a lot more noses pressed up against the display-case glass, and that men are aware of others deserting the battalions of hesitancy, if only because they're tired of the uniforms.
The problem is, diverse as they seem, these excuses are more suspect than Ivan Lendl's game on grass or the Mets' starting lineup.
1.
Too old compared to what?
Whom do you think these clothes are made for?
Kids?
The models who wear them?
Most can't afford them.
Maybe you can't afford allof them, eigher, but no designer who yearns for a house inMustique is going to make clothes solely for an idealized form or for a generation that can turn a sweatshirt, a kerchief and a pair of cutoffs into fashion.
To thrive, curent men's wear has to be far more adaptable than you give it credit for.
To thrive, so do you.
2.
Short, tall, squat, thin, knock-kneed, round-shouldered, barrel-chested.
What else?
Defects are everywhere you look.
If these were sufficient reason to ban men from clothes-shopping this fall, the designers wouldn't be allowed to wear their own clothes.
O.K.
A short man in a frock coat looks like a walking toaster cover, and a tall man in overalls should have on big shoes and a red nose.
You can't wear everything.
But what do you have on now?
How come that's O.K.?
How radicallyaltered do you think the new stuff is hanging on the rack with sleeves and buttons and collars?
Try something on for once.
You'd be surprised.
3a and 3b.
You get dressed, don't you?
You go to dinner, don't you?
The theater, movies, away on vacation?
So, what's the problem?
You have places to go.
That's what these clothes are meant for.
Look at thefollowing pages.
Men's wear just keeps getting better.
Comfortable, sexy, practical, versatile.
We're not insisting you dress like Heathcliff, or that tying one sweater scarflike round your neck, with tow other plopped over your head, and one more wrapped skirtlike round your waist, is the only way to fly (though what a great way to pack for a weekend).
We are saying that there arenew forms that flatter,luxuriant new textures and knits worth indulging in.
We're saying that romanticism has nothing to do with foppishness.
And we're highlighting suits - of all categories - as well as inventive variations, as the most adaptable and essential silhouette,outside and inside the office, which is why, relaxed though the outfits may be, dressing up is the suddenly more prominent than dressing down.
But if you're still wearing the same old, same old to work, it's guaranteed thatt, unless you're the boss, you're causing about as big a splash when you walk through the doors as you would giving a Masai chieftain a subscription to Martha Stewart Living.
You don't have to be that different.
A little different will do.
4.
How lame to hid behind a partner, the one most likely to greet such news with tears of joy.
5.
Your kids are walking around with everything three sizes too large, nothing tied, rags on their heads and shoes so heavy they can hardlylift their feet, and you're worried about them laughing at you?
Hey, they're wearing what works for them.
You may not like it, but they feel cool, vibrant, alive.
Maybe you should find something that does the same for you.
6.
What did a golf club feel like first time you swung it?
Working on a computer before understanding the codes?
Moving in with someone you love?
Feeling funnyis good.
We should feel funny more often.
7.
Allright, let's explain this once and fro all.
Style is not fashion.
Clothes don't have style.
You have style.
Yes, you.
You just may not know it.
Because if youcook, own a home, travel by bike,car, or Rollerblade, raise children, or worry about those who are dear to you, you exhibit it in other areas.
You just haven't trained it on getting dressed.
For style, true style, is the quality of imagination.
It's the ability to place yourself in new situations with a fresh attitude and an eye on something better.
You don't think you have that?
Then what to wear is the least of your problems.
8.
You don't know?
Who does?
Some people just guess with more confidence than others.
The photographers, stylists, designers, editors and models who've contributed to this issue feel this is what looks great this fall.
As Lily Tomlin said, "Reality is a collective hunch." If so, why are you trusting everyone else?
Where's your input?
Stick in your own two cents.
It's called making change.


Mexican Bus
To the Editor: On a recent trip to Mexico, I rode on one of the "executive" buses from Mexico City to Cuernavaca ("New Service With Style in Mexico," Aug. 15).
Curtains on the windows blocked all views.
The air-conditioning was Arctic.
For two hours, I watched Bruce Lee movies, full of blood and gore, in Spanish on the overhead television.


A Passion for Scent by the Dab or the Vial
FOR 20 years, Abdul Jabbar has been standing on a Bronx street corner selling oils and incense.
He has seen babies grow into adult customers.
He has made countless work-weary faces smile.
If you want an oil that smells like baby powder, Irish Spring soap or a best-selling perfume, he can duplicate the scent.
It's both a living and a way of life.


Corrections
An opera listing today on page 47 of the Arts and Leisure section includes an outdated reference to the conductor of Sir Michael Tippett's "Midsummer Marriage" on Saturday at the New York City Opera.
Joseph Colaneri is to replace Christopher Keene, who has withdrawn because of illness.


Springing a Surprise Move, Kasparov Gets His Revenge
By preparing a novel move in the opening, Gary Kasparov got his revenge and drove Nigel Short into a loss yesterday in London in Game 9 of their world championship match.
The 24-game contest, with the score now at 7-2 for Kasparov, begins to look like a rout.
With this victory the Russian has passed the halfway mark to win the $1.43 million prize.
Five and a half points more bring it home.
The match pattern that has developed thus far is that when Short gets the advantage, initiative, or attack, Kasparov cunningly holds him off and staggers into a draw, but when the Russian gets the upper hand, he does not let the game get away.


Postings: St. Ann's in Brooklyn Heights; Protecting a Church From Further Deterioration
Colorful, intricate and complex, the facade of the former St.
Ann's Episcopal Church in Brooklyn Heights might be called a garden in stone.
It is also a garden that has been untended for many years.
Now its owner, the Packer Collegiate Institute, has begun an $835,000 effort to protect the shell of the building from further damage.
Packer, which has 791 students from preschool through 12th grade, uses the undercroft for classrooms; the enormous sanctuary has been empty since St.
Ann's parish moved out in 1967.


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
BIOGRAPHY OF A VIRTUOSO VAN CLIBURN  By Howard Reich. Thomas Nelson, $24.99.


'Love and Friendship'
To the Editor:
That the last book by perhaps the most penetrating interpreter of great books of our time should be disdainfully dismissed by a hostile journalist in the most-read book review in the country is a great injustice.
While it is more and less than deserved, I would like to rebut Katha Pollitt's review of Allan Bloom's "Love and Friendship" (Aug. 8).


Your Order, Mr. President?
When President Clinton arrives today at the Future Diner in Fresh Meadows -- a lunch stop as he stumps for his national health-care plan -- Mike Rigatos will be ready.
Mr.
Rigatos, an owner of the diner at 61-09 190th Street, says his establishment can offer far more satisfying options than Mr.
Clinton's well-known haunt, McDonald's.


Sabina Howell and Thomas Carr
Sabina Akin Howell, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Thomas T. Howell of Morristown, N.J., was married yesterday to Thomas Robert Tiffin Carr, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert J. Carr of New Orleans.
The Rev.
Thomas Pike performed the Epsicopal ceremony at St.
George's Calvary Church in New York.
Mrs.
Carr, 27, is the merchandising coordinator for Gentlemen's Quarterly magazine in New York.
She graduated from Southern Methodist University.


In the Region/Connecticut; Comprehensive Land-Use Bill Faces a Tough Fight
THE autonomous control of land use by planning and zoning commissions in Connecticut's 169 towns may be in for some momentous changes in the next few years, but not without a fight.
A bill by the General Assembly's Task Force on the State Plan of Conservation and Development, designed to set up a comprehensive land-use policy by region, will be introduced in the 1994 legislative session, convening the first week of February.


WESTCHESTER GUIDE
LANI GUINIER TO SPEAK
Lani Guinier is traveling around the country talking about her withdrawn nomination June 3 to the post of assistant attorney general for civil rights.
At 12:30 P.M. on Friday she will speak in Reisinger Auditorium at Sarah Lawrence College in Yonkers, focusing on the Clinton Administration's position that her legal writings appeared to advocate proportional representation rather than the 1-person-1-vote system.


On Sunday; Useful Advice If Doing Time: Rewind Clock
THE city can shuck and devour idealists on the half shell, reducing them to sound-bite do-gooders or academic cranks while the larger life of New York roars on by obliviously, meanly.
Such a fate was clearly tempted early on by Stephen J. Chinlund, with his tall, lean demeanor, tweed jacket-cum-Episcopal collar regalia and inbred air of decency.
The city was at full fester and ready for him three decades ago when, a few years into the priesthood, he took his first bus to the Rikers Island jail with do-gooding on his mind.
"I'll never forget how vivid it was when we waited at a stop sign and a long line of inmates went by," he recalls.
"How intelligent and sensitive many of them seemed in contrast to the stereotype I had accepted of just a mass of brutalized guys."


For China, an Olympic Boomerang
In every other Olympic event, the rules of competition are clear.
Not so when it comes to picking the sites of future Games.
Last week, Sydney narrowly beat Beijing in a five-city race to host the 2000 Summer Olympics.
But it was far from clear why the International Olympic Committee voted as it did.
Until the last moment, Beijing was expected to win.
The United States Congress had opposed, on human rights grounds, China's full-court press to promote itself.
But such objections prompted some committee members to counter that the Olympics would open up China politically.
Further, some Olympic sponsors like Coca-Cola saw the games as a chance to tap China's consumer market.


Over Hill, Over Dale


Manager's Profile; Isabel Salzman
Fund: Latin America Dollar Income Fund, $122 million in assets.
Manager since July 1992 inception. (Sponsor: Scudder, Stevens &amp; Clark, New York City).


Barney's What's Least Wrong With TV
To the Editor:
It's amazing that the media and others seem to find more to criticize about the children's character "Barney" than about what's really wrong with television today ("Regarding Barney," editorial, Sept. 15).


Caveat Emptor, and Check Out These Booklets
New Yorkers, by nature, are wary of swindlers.
But the dangers of being cheated aren't restricted to 14th Street three-card monte games.
More often than not, the scam is going on close to home: in the supermarket, at the bank or on a credit card.
In an effort to combat such problems, the New York City Department of Consumer Affairs publishes reports on subjects from overpriced vitamins to corporate invasion of privacy.
The reports are compiled by the department's advocacy division researchers, and are available from the communications division of the Department of Consumer Affairs, 42 Broadway, New York, N.Y. 10004.
A complete list of research reports are available by calling (212) 487-4278.


Miss Sheehan And Mr. Arquit
Margaret Orr Sheehan, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert W. Sheehan of New York, was married yesterday to Kevin James Arquit, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
Gordon Arquit of Ithaca, N.Y.
The Rev.
Mark S. Anschutz performed the ceremony at St.
James' Episcopal Church in New York.
Mrs.
Arquit was until recently the deputy director of Lehrman Bell Mueller Cannon, a Washington economic forecasting firm.
She is to rejoin the company in its New York office next month.
She graduated cum laude from Middlebury College.
Her father is a partner in the New York law firm of Chadbourne &amp; Parke.


Expos Get Philosophical
The Expos are alive in the National League East.
Their clubhouse isn't.
The math is still workable.
The Expos, though, are more into philosophy.
"Any club that wins 90 games is good enough to win a title," said Felipe Alou, the manager of a club that last night won its 89th game of 1993 with a 4-1 triumph over the Mets.
"If someone wins 100, it's not your fault."


Piers Change Hands, Creating Unlikely Bedfellows
The treasured piers that residents of Brooklyn Heights see when they look out on Upper New York Harbor are officially no longer part of their neighborhood.
After a three-year dispute over the shifting of City Council district lines, the State Court of Appeals recently overturned two lower courts and ruled that the side-by-side communities of Red Hook and Sunset Park have dominion over the piers that Brooklyn Heights residents consider to be as much a part of their history as George Washington's retreat to the harbor's edge in 1776.


Ill or Mad, George Is a Royal Role
Ask Nigel Hawthorne how he came to be performing the leading part in Alan Bennett's "Madness of George III," the play from Britain's National Theater that began an American tour to general acclaim this month at the Rich Forum in Stamford, Conn., and moves on to the Brooklyn Academy of Music on Tuesday, and he promptly starts to talk of the last time he was working in New York, back in 1991.
It was while he was there, winning himself a Tony Award for his performance in William Nicholson's "Shadowlands," that he definitively proved to the world and to himself that he was an actor of genuine emotional weight.
It was there, too, that he had a crucial first meeting with Nicholas Hytner, who was to direct Mr.
Bennett's portrait of a monarch on the rack.
On the face of it, the genial, peppery George III could hardly be more different from C. S. Lewis, the mild and gentle scholar at the center of "Shadowlands." But they are linked by pain.
Lewis loses his wife to cancer and is tormented by grief.
King George loses his mind to a metabolic imbalance called porphyria and, thought to be mad, is tormented by being strapped into a chair and blistered with cups of hot wax, among other things.
Neither was a character who could be played by a comic actor, no matter how witty, no matter how accomplished.


Senator Wants Hoover's Name Off F.B.I. Building
Furious over a report that J. Edgar Hoover had the Federal Bureau of Investigation spy on a former colleague, Senator Howard M. Metzenbaum has introduced a bill that would strip Hoover's name from the building that houses the agency's headquarters.
Mr.
Metzenbaum, an Ohio Democrat known in Congress for his irascible liberalism, said he had long felt ashamed when he drove up Pennsylvania Avenue and saw Hoover's name prominently displayed above the building's entrance.


The Friendly Confines, but Not for the Lions' Opponents
Wien Stadium in upper Manhattan will never be confused with "the Pit" in Baton Rouge, La., or Neyland Stadium in Knoxville, Tenn., as far as the toughest places for visiting teams to play college football are concerned.
But Columbia, which calls the cozy little enclave at Baker Field home, has been making things difficult for opponents of late.
Yesterday, though neither pretty nor very convincing, the Lions held on for a 7-0 victory over Fordham.
It was their third straight triumph at Wien, the first time they have accomplished the feat since 1971, before the stadium even had a name.


True (Fugitive) Romance: The Movie Genre
Renegade romance.
Lovers on the lam.
Call the plot line what you will, it boils down to crime and passion -- time-tested elements of popular culture.


Edible Souvenirs
To the Editor: Readers whose mouths watered at Susan Allen Toth's descriptions of British food, but who cannot wait to get to Britain to purchase it, can find it in New York at Myers of Keswick, which is on Hudson Street between Jane and Horatio Streets in Greenwich Village.
HOWARD L. REITER  Coventry, Conn.


Kimberly Avison, Paul Huffard 4th
Kimberly Dean Avison, the daughter of Mrs.
Alfred D. Avison of Darien, Conn., and the late Mr.
Avison, was married yesterday to Paul P. Huffard 4th, a son of Mrs.
George L. Ball of Stamford, Conn., and Mr.
Huffard 3d of Greenwich, Conn.
The Rev.
Avery Manchester, a Congregational minister, officiated at the First Church of Round Hill in Greenwich.
Mrs.
Huffard is an associate marketing manager with Pepsi-Cola in Somers, N.Y.
She graduated from Colgate University and received an M.B.A. from Dartmouth College.
Her father was the president of Avison Associates, which was an advertising studio in New York.


Don't Call This Book Elegant
NAMES: Dodie Kazanjian (far right) and Calvin Tomkins (left).
IDENTITY: Husband and wife, authors of "Alex" (Knopf, $27.50), a new biography of Alexander Liberman (center), the 81-year-old artist and the editorial director of Conde Nast.


THE DEVIL IN LONG ISLAND
Ron Rosenbaum's entertaining article "The Devil in Long Island" (Aug. 22) failed to note the one topographical feature that is central to Long Island's psyche: the place is almost as flat as a board.


Teachers Feel Left Out of Reform, Study Says
Despite widespread and urgent calls over the last decade for school reform, nearly 60 percent of the nation's school teachers say they have yet to see major changes occurring in their individual schools, according to a new study.
But the study found that in the schools where "major reform" had occurred, particularly changes that give a greater say in areas like curriculum and scheduling, teachers felt better about their careers, their schools and their ability to influence students' lives.


THE NATION: Amtrak's Worst Crash; Night, Fog and Death in a Swamp
THERE were screams, chaos, confusion and heroics in a fog-enveloped bayou Wednesday morning when a string of double-decker, Superliner Amtrak coaches and three locomotives was launched from an apparently damaged bridge north of here into the murky waters.
Forty-seven people died in the 3 A.M. accident, many of them entombed in cars that were submerged or partially submerged in the 30-foot-deep waters of Big Bayou Canot along the Mobile River.
Survivors formed human chains to pull others to safety and soothed panicky fellow passengers trying to ride rising water out of sinking cars.


This Week's Numbers
Last
Consensus
Period
Estimates
(I.D.E.A. Inc.)
Monday
Existing home sales, millions, ann. rate
3.88
3.88
Tuesday
Consumer confidence index, September
59
60
Wednesday
G.D.P., 2d quarter, percent change
1.8
1.8
Thursday
Weekly jobless claims, thousands
335
330
New home sales, thousands, ann. rate
629
650
Chicago purchasing managers' index, Sept.
50.2
51.0
Personal income, August, percent change
-0.2
0.9
Friday
Leading indicators, August, percent change
-0.1
0.7
Factory goods orders, Aug., pct. change
-2.1
1.2
Tuesday: Annual I.M.F./World Bank meeting opens


Blind Fashion
WHAT: A barometer of age, the signifier that the eyes are not what they used to be.
Tiny half-glasses -- O.K., they're magnifying glasses -- sold at pharmacies for around $9.99, and bought in half-dozen lots by people over 40.
WHY: They're tiny and light, which is to say they're easy to conceal.
They're also easy to lose.


Another Trick of the Trade
To the Editor:
"Why the Bread's in the Back of the Store" (Viewpoints, Sept. 19) lists the strategies supermarkets employ to persuade shoppers to buy more.
He omits one I recently learned.
Supermarkets also periodically rearrange the shelves so that the confused shopper must tour the aisles looking for a favorite item.
This increases the distances walked and shoppers presumably discover new items to buy.
FRANK L. CINQUEMANI  Montclair, N.J., Sept. 21


Accused Businessman Is Linked to Secretary
Commerce Secretary Ronald H. Brown met three times with a Vietnamese-American businessman who has been accused of conspiring to pay Mr.
Brown $700,000 to pursue a trade policy favorable to Vietnam, a Federal law enforcement official said today.
The official said an investigation into the conspiracy accusation, which had been reported earlier, had not produced any evidence that Mr.
Brown had violated the law.


Mayoral Agenda: A periodic report on post-election issues facing the winner. -- 1. The Budget; New York City Candidates Agree: Reduce Spending but Hold Details
When the winner of New York City's mayoral race takes the oath of office on Jan. 1, he will face an immediate challenge: preventing a budget crisis.
That is the consensus among experts on the city's fiscal affairs, who say that without major changes, there will be shortfalls of at least $2 billion a year in the next three budgets.


Dinkins Set To Propose Health Plans
In the fourth major policy statement in a week, Mayor David N. Dinkins plans to announce a series of health-care initiatives today that range from expanding the number of neighborhood health centers to providing scholarships to medical students who agree to serve patients with AIDS after graduation.
Mr.
Dinkins's health proposals are the latest in a series of policy statements intended to seize the attention of the public in an election season in which the Mayor has been plagued by bad news.
The health proposals are also intended to counter the claims of Rudolph W. Giuliani, the Republican-Liberal mayoral candidate, that the Dinkins administration is without leadership on a number of fronts.
Mr.
Giuliani has faulted the Mayor in recent weeks for the city's management of public hospitals, some of which he said should be privatized.


President Clinton Arrives in New York With Much on His Menu


In Amtrak Inquiry, Details Are Veiled by Conflicts
Federal investigators have pieced together a broad outline of how the worst crash in Amtrak history took place Wednesday in predawn fog in an Alabama bayou.
They say they know that the crash that killed 47 people occurred after a bridge was struck and weakened by a wayward barge minutes before the 11-car Sunset Limited, en route from Los Angeles to Miami, began to cross it.
But then comes the hard part: the details.
Investigators say there are many significant unanswered questions and several crucial conflicts in the evidence and accounts by witnesses gathered so far.


Review/Film; From Success to Death Along an Anxious Road
In "Malina," the German film maker Werner Schroeter's adaptation of a novel by Ingeborg Bachman, Isabelle Huppert portrays a writer who suffers from an interminable case of existential angst.
Ms.
Huppert's unnamed character is a chain-smoking novelist who lives in Vienna with a calm and devoted male companion, Malina (Mathieu Carriere).
Although attractive and successful, she is emotionally disturbed.
In the film's opening scene, she has a vision of herself as a little girl being thrown to her death by her father from the roof of a building.
The father, a demonic figure, reappears in several expressionistic set pieces, sometimes to the accompaniment of operatic music.


Accord Is Near on a Mental Health Bill
Negotiators for the Legislature and the Cuomo administration said today that they were near agreement on a mental health bill that would close five state psychiatric hospitals and earmark between $153 million and $180 million in new spending for community care over the next five years.
An additional $30 million would be spent on programs for the homeless, with most of the money going to treatment for alcoholics and drug abusers who are mentally ill.
The negotiators have been working quietly since early July, when the Governor threatened to veto a mental health bill passed by the Legislature.
That bill would direct money to community mental health programs each time a bed was closed in one of the state's 22 psychiatric hospitals.
According to estimates, it would route between $208 million and $245 million to community care over five years.


The First New York City Hall Police Riot
To the Editor:
In his primary night victory speech (news article, Sept. 15), Mayor Dinkins accused his Republican opponent of playing "chief cheerleader and angry master of ceremonies at the first City Hall police riot in our city's history."


The Mets Fans Finally Get A Day for Appreciation
Fan Appreciation Day.
It was a concept born of another era, certainly another season.
The Mets, after all, had given Shea Stadium its worst baseball in more than a quarter-century.
By way of response, Shea had limited its outrage and mostly offered indifference through 1993.
Mutual affection, anyway, seemed a bit much to ask after this long season of an angry truce.
But corporate sponsors gave away radios and computers and a car.
And the Mets, after a season of lurid largesse, didn't give away a baseball game.
Positive Stats, for a Change
The Mets beat the Expos, 9-3.
Tug McGraw was inducted into the franchise's Hall of Fame.
Jeff Kent, after attacking a television camera, returned to the more acceptable activity of menacing a baseball, slugging a grand slam and driving in five runs.
Eddie Murray, aware the project won't win him a job at Shea next year, kept adding to his career totals, sliding up the career charts in runs batted in, hits and doubles.
And Dave Telgheder, a pitcher of modest tools, went eight respectable innings to edge the Expos closer to 1993 extinction in the National League East.


Jurors to Hear Closing Arguments in Trial of Trooper
Closing arguments were scheduled to begin this morning in the two-week-old trial of a State Police investigator accused of faking evidence in a 1991 armed robbery near Binghamton.
The investigator, David M. Beers, has been suspended without pay since he was charged in May and faces 5 to 15 years in prison if convicted.
Mr.
Beers is also set to go on trial in November on charges that he faked evidence in a 1991 narcotics investigation.


Coffee and Clinton: A Hard Sell on the Health Plan
Framed by boxes of breakfast cereal and refrigerated pies, President Clinton took a seat at the counter of a Queens diner yesterday and, like a neighborhood insurance agent trying to sign up his friends, listened to the customers' woes and tried to convince them that the one-size-fits-all Clinton health plan would meet their needs.
"What's your deductible?" the President asked Mark Fish, a diner in a booth a few feet from Mr.
Clinton's counter stool.


U.S. Denies Europeans and Belfry to Hold On to Ryder Cup
There was no defining figure on the final day of this Ryder Cup, no solitary hero or scapegoat, no Bernhard Langer wincing like some crestfallen angel as his final putt slid by the hole.
Instead, the Americans' 15-13 victory gathered force slowly this afternoon, like a series of waves breaking against this proud island's shores.
The final rush began in the middle of the day with the news of Jim Gallagher's stunning victory over Seve Ballesteros.
Then came Tom Kite's romp over Langer, then Davis Love 3d's crucial putt on No. 18 against Constantino Rocca, a small, round, sympathetic Italian, who, like so many Ryder Cuppers before him, folded down the stretch.


Comments From Dinkins Backer Draw Fire From Giuliani Camp
Rudolph W. Giuliani, the Republican-Liberal mayoral candidate, and his running mate for comptroller, Herman Badillo, yesterday assailed a supporter of Mayor David N. Dinkins for televised comments about Mr.
Badillo that the two candidates said were racially divisive.
The comments were made by Eric Adams, president of the Grand Council of Guardians, an umbrella organization of black police officers, on a television program with Bill McCreary as the host.
Mr.
Adams said that if Mr.
Badillo were truly concerned about the Hispanic community, he would have married a Hispanic woman.
Mr.
Badillo is Puerto Rican and his wife is Jewish.


Treasury to Auction Only Bills This Week
The Treasury's schedule of financing this week is confined to today's regular weekly auction of new three- and six-month bills.
Traders said that at the close of the New York cash market on Friday, the rate on the outstanding three-month bill was 2.91 percent and the rate on the six-month issue was 3.02 percent.


Proposal Seen For Auditing Police Graft
The mayoral commission investigating police corruption in New York City is considering recommending creation of a special panel of auditors to constantly scrutinize the Police Department's own system for weeding out corruption, advisers to the commission said yesterday.
Even before the start of public hearings today, the Mollen Commission's five members have reached a consensus that only such a panel, with the ability to conduct its own investigations, can keep the spotlight on corruption, the advisers said.
The department's Internal Affairs Bureau has been criticized as bungling investigations or ignoring signs of corruption.


Corrections
An entry in the Executive Changes listing of Business Day on Wednesday about C S First Boston misspelled the name of a new managing director of the health care finance group in the investment company's public finance department.
He is Gary D. Bunton, not Burton.


Communist Gains May Cool Investment in Poland
For companies experienced in emerging markets, Poland, with its 40 million people and a centrist Government, has proved a fertile field in the last four years.
But with the success of former Communists in the elections Sept. 19, Western investor enthusiasm may cool and new commitments may be delayed, at least in the immediate future, investment bankers and company officials say.
"In the short term it will be wait and see, and if the business climate changes dramatically you'll see people reassess the risk," said John Simpson, a director of Wasserstein Perella &amp; Company, the New York investment firm that was involved in purchases in Poland by the Gerber Products Company and the International Paper Company.


Powersoft Chooses Review Semifinalists
The Powersoft Corporation, a software company in Burlington, Mass., has named semifinalists in a review for its estimated $6.5 million account, which has been at Duval Woglom Brueckner &amp; Partners in Boston for three and a half years.
The six contenders are the incumbent and Anderson &amp; Lembke in New York; Clarke Goward Fitts Matteson in Boston; Eisner &amp; Associates in Baltimore; Lord, Dentsu &amp; Partners in New York, and Mullen Advertising in Wenham, Mass.


North Korea Won't Budge on Nuclear Stance
Six months after Washington broke decades of cold-war silence with North Korea and opened talks, American, Japanese and South Korean officials say there is no evidence that the reclusive Government is backing away from its nuclear weapons project or that it will allow international inspectors into its most secret installations.
No one knows if the Government in Pyongyang has been able to use the time to further its bomb development, or whether such efforts have slowed under international pressure and a lack of technology.
American negotiators insist that the talks have not been a failure, largely because they dissuaded North Korea from pulling out of the international treaty limiting the spread of nuclear weapons.


The Morning After: Red Faces for Rutgers
Doug Graber wasn't in a forgiving mood Saturday night after his Rutgers team was given a 31-7 thrashing at Beaver Stadium by Penn State.
"I'm embarrassed the way our team played," said Graber in an uncharacteristic display of criticism of his own team.
"Poise was our biggest problem. We have trouble keeping our poise and discipline."


China's Culture Should Dictate Political Reform
To the Editor:
Your long article on China ("China Sees 'Market-Leninism' as Way to Future," Sept. 6) is an example of excellent reporting based on uncertain and nebulous historical perspective.
Capitalism, as we understand today, involves wide extension of credit, impersonal management and pooling of service facilities.
In essence, it is an accounting method and civil law in tune with modern commercial practice.
Only a few die-hards still regard it with the vision of Marx and Lenin.


Nafta and the Environment
Environmentalists, accustomed to unified struggles against common enemies like air pollution and Ronald Reagan, have fallen to fighting among themselves over the North American Free Trade Agreement.
Grass-roots organizations like Friends of the Earth say it will create a polluters' paradise in Mexico and degrade America.
Mainstream groups like the National Wildlife Federation say it all but guarantees a cleaner hemisphere.
Nafta's critics are even more jittery now that a Federal appeals court has ruled that the White House can forward the agreement to Congress without an environmental impact statement.
A careful reading of Nafta should ease their worries.


Abroad at Home; Depriving The Nation
It is months since President Clinton abandoned his nominee as Assistant Attorney General for civil rights, Lani Guinier.
But the Guinier affair will not go away.
Questions about her views and about the way the political process treated her continue to nag at us.
By far the best analysis of those questions is now in hand.
It is by Professor Randall Kennedy of the Harvard Law School and appears in the fall issue of The American Prospect, a liberal quarterly that takes a deeper look at public problems.
The article is impressive in its evenhandedness.
Professor Kennedy praises Professor Guinier in some respects, criticizes in others.


Bledsoe, No. 1 Choice, No. 1 Target
f Drew Bledsoe thought he had been rudely welcomed to the National Football League through three losses, four interceptions, seven sacks and two fumbles, he did not realize what the Jets had in store for him tonight in Game 4 of his N.F.L. indoctrination.
The Patriots' $14.5 million rookie -- the No. 1 pick of the draft -- floundered in the face of an all-out attack by the Jets' defense.
That he got off 42 passes and completed 19 was a testament to his coolness and ability to throw flat-footed.


Ms. Pigliavento and Mr. Alonso
Michele Pigliavento, a daughter of Eleaner and Orlando Pigliavento of Schenectady, N.Y., and Daniel R. Alonso, the son of Drs.
M.
Lita and Daniel R. Alonso of Scarsdale, N.Y., were married yesterday.
Justice Stephen Crane of the State Supreme Court in Manhattan officiated at the Hotel Thayer in West Point, N.Y.
Ms.
Pigliavento, who is keeping her name, is an actress in New York who most recently appeared in "The Goodbye Girl" on Broadway.
She graduated cum laude from the State University at Geneseo, N.Y.
Her parents own the Orlando School of Dance in Schenectady.


Elderly With Large Health Care Bills See Special Boon in Clinton Proposal
If the Clinton Administration was looking for an elderly couple whose problems would illustrate the gaps in Medicare -- and how the new health care proposal could help to fill them -- it might choose Marcelle and Eugene Knisely, two retired New York City workers who are watching their pensions and savings dwindle to nothing because of their health problems.
Both Mr.
Knisely, 80, and his wife, 71, have cerebral palsy.
Until five years ago, Mrs.
Knisely could manage the daily tasks that kept them going.
But now, both use wheelchairs, Mr.
Knisely has cancer, and they are dependent on the home health aides who come to their Greenwich Village apartment at 7 A.M. and leave at 9 P.M.


Review/Rock; An Assaultive Amalgam Of Styles and Sonic Jolts
Ian MacKaye, Fugazi's guitarist and singer, likes to stay calm.
To open Fugazi's concert on Friday night at Roseland, the first of two sold-out concerts, he admonished the audience, "Be nice to each other." Later, without raising his voice, he urged people who were lifting crowd-surfers to pass them backwards so the fans up front wouldn't have so much traffic.
But the crowd had its own ideas about how to respond to Fugazi's brawny beat, furiously strummed guitars and half-sung, half-shouted words, turning Roseland's floor into a frenzied mosh pit.
Fugazi unites the lessons of hardcore rock -- the uncompromising irritation, the guitar attack, the stop-start riffs -- with reggae's sense of space and bits of mainstream rock (U2's guitar, the Police's punky ska, a booming heavy-metal beat).
The band, based in Washington, has also maintained hardcore's disdain for the entertainment business.
It runs its own label, Dischord Records, which sells compact disks for just $8 (raising the question why much larger entertainment conglomerates can't do the same); concert tickets at Roseland were $5.


Seeing Today's Dreams Against Political Reality
"WHEN people say dreams don't come true, tell them about Rudy."
Rudy who?
That advertising slogan is promoting a new film, not a candidate for mayor.
But the advertisement conjures up nostalgic Horatio Alger-type images of a young man who succeeded against the odds -- images that often seem to represent the underpinnings of Rudolph W. Giuliani's mayoral campaign.
For many New Yorkers, today's dreams seem to be less about what could be than about what might have been.


U.S. Davis Captain Choice Is Battered Back and Forth
First his players completed a 5-0 sweep of their congenial Davis Cup challengers from the Bahamas in a face-saving relegation match.
Then the United States Tennis Association's president, Bumpy Frazer, took the Fifth Amendment regarding the identity of next year's Davis Cup captain.
Will it be led by the Pied Piper of top players, John McEnroe, or will the U.S.T.A. save further face and select a less controversial candidate for a job traditionally held by men who don't throw public temper tantrums?


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY BUDGET PRESENTS IMMEDIATE CHALLENGE When the winner of New York City's mayoral race takes the oath of office on Jan. 1, he will face an immediate challenge: preventing a budget crisis.
That is the consensus among experts on the city's fiscal affairs, who say that without major changes, there will be shortfalls of at least $2 billion a year in the next three budgets.
A1.


Dance in Review
Perspectives in Motion  Dia Center for the Arts SoHo
Ann Moradian saved the best for last in a program presented by her Perspectives in Motion company on Thursday night.
The ingenious theme of Ms.
Moradian's new "My Left Hand," danced by Stefanie Nelson to music by Eric Tingstad and Nancy Rumbel, was that one hand expressed the strongest emotions in a solo that made use of the entire body.


Candidates for City Comptroller Continue to Walk Before the Runoff


Seeing a Different Kind of Stars
We interrupt the latest brawls to bring you the new college football rankings:
A.P. -- 1. Florida State, 2. Alabama, 3. Miami, 4. Notre Dame, 5. Florida.


Military College to Start Separate Women's Course
In an effort to comply with a Federal court order, the trustees of the all-male Virginia Military Institute voted Saturday afternoon to underwrite a military program at a neighboring women's college.
Gov.
L.
Douglas Wilder immediately endorsed the move, saying: "It is a plan that recognizes the physiological and psychological differences between men and women. And instead of drawing a middle ground that would not fully benefit students of either gender, it strives to reach the same results that V.M.I. currently achieves so successfully with men."


CHRONICLE
SHIMON PERES , Israel's Foreign Affairs Minister, has been quite the man about town -- wining, dining and holding court in small intimate settings around the city.
First, Mr.
Peres spoke to an invitation-only luncheon gathering of Jewish youths and community leaders at the Park East Synagogue on East 67th.
The topic -- what else? -- the recently signed peace accord between Israel and the Palestine Liberation Organization.
Next, Mr.
Peres was off to a party at the East Side apartmentof ROBERT K. LIFTON , businessman and president of the newly formed Israel Policy Forum, and his wife, LORETTA .
Over hors d'oeuvres, the Foreign Minister engaged in an informal dialogue with prominent Jewish Americans.
Among those sipping and conversing were MARTIN WHITMAN , an investor; AL TISHMAN , the real-estate magnate, and his wife, PEGGY , a civic leader; ROBERT ROSEN , the health-care executive, and his wife, DALE , an author and psychologist; IYA AZRIELANT , the jewelry designer; MICHAEL SONNEFELDT , vice chairman of the United Nations Association, and DR.
ISMAR SCHORSCH , chancellor of the Jewish Theological Seminary.


King Hussein Breaks Bread and Makes Promises
King Hussein of Jordan, struggling to absorb the aftershocks of the Palestinian-Israeli peace agreement, has indicated that, because of the accord and the changes it has brought to the Middle East, he will probably delay parliamentary elections scheduled for November.
"There is a likelihood of postponement for a limited period until matters clear up a little bit more, and we know exactly where we all stand in the interests of cohesion within the country," he told foreign reporters over dinner Saturday at the limestone Mawa Palace.


Gilmour of Leafs Gets a Suspension
The National Hockey League yesterday announced a one-game suspension and $500 fine for Toronto Maple Leafs center Doug Gilmour for head-butting Enrico Ciccone of the Washington Capitals during an exhibition game on Sept. 23.


Economic Calendar
Listed below are the scheduled release dates for major economic indicators this week.
Monday  None  Tuesday None  Wednesday  Gross Domestic Product . . . 2d Qtr  Thursday Weekly Jobless Claims  New-Home Sales . . .
August  Personal Income . . .
August  Friday Leading Indicators . . .
August  Factory Orders . . .
August


Ally &amp; Gargano Gets General Nutrition
General Nutrition Centers in Pittsburgh has named Ally &amp; Gargano in New York to handle its estimated $30 million account, effective Jan. 1.


Irving R. Wisch, 82, a Leader Of New York Dairy Industry, Dies
Irving R. Wisch, who learned to milk cows as a boy at his family's dairy in Brooklyn and grew up to head the milk industry in metropolitan New York, died on Friday at a hospital in Norwalk, Conn.
He was 82 and lived in Boca Raton, Fla., and Westport, Conn.
The cause of death was cardiac arrest, his family said.


Rally Is Over, an Economist Says
The yield on the 30-year Treasury bond has been trading above 6 percent for seven days now, and to David C. Munro, chief United States economist at High Frequency Economics, it looks as if the rally is over.
But Mr.
Munro is not expecting any sharp jump in long-term interest rates to follow.
He does not arrive at this conclusion from a concern about inflation.
Nor does he expect that the economy is about to break out of its sluggish path.


Patents
MANY adults can remember strapping on a Dick Tracy two-way wrist radio as children.
Even if the plastic version did not work like the detective's, most kids knew it was powered by an atomic battery and that they, like Dick Tracy, could call the police station from just about anywhere -- even if they were dangling from a helicopter.
Well, A.T.&amp; T. Bell Laboratories readily admits that its newly patented wrist telephone runs on a small battery and sends a signal only about 100 yards.
But it says its model is still better than the one that Tracy wore.


Kristin Jahoda, Christopher Arndt
Kristin Jahoda, a daughter of Mrs.
Barbara Jahoda of Coppell, Tex., and Mr.
John Jahoda of Dallas, was married yesterday to Christopher Vincent Arndt, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Edward W. Arndt of Ho-Ho-Kus, N.J.
The Rev.
Timothy Graff performed the Catholic ceremony at the Church of St.
Gabriel the Archangel in Saddle River, N.J.
Mrs.
Arndt and her husband, both 25, graduated from the University of North Carolina at Charlotte.
She is a compensation and benefits analyst with Broadway &amp; Seymour, a computer consulting firm in Charlotte, N.C.


Dance in Review
'Sacred Hula of Hawaii'  Halau O Kekuhi St. Mark's Church
Halau O Kekuhi, a group from Hilo, Hawaii, celebrated the hula on Saturday night.
Not a ukulele was strummed, nor did any Hollywood starlets wiggle their hips seductively.
This was just as it should have been.


Mechanic Is First to Ride The Falls Twice -- And Survive


No Political Actions Against Quayle's Accuser
To the Editor:
I would like to respond to your editorial "Who Silenced Mr. Quayle's Accuser?" on Sept. 15, which implied that my office failed to recognize substantial evidence that a Federal inmate was silenced for political reasons in 1988.


RESULTS PLUS
SOCCER  Rebuilt Zambia Nears World-Cup Berth  The rebuilt Zambian team moved within one game of a trip to the World Cup finals after a 4-0 victory over Senegal yesterday in Lusaka, Zambia.
The triumph moved Zambia past Morocco as the leader of Africa Group B. Zambia needs only a tie in its final match, against Morocco at Casablanca on Oct. 10, to qualify for the finals next year in the United States.
Most of Zambia's original national team died when their plane crashed into the sea off West Africa on April 28 on the way to a World Cup qualifier.
Yesterday's lineup included four national players who had played in previous international matches with the 18 stars who died in the crash. (AP) Zimbabwe Wins, Keeps Cup Hopes Alive: Agent Sawu scored off a header in the third minute as Zimbabwe beat Guinea, 1-0, in Harare, Zimbabwe, and kept alive its hopes for a World Cup berth.
Cameroon and Zimbabwe (both 2-1) are tied for the lead in Africa Group C and play on Oct. 10 at Yaounde, Cameroon.
Zimbabwe must win that game, while Cameroon needs only a tie. (AP)


Inmac Sets I.B.M. Deal
The Inmac Corporation, a large computer distributor, will begin selling personal computers under its name that are manufactured by I.B.M.
The computers will be built to customers' orders and sold through Inmac's catalog, which is distributed to two million customers in North America.


No Headline
Russians need to be reminded at times like this that they're a great people.
Events disrupt things a little sometimes, but listening to this music is a reminder that there's a great nation here. -- MSTISLAV ROSTROPOVICH.  [ A10:5. ]


Isolated Foes of Yeltsin Are Sad but Still Defiant
President Boris N. Yeltsin spent a cold but sunny morning in Red Square with thousands of ordinary Russian citizens today, listening to the revered cellist and conductor Mstislav Rostropovich direct Washington's National Symphony Orchestra.
Russia's other President, Aleksandr V. Rutskoi, spent his morning in the increasingly isolated Parliament building, where the long, echoing corridors are lit every 30 yards or so by a single fluorescent fixture run by a generator and where the offices have no lights at all.


Floyd and Wadkins Live Up To Watson's Faith in Them
When Tom Watson picked Raymond Floyd and Lanny Wadkins as his two captain's choices for the Ryder Cup team, he said his top criteria were "heart and guts."
Both did little to prove their captain wrong today, but only one swung a golf club at the Belfry.


Accord Is Near on a Mental Health Bill
Negotiators for the Legislature and the Cuomo administration said today that they were near agreement on a mental health bill that would close five state psychiatric hospitals and earmark between $153 million and $180 million in new spending for community care over the next five years.
An additional $30 million would be spent on programs for the homeless, with most of the money going to treatment for alcoholics and drug abusers who are mentally ill.
The negotiators have been working quietly since early July, when the Governor threatened to veto a mental health bill passed by the Legislature.
That bill would direct money to community mental health programs each time a bed was closed in one of the state's 22 psychiatric hospitals.
According to estimates, it would route between $208 million and $245 million to community care over five years.


United Nations Is Finding Its Plate Increasingly Full but Its Cupboard Is Bare
The lights are going out early at the United Nations as this year's General Assembly gets under way.
Despite having 80,000 peacekeepers in the field and despite the brave predictions of a United Nations renaissance in the post-cold-war world, the organization is on the brink of bankruptcy and is torn by self-doubt.


Compromise on Russia's Standoff Is Proposed by Regional Leaders
Russian regional leaders meeting in St.
Petersburg called today for simultaneous early elections for both President and Parliament to resolve the power struggle between the two sides.
They proposed that both President Boris N. Yeltsin and the Congress of People's Deputies reverse their edicts dissolving or dismissing each other and that the legislature then turn its powers over to the Council of the Federation -- a body of regional leaders formed by Mr.
Yeltsin -- until a new legislature is sworn in.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Media Business
Paramount's board meets this morning to consider rival takeover bids, and one executive close to the company said senior officials seemed ready to begin discussions with QVC.
Any talks with that rival bidder depend on whether Paramount's legal advisers conclude that by taking that course, the board would be within its legal obligations to Viacom, its initial suitor.  [ Page D1. ]
Steven Hoffenberg still has publishing ambitions despite the failure of his attempts to take over The New York Post.
He says his latest effort, a paper aimed at women called Her New York, will reach newsstands on Friday.
William Glaberson: Press.  [ D6. ]


In Auctioning the Airwaves, Who'll Risk What?
Get ready for the biggest burst of arbitrage and speculation since before Ivan F. Boesky went to jail.
Even before the Federal Communications Commission announced its plan on Thursday to auction off a huge swath of the nation's airwaves for a new generation of wireless communications, deal makers on Wall Street and in corporate board rooms were trying to figure out what those rights might be worth.
It is, literally, the $10 billion question.
That is how much the Clinton Administration hopes to bring in from auctions that will begin next year.
Many aspiring bidders insist that that estimate is giddily high.
Yet current prices for cellular and other wireless licenses suggest that the estimate could be far too low.


CHRONICLE
As a young, black girl growing up in New York City, BETHANN HARDISON , owner of Bethann Management Company, an agency that represents models, never thought of a career in modeling or fashion because she didn't see anyone like her in magazines.
Even when she got her big break, Ms.
Hardison wished there had been some guiding hand to help her manuever the competitive fashion world.
So that other minority youths will be spared her travails, she and a group of fashion industry professionals formed Fashion Outreach, a nonprofit group working to improve minority representation in the fashion industry.
"We plan to focus on youth, educating them, providing role models for them, providing them with contacts that will aid them in choosing and forging a career in fashion," said LAWRINE CHILDERS , one of the group's founding members and a personal manager to models.


Hotel Group Signs Deal For Casinos
Hospitality Franchise Systems Inc., the nation's biggest hotel franchiser, became the latest entrant in the gambling industry when it signed the last of three agreements yesterday for ventures extending from a Mississippi riverfront casino to one on an Indian reservation in Canada.
Its executives say it is pursuing at least five more.
But in a marked departure from the gambling operations of other hotel companies -- which aim primarily at upper-income gamblers, including many who arrive by air -- the Hospitality Franchise operations aim at middle-class Americans who live within 150 miles of the casinos.


Dance in Review
'Indigenous Culture'  Polly Motley Bessie Schonberg Theater
Polly Motley now lives in Boulder, Colo.
But she grew up in Texas, and on Wednesday she choreographically reminisced about her years there in the program of three solos she offered as part of Dance Theater Workshop's Out-of-Towners series.


Brother R. Power, 75, Ex-Iona College Head
Brother Richard B. Power, a former president of Iona College in New Rochelle, N.Y., died on Friday at New Rochelle Hospital.
He was 75 and lived in New Rochelle.
The cause was complications after a surgical procedure, associates said.


Rangers' Keenan Puts Game Face Over an Aching Loneliness
Mike Keenan arrived at the hospital in Stratford, N.J., within a few hours of the accident.
It was morning, Nov. 10, 1985, and Pelle Lindbergh had crashed his Porsche into a retaining wall at an excessive rate of speed.
Lindbergh, the goaltender for the Philadelphia Flyers, was effectively brain dead, his body dependent on a life-support system that eventually would be turned off.
Keenan, in his first National Hockey League head-coaching job, came into the lobby of Jefferson Hospital and immediately took charge.


On a Boulevard in Harlem: the African-American Day Parade


London Journal; With a Mace, Madam Rules a Most Unruly House
A foreigner who wanders into the wood-paneled gallery of the House of Commons expecting decorum is in for a shock.
Do the honorable members rise with gravitas to expound on the affairs of the realm?
Do they conduct the state's discourse with dignity?
Do they humbly give way in defeat and display Churchillian magnanimity in victory?


BASEBALL: Sports of The Times; Yanks and Showalter Can't Look Back Yet
IT'S time to put the Yankees out of their misery, so haggard Buck Showalter does not have to give any more awkward little speeches about miracles and mathematics.
But it would have been more misery for them if it had happened here.
At least the Yankees did not have to listen to the roars and the fireworks of a division championship, something they may never experience on this patchwork team.
At least the Yankees did not have to skulk out of Toronto in a happy traffic jam of honking horns and smiling faces.


New York City Considers Exporting Trash
For the first time, New York City is looking to ship some of its household garbage to other states.
With the city's only landfill, Fresh Kills on Staten Island, filling up, and with plans to build incinerators and expand recycling moving slowly, sanitation officials are considering exporting some of the 14,000 tons of garbage produced each day by households and institutions.


Review/Jazz; 2 Young Trumpeters, In 2 Commissioned Works
Jazz at Lincoln Center opened its season on Wednesday at Alice Tully Hall with "On Commission: Terence Blanchard and Roy Hargrove," a set of commissions that were a good idea in principle but didn't quite succeed.
Mr.
Hargrove and Mr.
Blanchard, both young trumpeters adept at arranging for small groups, lead two of the better bands working in jazz.
Jazz has traditionally depended on the ensemble for its finest moments, on the sort of precision and interplay that only musicians who work together regularly can achieve.
The two commissions played on Wednesday were clearly assigned with the idea that these two working bands would be able to produce something out of the ordinary.


PRO FOOTBALL: Sports of The Times; Parcells: 'Not Even A Good Scrimmage'
ON the opposite sideline from where Bill Parcells once glowed when doused with Gatorade as the Giants coach, he endured last night the most embarrassing defeat in his nine seasons as a National Football League coach.
"We were completely outclassed in every way," he was saying now after the Patriots' 45-7 loss to the Jets.
"That wasn't even a good scrimmage. I'll take the responsibility for it. We weren't prepared and we didn't play well. They took advantage of every opportunity they had and we did very little to stop them, and we helped them along the way."


Organ Transplants Shouldn't Be Limited
To the Editor:
Willard Gaylin makes the point that any new health plan in this country must accept the notion of rationing ("The Health Plan Misses the Point," Op-Ed, Sept. 15).
Perhaps he is correct but I object to his insinuation that paying for a kidney transplant for a patient over 50 is a questionable practice, and I can't agree with his seeming approval of the Oregon plan, which will not fund liver transplants.


Alicia Grimaldi, Matthew Brzycki
Alicia Bernadette Grimaldi, the daughter of Lucian and Audrey Grimaldi of Woodbridge, N.J., was married there yesterday to Matthew Mark Brzycki, a son of Marian Brzycki of Wyoming, Pa.
The Rev.
Paul Viale performed the ceremony at St.
James Roman Catholic Church.
Mrs.
Brzycki, 32, and her husband, 36, work at Princeton University, she as the associate publications editor, he as the strength and conditioning coach and health-fitness coordinator.


Essay; The Fifth Person
Within a few years, health insurance will be universal and irrevocable; that's a given.
Reality #1: The four out of five Americans who are presently covered will have to pay for the fifth person's insurance: that is logically inescapable.
Four must pay for five.


Corrections
An obituary on Saturday about Alvin Hasenberg, an executive in the confectionary industry, misstated his age and the date of his death.
He died on Sept. 13, not on Sept. 16, and he was 70, not 76.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Peat Marwick, in its first campaign, aims to market a global identity.
KPMG PEAT MARWICK hopes globalization is not globaloney.
In its first advertising campaign, Peat Marwick, the American practice of the worldwide accounting and professional services company, is selling what television commercials and print advertisements assert is the "business expertise" it can offer companies as they expand internationally.


Dance in Review
'T.R.O. (Temporary Restraining Order)'  Pearl Ubungen Judson Memorial Church
In the past, Movement Research, which presents dance on Monday nights at Judson Memorial Church, has emphasized New York choreographers.
But it opened its new season on Sept. 13 with "T.R.O. (Temporary Restraining Order)," by Pearl Ubungen, a dancer from San Francisco.
The three-part suite concerned the treatment of women, especially Asian women, as sex objects.


19,000 Cancer Tests Rechecked After Misreading
An independent laboratory is re-examining 19,000 Pap smears performed at Newport Hospital since 1988 after a woman who had tested negative four times in eight years died of cervical cancer last spring.
Of 1,190 Pap smears rechecked so far, investigators have found that in 17 cases women were told they did not have cancer when the tests actually indicated early signs of cervical cancer.


CHRONICLE
Well, hello, Dolly!
Broadway's original Dolly, CAROL CHANNING , and the man who wrote the score for the Tony award-winning show, JERRY HERMAN , will be reunited tonight -- nearly 30 years to the date they first met in DAVID MERRICK'S offices -- when the New York Friars Club pays tribute to Mr.
Herman at its East 55th Street Renaissance mansion.
Among those expected to toast and perform for the man who also wrote the scores for the hit shows "Jerry's Friends," "Mame," and "La Cage aux Folles" are LESLIE UGGAMS , who will emcee the event, LAURIE BEECHMAN , BILLY STRITCH , LEROY REAMS , ALIX KOREY and FLORENCE LACEY .


Cuomo the Orator Now Soliloquizes in Book Form; Disclaiming Greatness, He Labors On: An Embryonic Idea Here, an Honorarium There
For a man who just published a collection of his speeches, Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo affects an unlikely sense of modesty about his oratorical skills.
He says he doesn't really consider himself a good speaker.
He agreed to publish his speeches, he says, because he believes that his ideas, not his elocution, merit preservation.


Review/Opera; Linking Distant Strife To That of Modern Times
William Harper's "El Greco," given its premiere on Thursday night at Playhouse 91, is a rich but imperfect opera.
Based very loosely on the life of the great Renaissance painter, it makes a problematic effort to equate the society of 16th-century Toledo, Spain, with the society of today.
Life, art and minority politics mingle on uncertain dramatic terrain.
The music is not to blame.
Mr.
Harper has produced an intriguing and sometimes entrancing score.
A prolific Chicago-based operatic composer, he has managed a graceful fusion of elements drawn from multiple eras and genres.
At climactic moments, he allows himself an un embarrassed neo-Renaissance grandeur, wild around the edges.


Supporting Dinkins, Clinton Worries About Role of Race
President Clinton, his voice ringing in revival tones, told a packed fund-raiser last night that Mayor David N. Dinkins deserved re-election on his record, but was facing a tough campaign partly because "too many of us are still too unwilling to vote for people who are different than we are."
With such an overt reference to Mr.
Dinkins's status as New York City's first black Mayor, the President unleashed perhaps the most explosive electoral weapon at the Mayor's command, and one that Mr.
Dinkins has seldom, if ever, invoked in such strong terms.


Clinton Lends Luster, and Bedlam; A Brush With Celebrity Worthy of the Movies Next Door
Mollie Moskowitz just wanted to see the 1 o'clock movie.
On her way to the theater yesterday afternoon, she heard something on the car radio about how President Clinton was at a diner.
She heard something about how the diner President Clinton was visiting was painted a pinkish color.
Until she pulled into the parking lot and saw all the camera crews and the police and the Secret Service agents, it had not occurred to her that the diner Mr.
Clinton was visiting was the one next to the theater, the Future Diner.


Equity Issues This Week
The following equity offerings and convertible debt offerings are expected this week:
Allied Holdings Inc., Decatur, Ga., an initial public offering of 3 million shares.
Alex.
Brown &amp; Sons.


Preporant Slogs To Record Victory
Preporant thrived on a sloppy track yesterday and cruised to a 14 1/2-length victory in the $60,000-added Hudson Handicap at Belmont Race Track.
Ridden by Robbie Davis and carrying 114 pounds, Preporant led throughout and covered the seven furlongs in 1:212/5, a stakes record.
It was the second victory in 10 starts this season for the 4-year-old gelded son of Cormorant.


Edith Meiser, 95, Dies; Actress and a Writer
Edith Meiser, a stage actress, writer and radio producer, died yesterday at Roosevelt Hospital.
She was 95 and lived in Manhattan.
The cause was a heart attack, said William Herz Jr., a friend.


Critic's Notebook; Rating the Interviewers In Hillary Clinton's Blitz
If you have not caught Hillary Rodham Clinton on the screen in recent days, you have not been watching enough television.
Morning time and evening time, summertime and autumntime, she has appeared on the three major networks to advance the Hillary-and-Bill health care plan.
Customarily described as its chief architect, she played the part of its chief promoter for these occasions, advertising comprehensive care, controlled cost and Congressional consensus around the corner.
The assignment was carried off with informed charm.
Having had her image problems with television, Mrs.
Clinton seems to have settled into a comfortable persona, one that suits her and that seems to suit most viewers: a woman who does not have to apologize because her interests and abilities stretch beyond the domestic quarters of the White House.
The wife whose television career began with an understandably shaky my-man performance on "60 Minutes" was now beside him once again, but without defensiveness or embarrassment, on a more serious matter.


2 Autumn Festivals in Europe
Both the Warsaw Autumn, which ended its 36th installment on Saturday night, and Paris's 22d Autumn Festival, which got under way last week and continues until December, were intended to open their cities to the best the world had to offer.
Both remain at full strength, attracting audiences from far beyond their local borders.
Yet both festivals are facing a new order, forced by circumstances to reconsider their roles.
In the late 1950's and 60's, the Warsaw Autumn provided Poland and the entire Soviet bloc with its only comprehensive look at contemporary classical music.
But it has had to readjust as the shock of the new wore off and the modernist passions of its founders were diluted by today's musical eclecticism.


China's Culture Should Dictate Political Reform; Danger in A-Test
To the Editor:
You reported on Sept. 17 that the United States believes that China is about to set off an underground nuclear explosion at its Lop Nor site in Xinjiang Province.
Such a test would surely outrage the population of Xinjiang, a northwestern region where minority Muslims have engaged in a sometimes bloody independence movement.


Ms. Reno and Crown Heights
Representative Charles Schumer, Brooklyn District Attorney Charles Hynes and many other New Yorkers want Attorney General Janet Reno to conduct a more rigorous investigation into the Crown Heights riots.
They're right.
Ms.
Reno may ultimately decide that no Federal crime was committed during the rioting or in the slaying of Yankel Rosenbaum, a Hasidic scholar who was murdered the first night of the violence.
But it is difficult to see how she could fairly make that judgment without an aggressive inquiry.
A few weeks ago, officials said Ms.
Reno had decided to drop the case.
Then she reconsidered after Mr.
Hynes, Mr.
Schumer and others asked for more time to make the argument for Federal prosecution.
The Justice Department will not, of course, discuss the case.
But a Federal grand jury has not been convened and it is clear that the Justice Department's questioning has been limited.


Dividend Meetings
Following is a partial list of dividend meetings this week: MONDAY  Ameron Inc Del Walt Disney Co Hartford Steam Boiler Unocal Corp TUESDAY  Bell Atlantic Corp Centerior Energy Corp Harsco Corp Metropolitan Finl Corp Montana Pwr Co WEDNESDAY  USF &amp; G Corp Vulcan Matls Co Washington Gas Lt Co THURSDAY  Delmarva Pwr &amp; Lt Co KCS Energy Inc Scor U S Corp FRIDAY  Freeport-McMoran Inc National City Corp Nevada Pwr Co


Revved-Up Esiason Makes Jets Go, Go, Go
Last week many of the Jets players wondered how the team would respond tonight against the winless Patriots.
Typically, the Jets haven't played their best against New England.
And the Jets were coming off a bye week.
In the past it was a scenario that often led to a Jets letdown.
But the Jets jumped out to a 21-0 lead early in the second quarter, and all the questions disappeared.
And as they flirted with a 45-0 shutout late in the fourth quarter, the past didn't seem applicable.


Giants' Bailey Has to Check His Loyalties
For about an hour recently, Giants linebacker Carlton Bailey talked fondly about his days in Buffalo.
He still stays in touch with some of the guys there.
Misses them a lot, actually.
Still, there were several things the talented linebacker remembers about his experience with his former team that, frankly, even now bring back feelings of disappointment and anger.
When the Giants play at Buffalo on Sunday night in what is being billed as New York's biggest test of the young season, Bailey plans on using these things to motivate him, to fire him up against the many players he spent five years of his life with as they built one of the American Football Conference's all-time powerhouses.


Nielsen Delays a Service Until the Cable Sky Clears
Broadcasters want cable television systems to pay them for the right to carry their signals.
Cable systems, which have never had to do that, are balking -- and, in some cases, switching the stations they offer to viewers.
And now this disagreement has claimed its first victim: the Nielsen overnight ratings.
Citing the difficulty in keeping track of the changes in cable lineups, Nielsen has announced that it will not provide television ratings on an overnight basis until the cable confusion is resolved.
Instead, starting next week, the press, the networks and their advertisers will have to wait three to five days to find out how, say, "Full House" on ABC fared against "Saved by the Bell" on NBC.


Cray Is Ready to Introduce Its First Parallel Computer
Seeking to shore up its eroding control of the market for the fastest computers, Cray Research Inc. will introduce its first massively parallel computer on Monday.
Massively parallel processors are made by chaining together hundreds or thousands of inexpensive commercial microprocessors.
They have been making inroads into the supercomputer business that Cray dominated in the 1980's.


I.M.F. Meeting Backs Yeltsin, With a Caveat
Finance ministers here for a meeting of the International Monetary Fund gave Russia a two-pronged message today: they support President Boris N. Yeltsin in his showdown with Parliament, but they want him to move faster to reduce inflation and reform the economy.
Voicing enthusiastic support for Mr.
Yeltsin, Treasury Secretary Lloyd Bentsen told the ministers today, "Our task in this unfolding drama is to reinforce reform and its standard-bearers."


Books of The Times; America's Dream on a Slide Into the Third World
The Endangered American Dream  How to Stop the United States From Becoming a Third-World Country and How to Win the Geo-Economic Struggle for Industrial Supremacy By Edward N. Luttwak  365 pages.
Simon &amp; Schuster. $24.
Much will seem familiar about Edward N. Luttwak's cumbersomely subtitled but important economic jeremiad, "The Endangered American Dream."


How Young Pleasure-Seekers at the Library Wind Up Literate
To the Editor:
As a retired public librarian I would like to comment on your Sept. 9 article that shows that many Americans cannot read.


Market Place; A flurry in the chemical industry confirms analysts' suspicions.
THE rapid-fire succession of spinoffs, acquisitions or restructurings last week in the chemical industry reinforced what many Wall Street analysts had already concluded: Chemicals are having another bad year, and will probably endure several more before the business pulls out of a prolonged slump.
Texaco Inc. kicked off the flurry by disclosing plans to sell its Texaco Chemical Company to Jon M. Huntsman, a chemical entrepreneur from Utah, and the Australian billionaire Kerry Packer, for $1.06 billion.
Then the American Cyanamid Company and the Ethyl Corporation each announced that they planned to spin off their chemical businesses to shareholders.
And E. I. du Pont de Nemours &amp; Company said it would lay off 4,500 employees in its domestic chemicals business.


The Yankees Save Face, but Not the Season
The Yankees did not need sunglasses, they did not need earplugs, they did not need to be frustrated about being swept and they did not need to credit the Blue Jays for winning the division.
It is inevitable and it will happen real soon, but the Yankees gladly snuck out of Toronto today and happily surrendered their front-row seats to the eventual clinching.
The Yankees finally won.


Bridge
An astonishing victory emerged from the Royal Viking Instant Matchpoint game, which was organized by the American Contract Bridge League and played in clubs throughout North America Thursday night.
The winners, playing at the Winfield Hall Club in Westchester, Pa., were Carole Siegel, who has 20 master points, and Susan Strauss, who has none at all and does not belong to the national group.
They scored almost 75 percent in the North-South line, and are surely the least experienced pair ever to win on such an occasion.
The East-West winners, with 73 percent, were Bill Cook and Annette McHann of Jackson, Miss.


Strangling: Only Certainty Is the TV Movie
Robert A. Solimine Jr.'s short life and senseless death seem destined to become a movie.
At least one producer regularly drops by the trial of James P. Wanger, the youth accused of strangling Mr.
Solimine.
Film executives keep calling reporters, angling for details on the case.


U.N. Ambitions Exceed Assets
Despite predictions that it would flower with the cold war's end, the United Nations is strapped for cash and racked by self-doubt.
Page A8.


INSIDE
Hussein Ponders Changes
Over dinner with foreign reporters, King Hussein of Jordan reflected on the changes wrought by the Israeli-Palestinian accord and talked of delaying elections.
Page A3.
U.S.
Keeps Ryder Cup
A crucial victory by 51-year-old Ray Floyd -- the oldest player in Ryder Cup history -- helped the United States beat Europe in golf's big showdown.
SportsMonday, C1.


Palestinian Killed by His Own Bomb in Gaza Strip


Asking for Asylum in U.S., Women Tread New Territory
One September night, the night of the 1991 military coup against President Jean-Bertrand Aristide of Haiti, a tall, slender young woman limped through the streets of Port-au-Prince in a tattered nightgown.
Then 16 years old, the woman, W. Louis, had just been beaten and gang-raped in retaliation for her male cousin's pro-Aristide activities.
Ms.
Louis and her cousin fled Haiti six weeks later by boat, spent five months at the American naval base in Guantanamo, Cuba, and were then admitted to the United States to apply for political asylum.
As a rape victim, she agreed to speak only if she was identified by her last name.


A Son Returns to Remind the Russians
The biggest crowd in Moscow in months gathered in Red Square today to welcome a returning son of Russia.
Mstislav Rostropovich, the cellist and conductor, who was exiled from the Soviet Union almost two decades ago, was leading the National Symphony Orchestra of Washington in an outdoor performance of the finale to "Alexander Nevsky" by Prokofiev and Tchaikovsky's "1812 Overture," complete with booming cannon fire and the Kremlin bells ringing.


The M.I.T. Case: Time to Back Off
A Federal appeals court has reversed a lower court decision that found the Massachusetts Institute of Technology guilty of violating antitrust laws.
The decision could prove a lifeline to needy students, especially if it leads the Clinton Administration to drop the case.
The Bush Administration charged M. I. T. and eight other universities with conspiracy.
Their crime was to participate in "overlap" meetings where financial aid officers would agree to offer mutual applicants an identical amount of financial aid -- an amount just enough to cover the applicant's financial need.


Expanding Perceptions Of Family In Film
Danny Glover daydreamed aloud as he took time out from his whirlwind schedule of promoting his new Paramount film, "Bopha!," about a black family in South Africa.
He was talking about another kind of film.
He envisioned a gentle love story, something like "Sleepless in Seattle," with black protagonists.
He was not certain it would happen anytime soon.
"People don't think that black people want to go see those films," said Mr.
Glover, 46, who waved his hands for emphasis and sometimes talked so fast that he practically stuttered.
At an interview in the Essex House hotel, he sported a gray-and -black beard and wore a cross-emblazoned black vest so hip that his teen-age daughter tried to borrow it permanently.


China's Culture Should Dictate Political Reform; A View From Inside
To the Editor:
I am an American who has been living in China since 1967.
Back in America on a visit, I was intrigued by your Sept. 6 and 7 articles on China.
Although you present many facts, you are unable to explain how it is that an allegedly repressive regime can create a soaring economy and provide its people with many social amenities.
You say this is "annoying to democrats," and wonder whether repression of the citizenry might not be the best way for emerging nations to go.


Saints End String Of 49er Dominance
During an emotional team meeting last week, Saints Coach Jim Mora, searching for a way to break San Francisco's hex on his team, recited the scores of games the Saints and 49ers had played during the past few years.
As they went down the list, coach and team commiserated as they recalled how so many of the games had ended with the 49ers breaking their hearts with last-second victories: 1988, 34-33; 1989, 24-20; 1990, 13-12.
Then there was last year's double whammy: 16-10 and 21-20.
"It was either them driving it or us not executing," said Wade Wilson, the Saints' starting quarterback this season.
"There was no reason for that happening. This year we know that if we're going to get to where we want to go, we're going to have to beat San Francisco."


Dianne Pine, Scott Dembner
Dianne F. G. Pine, a lawyer in New York, was married yesterday to Scott Dembner, an associate at Cherry, Edson &amp; Kelly, a law firm in Hempstead, L.I.
Rabbi Phillip Hiat officiated at the Ballroom restaurant in New York.
Ms.
Pine is keeping her name.
She graduated from the State University at Albany and received a law degree from New York Law School.
She is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Harvey Pine of Spring Valley, N.Y.


More Revamping At Backer Spielvogel
As Backer Spielvogel Bates Inc. continues to revamp under Michael Bungey, its new chairman and chief executive, a series of changes at the flagship New York office were announced on Friday.
"We were just looking at our business internally and seeing how we can be more efficient and effective," said Frank Assumma, the president of the New York office.
One significant change involves consolidating the office's levels of management to three from five.


Traffic Alert
President's Visit
Because of President Clinton's visit to New York City today, First Avenue between 34th and 50th Streets and Second Avenue between 42d and 50th Streets will be closed to traffic, as will most side streets in the 40's between those avenues, including 42d Street.
In addition, 50th Street between First and Park Avenues will be shut.


No Rest For Braves Despite Victory
The Atlanta Braves had every right to think that if the franchise ever won 100 games in one season again, they'd already be printing up the playoff tickets and sitting pretty.
The Atlanta Braves were wrong.
Today the club won its 100th game by soundly defeating the Philadelphia Phillies, 7-2, making it only the third time in franchise history and the first time this century the 100-victory plateau had been reached.
But the Braves left Philadelphia comforted by another winning series but far from being at peace with their station.


Apple Picking Can Be Filled With Obstacles and Good Times


Down-to-the-Wire Finishes Quickly Fizzled
The four down-to-the-last-weekend division races that appeared possible earlier this month have withered to one, but the champions-in-waiting in the three other divisions had to pull off critical winning streaks to fend off their pursuers.
Barring a weeklong winning streak by one of the contenders and a weeklong losing streak by the other, the National League West should go until next weekend before learning the identity of its champion: the Atlanta Braves for the third successive season or the San Francisco Giants for the first time since they introduced earthquakes to the World Series.


CLINTON TO OUTLINE NEW U.S. PROPOSALS FOR LIMITING ARMS
In his first comprehensive effort to spell out his vision of the world and the role of American foreign policy, President Clinton will lay out several new proposals today for limiting the spread of nuclear arms, ballistic missiles and chemical weapons, Administration officials said yesterday.
In an address to the United Nations General Assembly at 11 A.M., Mr.
Clinton will also discuss how the United States plans to make up the roughly $1 billion in unpaid dues and peacekeeping bills that it owes.


Comptroller Candidates Fire Away
The candidates for city comptroller moved toward the conclusion of their political morality play yesterday with Comptroller Elizabeth Holtzman staking her 20-year career on the power of an apology and Assemblyman Alan G. Hevesi striving relentlessly to insure that tomorrow's runoff remains a referendum on Ms.
Holtzman's integrity.
The two Democrats bickered in a bitter morning debate, with Mr.
Hevesi blaming Ms.
Holtzman for Geraldine A. Ferraro's defeat in the 1992 United States Senate campaign and Ms.
Holtzman charging that Mr.
Hevesi was incapable of telling the truth.
Both then set out on a day of archetypal New York campaigning with visits to the Abyssinian Baptist Church in Harlem, street festivals and parades.


8 Bid Farewell to the 'Future': Musty Air, Roaches and Ants
Gulping the rich air of the earth's atmosphere and blinking at the vastness of the horizon, eight men and women emerged this morning from two years inside the world's largest and strangest test-tube experiment, a planet-in-a-bottle called Biosphere 2.
Dressed in matching blue "Star Trek"-like uniforms, they marched out in single file from the airtight hatch of the glass-enclosed 3.15-acre terrarium they have shared with 3,800 other species of plants and animals in what they said was an attempt to duplicate the earth's natural harmonies.
Visions of Martian Settlements
The welcoming ceremony, accompanied by a flute solo and a gush of utopian New Age oratory, was in keeping with the odd mix of science and showmanship that has characterized the entire venture and caused widespread uneasiness among professional scientists.


Once-Tamed Disease Fells Workers On Pork Packing Plant's Killing Floor
Evelyn Fryar has one of the bloodier jobs at the Lundy Packing Company here, trimming the jaws from heads of slaughtered pigs.
In June of last year, she said, she came down with something like a very bad case of the flu.
"In the beginning, I started aching all over -- my ankles, my knees, my hips, all over," she said.
"Then I began to lose weight. I lost 12 pounds the first week I was out sick with it. I didn't have an appetite to eat. I had real bad headaches. I carried a fever of 103 for a solid week before they put me on antibiotics. I was hospitalized with it in July. I was out of work about four months."


The Older Lighthouse
To the Editor:
While New Jersey's Barnegat Lighthouse deserves much praise for its service, is it fair to feature it rather than the Sandy Hook Lighthouse on the state's special license plates?
Perhaps age best proves the lighthouses' respective claims.
Barnegat's blinker went up in 1855.
Sandy Hook's, finished in 1764 and now portrayed on a postage stamp, is the oldest working lighthouse in the country.
WYN ESSELBORN  Newark, Sept. 13, 1993


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-11 CLINTON TO OFFER ARMS INITIATIVE
President Clinton will make his first comprehensive effort to spell out his vision of the world and lay out plans to halt the spread of nuclear and other weapons in an address to the United Nations, Administration officials said.
A1


Farm Subsidies Still Threaten GATT Talks
After seven years of negotiations, world trade talks are falling apart this autumn, which could hurt the world economy, damage confidence in the financial markets and provoke a crisis in the European Community.
President Clinton and leaders of the world's other large industrial democracies contended in Tokyo in July that the talks were back on track, after their trade ministers agreed to lower tariffs on many manufactured goods.
But with less than three months until President Clinton's special negotiating authority effectively expires, the talks have slowed to a crawl because of renewed squabbling over farm subsidies.


Officials Predict Deluge of Suits On Health Plan
Even before President Clinton sends a formal legislative proposal to Congress, the Administration is preparing for a flood of constitutional and civil rights challenges to his health care plan.
Officials at the Justice Department and the Department of Health and Human Services say the Administration is just beginning to understand the potential wave of legal challenges.
With the exception of handling antitrust, fraud and malpractice issues, the Justice Department had only a limited role in developing the plan and was consulted only in the last few weeks, after the plan was completed, these officials said.


Paramount Talks With QVC Seen
It sounded like the perfect marriage, but already the engagement of Paramount Communications Inc. and Viacom Inc. seems rocky.
Senior executives of Paramount appear ready to begin discussions soon with QVC Network Inc., an executive close to Paramount said yesterday.
Paramount's board is scheduled to meet today to discuss rival bids for the company.
The executive added that any talks would depend on whether Paramount's legal advisers conclude that by taking that course, the board would still be within its legal obligations to its first suitor, Viacom.
Nevertheless, late last night it seemed likely that both Paramount's financial and legal advisers would recommend discussions, which would begin shortly, according to several executives close to the company.


Dolphins Devise Plan to Beat Bills, Then Do
It is one thing in pro football to devise a crafty game plan but quite another to execute it so convincingly that you give your opponent a swift kick in the rear.
And then, afterward, he does the same.
To himself.


Military College to Start Separate Women's Course
In an effort to comply with a Federal court order, the trustees of the all-male Virginia Military Institute voted Saturday afternoon to underwrite a military program at a neighboring women's college.
Gov.
L.
Douglas Wilder immediately endorsed the move, saying: "It is a plan that recognizes the physiological and psychological differences between men and women. And instead of drawing a middle ground that would not fully benefit students of either gender, it strives to reach the same results that V.M.I. currently achieves so successfully with men."


Ford Sets Its Sights on a 'World Car'
With their sleek contours and high-tech features, the cars rolling off the production line at the Ford plant here would never be mistaken for a Model T.
Yet they represent the most ambitious effort so far by the American auto industry to accomplish what Japanese auto makers -- and Volkswagen with the Beetle -- have done in the decades since the Ford Motor Company's Model T epitomized mass production: design a car that can be built and sold in pretty much the same form all over the world.


Puritans in High-Top Sneakers
Liberalism is sometimes identified with the spirit of "open-mindedness," yet the idea of an "open mind" is notoriously difficult to define.
Consider, for example, Kurt Vonnegut's description of his education in open-mindedness four decades ago at the greatest of all American universities.
This is what he recounts in his novel "Slaughterhouse-Five": "I went to the University of Chicago for a while after the Second World War. I was a student in the department of anthropology. They taught me that nobody was ridiculous or bad or disgusting."


Senator Nunn Sets Tough Conditions to Send U.S. Troops to Bosnia
Senator Sam Nunn, one of the most influential members of Congress on military matters, set stiff conditions today for using American troops to enforce a peace treaty in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Mr.
Nunn, the chairman of the Senate Armed Services Committee, often frames the debate in the Senate on military issues.
He has previously called on the Administration to spell out its "exit strategy," and his comments today were his most detailed explanation of what he says is needed.


Review/Theater; Concern About Communication Unites Young Playwrights Festival
All the characters in the four one-acters that are being staged at the 12th annual Young Playwrights Festival speak English, but they seldom really speak the same language.
If one theme unites this diverse quartet of works, chosen from 942 plays submitted nationwide by writers under the age of 18, it has to do with the often insurmountable limitations of making oneself understood.
Whether the subjects are a tenement-bound mother and daughter self-isolatingly wrapped in the glassy haze of crack addiction, or two teen-agers of widely divergent backgrounds spending a night together in a lace-curtained suburban bedroom, communication is perceived as, at best, a struggle, and, at worst, utterly futile.


Military College to Start Separate Women's Course
In an effort to comply with a Federal court order, the trustees of the all-male Virginia Military Institute voted Saturday afternoon to underwrite a military program at a neighboring women's college.
Gov.
L.
Douglas Wilder immediately endorsed the move, saying: "It is a plan that recognizes the physiological and psychological differences between men and women. And instead of drawing a middle ground that would not fully benefit students of either gender, it strives to reach the same results that V.M.I. currently achieves so successfully with men."


Suspect's Chat by Pay Phone Leads to His Arrest in Killings
When Luis Garcia had a talk with a friend by a curbside telephone in New York City, little did he know that the conversation would lead to his arrest on charges that he helped dispose of the bodies of three people who were slain in a Hartford suburb.
Mr.
Garcia, a 22-year-old from Brooklyn, had told the friend that "no one would ever know who did it," according to a police affidavit released here last week.
But the friend soon called the police, providing a vital break in a killing that had baffled the authorities in two states.


No Accord at OPEC Talks
Oil ministers of the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries met for a second day here today but were unable to find a way to increase oil prices.
Blocking progress were demands from two Persian Gulf producers, Iran and Kuwait, for bigger shares of OPEC's total oil output.
Those demands are in conflict with the organization's desire to drive up prices by restricting the quantity of oil on world markets.


Beyond the Tinkering at Time Inc.
On the theory that if it ain't broke, you don't fix it, Time Inc.'s overhaul of its management structure last week has raised an inevitable question about the health of its magazines.
The company's moves were quick and, in some ways, drastic: it shuffled executives, gave more financial responsibility to individual magazines and returned to a more traditional advertising sales structure.
One goal was to reverse declines in ad sales at its seven core magazines.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Press; Ready or not, here it comes: Hoffenberg's newspaper for women.
WHEN we left our story, Steven Hoffenberg had been defeated in the strange fight for The New York Post that made him a household name.
He was battling Government claims that he had defrauded investors in his debt-collection business.
And he had come to be known for a promise-a-minute patter that made him seem oblivious to his troubles.
So it may, or may not, come as a surprise that in today's episode we find Mr.
Hoffenberg, in as sunny a mood as ever, ensconced in a tony new Trump Tower office, with lots of men in ties humming around him and telephones ringing.
It is, he says, the office of a major new New York City newspaper, Her New York, which he says will hit the stands on Friday.
The publisher of the newspaper, which will be aimed at women, is Steven Hoffenberg.


World Economies


Savings Associations and Commercial Banks
After peaking in 1988, the number of commercial banks in the region has plummeted, in large part reflecting the effects of the recession.
The trend in New York has been driven by mergers like the one between Chemical Bank and Manufacturers Hanover, and by moves by many large New York City-based banks to merge their upstate subsidiaries into the parent banks.
In Connecticut, the FDIC closed 10 institutions in 1992 alone; only one of the state's banks was closed in the 1980s.
In New Jersey, a slow down in commercial real estate and construction took a toll on commercial banks, but they resumed profitable operations in 1992, after three years of setbacks.
The thrift industry in all three states has also contracted, afflicted by the same troubles that beset many of the country's savings and loan associations.


Treasury Issues Make New Gains
Treasury prices shot higher yesterday and yields fell as traders and investors seemed to focus on the positive story for the bond market: continued slow growth and low inflation.
The mood swing was enough to push the yield on the 30-year bond below 6 percent again, just four trading days after selling had pushed the yield up to 6.12 percent.


Japan and Germany Show No Zeal for Council Seats
President Clinton has already said that Japan and Germany deserve permanent seats on the United Nations Security Council so they can play a greater role in maintaining world order, and this year's General Assembly is set to discuss enlarging the 15-member Council to include them.
But when Mr.
Clinton addressed the General Assembly today, he never mentioned the proposal, and when Prime Minister Morihiro Hosokawa of Japan addressed the Assembly later in the day, he did not actually say whether he is interested in a Council seat.


Pollution in China Sets Off a Battle Fatal to Two
In a clash that left two people dead and a dozen injured, workers at a once-secret Chinese nuclear plant last month shut down a neighboring chemical factory that was poisoning their water supply.
The incident on Aug. 14 in Gansu Province in northwestern China was initially kept secret.
The first report of the episode emerged last weekend in an official regional newspaper, which quoted sources as saying Politburo members had been "frightened and moved" by its intensity.


Elegy on Goodbyes: A Reading by Rizzuto
"Scooter: The Second Final Goodbye" played its one-night stand last Friday night on WPIX-TV/Channel 11 as his fans fretted about whether the MSG Network would make a new deal to keep Yankees games on WPIX.
A similar crisis engulfed the city once before, in 1990, and was resolved with 50 games a year on WPIX.
Friday's epochal event may have been Phil Rizzuto's last bovine melody behind the Yankees' microphone after 37 years.
The Yankees-Blue Jays game did not matter.
The possibility of one last "holy cow" was at hand.


COMPANY BRIEFS
PRESIDENT RIVERBOAT CASINOS INC., St.
Louis has entered into a joint venture to develop riverboat gaming operations in Gary, Ind.
SARATOGA BRANDS INC., New York, signed a letter of intent to acquire Dixie Brands Inc., a privately held California-based ice cream distributor.
Dixie shareholders will receive restricted common stock equal to about 60 percent of Saratoga.
ZITEL CORP., Milpitas, Calif., has cut 25 percent of its work force and expects to post a loss in its fourth quarter, ending this month.


CLINTON'S HEALTH PLAN: Washington Talk; Health Insurance Debate Hitting Home in Congress
Congress has actually started debating health care, not just for partisan points or to claim the honor of Hillary Rodham Clinton's first appearance, but in terms real people can understand.
They were wondering, like Americans in living rooms around the country, how President Clinton's plan would affect them and their families.


Corrections
A report by The Associated Press in the Company News column in some copies of Business Day on Friday, about the Ralston Purina Company's decision to spin off its private label and branded cereal businesses, misstated the distribution of debt after the transaction.
The new company will acquire about $400 million in debt, and Ralston's debt will decrease by that amount.


Zoom
When Zoom Telephonics Inc., a Boston manufacturer of computer modems, said in mid-September that it might miss its third-quarter earnings target by a few cents a share, the stock fell from as high as 14 1/4 a share earlier in the month to as low as 11 5/8 on Wednesday.
Yesterday, some investors saw a buying opportunity and the price rose.


Room for Compromise in Russia
Yesterday Boris Yeltsin knocked back a proposal for ending the standoff with the Soviet-era Parliament he dismissed last week.
No, he said, he would not agree to hold presidential and parliamentary elections together in December.
He would stick to his original timetable: parliamentary elections in December, presidential elections next June.
It's easy to understand why.
The President has gained the upper hand in his showdown with the Parliament.
Holding the two elections at the same time would risk throwing Russia right back into the chaos and paralysis Mr.
Yeltsin sought to end by his daring decrees.


Bahrain Group Wins Battle With Gucci for Full Control
Maurizio Gucci, renowned through the world for loafers and lawsuits, agreed today to surrender his remaining share in the fashion goods company his grandfather founded to an investment bank that has sought full control of the company.
The announcement, in a joint statement by Mr.
Gucci and Investcorp, a Bahrain-based merchant bank, ends a drawn-out feud for control of Gucci, whose horse-bit shoe buckles and double-G logo provided the original paradigm for designer labels.
For Italians, depressed by a web of political and business scandals, the surrender of Gucci appeared to signal the loss of one of the nation's crown jewels.


Classical Music in Review
Dorian Wind Quintet Merkin Concert Hall
Wind quintets often fall victim to compositional busywork.
Joan Tower's "Island Prelude," commissioned by the Dorian Wind Quintet in 1989 and played by the same group on Sunday night at Merkin Concert Hall, strikes off in a new direction: hovering sonorities, slowly unfolding lines, patient construction of motifs.
Set as a miniature concerto for oboe, the piece eventually heads toward more familiar ground, with chattering Stravinskyite episodes and florid cadenzas for the soloist.
But it has a thoroughly distinctive shape overall, and the Dorians -- Elizabeth Mann (flutist), Jerry Kirkbride (clarinetist), Gerard Reuter (oboist), Jane Taylor (bassoonist) and Nancy Billmann (horn player) -- added their usual flair.


No Headline
"If you made an arrest you would get a complaint about overtime and the next day you would be on a foot post in the weeds on the Belt Parkway." -- MICHAEL DOWD, a rogue New York City police officer, testifying about police corruption.  [ B3:3. ]


Senator Indicted Over Use of Post In a Texas Race
Senator Kay Bailey Hutchison was indicted today on charges that she abused her position as Texas State Treasurer while she was preparing for her Senate campaign this past spring.
Her landslide victory made her a rising star in national Republican circles.
The indictment, handed up by a grand jury in Austin, accuses her of using state workers, computers and supplies for her "personal benefit," apparently for campaign-related purposes, and of trying to destroy computer files and other government records once an inquiry into her activity was begun.
Two of her top aides were also charged.


Informer's Ex-Wife Said He Warned of Terrorism
At least a month before the World Trade Center bombing, the informer in what the Government has now charged was a widespread terrorist conspiracy told his former wife that he had warned authorities that a group of Islamic fundamentalists were plotting violent acts in New York, the woman said yesterday.
Barbara Rogers, the former wife of the informer, Emad A. Salem, said that the day after the explosion, Mr.
Salem was upset and told her the bombing could have been averted if the F.B.I. had heeded his warnings.
He had told the agency that several buildings had been targeted, she said, and he gave them names of several men, including Mahmud Abouhalima and Ibrahim A. Elgabrowny, who were later arrested in the case.


Murdoch Says He's Halting Purchase of The Post
Rupert Murdoch's company announced early this morning that it would pull out of its agreement to buy The New York Post, after the Newspaper Guild of New York went on strike yesterday and production unions refused to cross the guild's picket line.
The announcement put the 420,000-circulation daily at the brink of extinction once again as it failed to publish this morning's editions.
Responsibility for the newspaper will now be returned to the Peter Kalikow's bankrupt estate if Mr.
Murdoch stands by his position, The Post's publisher said.
Mr.
Murdoch had been scheduled to complete his purchase of the paper on Friday.


Stop Subsidizing the Arms Race
At the United Nations yesterday, President Clinton called on the world to halt nuclear testing and ban the production of fuels for nuclear weapons.
But while the Administration is saying that attacking the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction is an urgent priority, the Senate has sent a different signal by approving subsidies for arms exports.
The House has rejected this approach and a conference committee can soon put the matter to rest.
A provision of the 1994 Defense Department Authorization Act, passed Sept. 14, provides $1 billion in loan guarantees for the export of weapons to NATO members, Australia, Japan, South Korea and Israel.


Comptroller's Race Is Bitter to the End
After a caustic campaign marked by the travails of one of the city's durable politicians, the candidates in today's Democratic primary runoff for New York City comptroller set out to insure that the few voters expected to show up are their own.
Party leaders and strategists say the outcome of the race between the incumbent, Elizabeth Holtzman, and her opponent, Alan G. Hevesi, may hinge on the turnout.
Polls have shown Mr.
Hevesi ahead.


U.S. and Peru at Odds Over Death of Airman
The attack on a United States military transport plane by two Peruvian jet fighters in April 1992, in which an American airman was killed, has come back to haunt the Government of President Alberto K. Fujimori and strain relations with the United States.
A foreign aid appropriations bill passed by the Senate on Thursday included an amendment prohibiting the United States from disbursing $100 million in aid planned for the Peruvian Government in the 1994 fiscal year, until Peru settles damage claims with the family of Sgt.
Joseph Beard.


Global Warming's Doomsday Nowhere in Sight; Underestimated Data
To the Editor:
"Scientists Confront Renewed Backlash on Global Warming" (Science Times, Sept. 14) calls attention to a small group of antagonists such as Dixy Lee Ray and Richard Lindzen and representatives of the neo-conservative Cato Institute and the George C. Marshall Institute who believe the large scientific community exaggerates the potential warming due to accumulation of heat-trapping gases in the atmosphere.


American Trees Besieged by Alien Blights
AMERICAN forests are silent battlefields between trees and the pathogens that prey on them, particularly foreign fungi and other blights against which they have not yet developed defenses.
The chestnut and the Dutch elm were two eminent casualties of this strife.
Now the hemlock and the red pine are under deadly assault.
But biologists now have more powerful tools to bring to bear.
They are busily working to defend the hemlock against its new foe, the woolly adelgid, and even to restore the American chestnut to its former glory.


Marseilles Is Barred Again and Again
Scandal-plagued Olympique Marseilles was barred yesterday from playing in the Intercontinental Cup, which is for the world club championship, and the European Super Cup.
Earlier this month, Marseilles was stripped of its 1992-93 French League title and barred from defending its title in the European Champions Cup.
"We have to protect soccer," FIFA's general secretary, SEPP BLATTER, said.
"We have to maintain order, respect and discipline in an organization which groups 178 national associations and more than 200 million players."


By Design; Cashmere and Carry
Cashmere is no longer just prim jewel-neck sweaters.
As ribbed poor-boy sweaters, it is sexy; as boxy sweaters, sporty.
"Cashmere used to be considered a precious fiber, so people bought classic designs," said Rebecca Shafer, image director of Tse Cashmere, a maker of cashmere clothes in New York City.
It is still expensive, but perceptions have changed.
"Now, people see it as a natural fiber that feels so good on the body, they want to wear it morning, noon and night," Ms.
Shafer said.


Vann Gets an O.K. to Referee Big Fight
The World Boxing Council confirmed yesterday that MICKEY VANN will be the referee for Friday's heavyweight title fight between LENNOX LEWIS and FRANK BRUNO in Cardiff, Wales.
"The W.B.C., British Boxing Board of Control and the European Boxing Union consider Mickey Vann as one of the top ring officials in the world and strongly confirm his appointment," the W.B.C. president, JOSE SULAIMAN, said in a statement.


A Sudden Interest in Tailored Winter Coats
On the first cool crisp day in September, even before the fall season had officially begun, women began crowding into the stores looking for winter coats.
They hadn't done that in years.
In recent winters they had huddled into capes and shawls, layered on sweaters and made do with raincoats.
But a tailored wool coat?
It was almost an endangered species.


Q&amp;A
The Falling Leaves
Q. What would make a ginkgo tree drop all its leaves overnight?
A.
Tree experts say they do not believe there is anything special about Ginkgo biloba's structure that would make the loss of its leaves different from the process that occurs in any deciduous tree.


Observer; Childish Questions
The news is seething with unanswered questions.
Why, for instance, is the Government willing to raise taxes on tobacco but not on alcohol to finance a national health program?
Surely booze matches smoke as a health menace, doesn't it?
Is it because the anti-smoke lobby has muscle while the temperance lobby has none?
Or because pols of both parties fear the booze lobby's power to anger millions of beer-sodden televiewers?
Speaking of the health program, why are lawyers (namely, both Clintons and most of the Congress) now in charge of inventing it?
Doesn't everybody know that lawyers can't stop themselves from making everything so complicated that nobody can figure it out without hiring a lawyer?
Wasn't the present income-tax law designed by lawyers?
Why do we have to suffer an April 15th experience every time we get sick?


More Tuned In For Ryder Cup
NBC's telecast of the Ryder Cup from England delivered sizable increases in preliminary overnight Nielsen ratings compared with 1991.
Saturday's six-hour tape of same-day play rated a 3.7, up 19 percent from two years ago, and Sunday's four-and-a-half-hour live broadcast rated a 4.3, up 13 percent from 3.8 in 1991.
Each overnight rating point, which is computed from 29 major markets around the country, equals 472,108 television households.


CHRONICLE
Hawkeye in a scientific laboratory?
ALAN ALDA explaining principles of biology and technology, bouncing on a bionic walking device, observing surgery in an operating room?
The five-time Emmy award winning actor, director and writer will serve as the host of "Scientific American Frontiers," a series of science programs that enters its fourth season on PBS on Oct. 13.
Unlikely though it may seem to some of his fans, Mr.
Alda has had a lifelong passion for the sciences, and he snapped at the opportunity to succeed Dr.
Woodie Flowers an M.I.T. professor, as host of the educational show, when it was offered five months ago.


Joseph E. Choate, 84, Boat-Show Impresario
Joseph E. Choate, a former managing director of the annual National Boat Show in New York City, died on Saturday at Waterbury Hospital in Connecticut of Lou Gehrig's disease, or amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
He was 84 and lived in Southbury.
From 1949 to 1969, Mr.
Choate organized and ran the boat show in the New York Coliseum, the Kingsbridge Armory in the Bronx and the Grand Central Palace, on Lexington Avenue between 46th and 47th Streets.
He was also administrative vice president of the National Association of Engine and Boat Manufacturers, a trade organization for boat makers and other boating interests and sponsor of the show.


Memo to the Sox: This Time, Don't Forget the Bats
Jason Bere wasn't even a teen-ager the last time the Chicago White Sox won the American League West championship.
Wilson Alvarez had become a teen-ager only several months earlier.
Alex Fernandez was all of 14 years old, and Jack McDowell was a relative old-timer at the age of 17.
Perhaps, then, it would be unfair to educate the current White Sox starting pitching corps about the outcome of the 1983 pennant playoff against the Baltimore Orioles.
Let ignorance continue to be bliss and what they don't know can't hurt them.


Ramon F. Berger; Executive, 64
Ramon F. Berger, an executive and camping consultant for several Jewish philanthropies in New York and Rhode Island, died on Wednesday at Hospice Care of Rhode Island in Providence.
He was 64 years old and lived in Providence.
The cause was esophageal cancer, his family said.


Gino Robusti; Restaurateur, 82
Gino Robusti, a founder and former owner of the New York restaurant Quo Vadis for more than 30 years, died on Saturday at Englewood Hospital in New Jersey.
He was 82 and lived in Englewood Cliffs, N.J.
He died after a long illness, said Gilberte Breslin, his daughter.


Turgeon Could Miss Opener
Pierre Turgeon, the Islanders' premier player, may not be able to start in the regular-season opener next Tuesday because the left wrist he jammed in a scrimmage last week has been slow in healing.
Trainer Ed Tybursk said last night he had diagnosed the injury as tendinitis and that the all-star center was feeling pain on his wrist shots during practice yesterday.
"The worst thing we can do is aggravate it by pushing it," the trainer added.


Job Losses in Health Plan Are Denied
Recognizing that in this day and age the econometric study is mightier than the sword, the Clinton Administration has begun fighting back against reports concluding that its health care plan will cause huge job losses.
One study, largely financed by companies that do not provide health insurance for their employees, asserts that requiring employers to pay for health coverage would wipe out 3.1 million jobs.
Another study, sponsored by the National Federation of Independent Business, a small-business lobbying group, estimates that such costs would put 12.7 million jobs at risk and cause one million layoffs.


RESULTS PLUS
TENNIS  Magdalena Maleeva Advances in Leipzig Magdalena Maleeva of Bulgaria came from behind yesterday to win a baseline duel against Meike Babel of Germany, 3-6, 6-0, 6-3, in the opening round of play at the Volkswagen Card Cup in Leipzig, Germany.
Babel, ranked 42d in the world, played a consistent first set against the fifth-ranked Maleeva, but was outslugged from the baseline in the following sets.
Maleeva trailed, 3-2, in the third set before breaking Babel's serve twice to win the match. (AP)


Mollen Panel Aides Say They Can Show How Officials Halted an Inquiry
As the Mollen Commission began public hearings yesterday with the tale of how one officer went bad, commission staff members and senior law-enforcement officials said the panel has evidence of another case showing how police officials halted an investigation rather than see it explode into a wider scandal.
The Internal Affairs Division did not pursue allegations from a confidential informer that about a dozen officers from the Ninth Precinct in the East Village were involved in a crime ring, shaking down drug dealers, selling drugs and guns, and using cocaine and liquor while on the job and in uniform, the commission staff members said.


Hampton Is in Running To Make More Money
There has been so much talk about the Giants and the changing of the guard.
New coach.
New players.
And they have been winning.
But the times are changing in another area as well, mainly in endorsements, where running back Rodney Hampton is beginning to see how big runs can turn into big bucks.
Before the team's bye last week, Hampton led the National Football League in rushing and is now fourth in the N.F.C.
It is possible that if the Giants keep winning, and as the careers of the more visible players like Phil Simms and Lawrence Taylor begin to wind down, it will be the Rodney Hamptons who can step in and take their place.


Home Shopping Plans for Spiegel-Time Warner
Spiegel Inc., the catalogue company, said yesterday that it was teaming up with Time Warner Inc. to create two home shopping cable channels.
One of these, tentatively called the Catalogue Channel, will start operating early next year, while the other will make its debut later in 1994 on an interactive cable network that Time Warner is building in Orlando, Fla.


Classical Music in Review
Maxim Vengerov  92d Street Y
Still a teen-ager, Maxim Vengerov came to his duo recital with Itamar Golan on Sunday afternoon a fully formed violinist in the powerhouse Soviet style.
He is a rock of infallible technique and an interpreter of intimidating assertiveness.
Intonation was never in question; Mr.
Vengerov's control over the instrument's treacherous flageolet tones was eerie perfection.


Senator Indicted Over Use of Post In a Texas Race
Senator Kay Bailey Hutchison was indicted today on charges that she abused her position as Texas State Treasurer while she was preparing for her Senate campaign this past spring.
Her landslide victory made her a rising star in national Republican circles.
The indictment, handed up by a grand jury in Austin, accuses her of using state workers, computers and supplies for her "personal benefit," apparently for campaign-related purposes, and of trying to destroy computer files and other government records once an inquiry into her activity was begun.
Two of her top aides were also charged.


In the End, Civility Finds a Way to Creep Into Ryder Cup
Peace, love and understanding have taken something of a beating in recent Ryder Cup play.
If the Americans weren't puffing out their chests and taking umbrage at the superior attitude of Tony Jacklin, a former European captain, the Europeans were puffing out theirs and complaining about excess flag waving and phones ringing late into the night at Kiawah Island in 1991.
At times, it seemed that all the teams could agree on was how much they liked flying the Concorde across the Atlantic.


New Curbs on Nuclear Weapons
President Clinton yesterday announced the most serious effort in years to curb the spread of nuclear arms and other weapons of mass destruction.
In his speech to the United Nations General Assembly in New York, he pledged to seek global bans on the production of nuclear material for bomb-making and on nuclear testing.
And he offered important inducements to get other countries to cooperate.
His commitment comes not a moment too soon.
Iran, North Korea and others are poised to develop nuclear weapons.
And now from Russia comes word that the Soviet nuclear arsenal may have been far larger than previously admitted, leaving far more plutonium and enriched uranium to dispose of safely in that dangerously fragmenting society.


Corrections
A headline in some editions yesterday about the activation of monitoring cameras at two missile test sites misidentified the country involved.
It is Iraq, not Iran.


Danes Commemorate Rescue of Jews From Nazis
In October, Danes will observe the 50th anniversary of an operation that ultimately saved nearly all of the country's Jews from death at the hands of the Nazis.
But this time the public is hearing a fuller account of the rescue, which made Denmark a striking exception among the countries occupied by Germany in World War II.
While the German occupation forces were preparing to deport more than 7,000 Jews to death camps beginning at 10 P.M. on Oct. 1, 1943, Danes shepherded all but a few hundred to the east coast of the island of Zealand, where they boarded small boats that ferried them to neutral Sweden in hundreds of crossings over a period of a few days.


With Waco Report Due in 3 Days, Firearms Chief Says He Is Quitting
The senior Washington official who supervised the raid on the Branch Davidian compound near Waco, Tex., on Feb. 28 said today that he was stepping down.
His announcement came just three days before the release of a report that is expected to be highly critical of his handling of the assault.
In a letter sent today to Treasury Secretary Lloyd Bentsen, the director of the Treasury's Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms, Stephen E. Higgins, said he would retire on Oct. 30 because of disagreements with the Administration about the Waco operation and about the Administration's decision to support a plan that would merge his agency with the Federal Bureau of Investigation.


White House Nears a Decision on Recycled Paper
The White House, which is about to decide whether the Government should buy more recycled paper, today called in representatives from industry, environmental groups, labor unions and cities for a last round of debate on the hotly contested details.
At issue is how to fulfill President Clinton's promise, made in April at Earth Day festivities, to give a vigorous stimulus to the market for recycled paper by putting the buying power of one of the biggest single consumers, the Federal Government, on the side of recycling.


For Voters, Strong Reactions on Race
Rosa Archer felt personally insulted.
She said that she was perfectly competent to judge her politicians based on their performance and potential without being swayed by skin color.
"What the President said, it was just outrageous," said Ms.
Archer, a writer and editor who lives on Manhattan's Upper West Side.
"This is what we're all trying to get away from. Absurd."


CBS Fails To Get Pay From Cable
Having failed to win acceptance from cable-television operators for three ideas for new cable channels, CBS bitterly conceded defeat yesterday in its long struggle to win payment from the cable systems that carry the signals of the broadcast stations it owns.
Not only did CBS fail to win cash payments from cable operators for the right to carry local stations like WCBS in New York, but the network also became the only one of the four broadcast networks to fail to create a new cable channel and receive payment for it from the cable systems in lieu of retransmission fees.
Congressional Backing
Just last year, in passing a new cable television law, Congress gave ABC, CBS, NBC, Fox and their affiliates across the country the freedom to demand money from cable systems, which pay to carry cable channels like ESPN and Nickelodeon but have not paid to retransmit broadcast signals.


Classical Music in Review
Richard Auldon Clark  Symphony Space
Richard Auldon Clark, the enterprising music director of the Manhattan Chamber Orchestra, certainly knows how to fill two hours.
The program of 20th-century Americana that opened the group's seventh season, on Wednesday evening at Symphony Space, put listeners through two emotional wringers.


Hevesi for Comptroller
In today's primary runoff election, as in the Sept. 14 primary, we endorse Assemblyman Alan Hevesi for the Democratic nomination for City Comptroller.
He is a stronger candidate than the incumbent, Elizabeth Holtzman, who in our judgment has put her political ambitions ahead of her government responsibilities.
The recent Department of Investigation report into her handling of a $450,000 campaign loan she accepted during her race for U.S.
Senate last year underscores how distracted she was.
The report cited no evidence of deliberate wrongdoing, but found Ms.
Holtzman "grossly negligent" for failing to determine whether the banking company that made the loan was trying to expand its business with her office.
The bank was later named an underwriter of city bonds based on a recommendation from a Deputy Comptroller.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.19
2.99
3.45
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
2.90
2.91
2.73
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.02
3.02
2.85
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
4.87
4.94
5.86
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
5.94
6.03
7.33
TELEPHONE BONDS
6.98
7.06
8.40
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
5.44
5.47
6.39
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Some Doctors See Peril; Others Are Unworried
When Dr.
Bruce H. Berlin and Dr.
Christopher Puca finished their internal-medicine training at the Nassau County Medical Center in 1983, they set off on divergent paths.
Dr.
Berlin took $15,000 from the cash received in wedding gifts, leased an examination room in another doctor's office and worked nights and weekends over the next decade to build a thriving private practice all his own.
Dr.
Puca went to work for the Public Health Service in a medically underserved area in Queens and, in 1990, joined a group practice, where -- for a salary -- he takes care of patients from health maintenance organizations.


Corrections
The caption of a picture in some editions yesterday, with a jazz review, misidentified the trumpeter shown alongside a pianist.
The trumpeter was Roy Hargrove, not Terence Blanchard.


Auvers-sur-Oise Journal; All the Inn Needs Now Is the Ghost of van Gogh
Dominique-Charles Janssens said he had never given much thought to Vincent van Gogh.
The Dutch painter was far from the Flemish business executive's mind that day in 1985 when he drove into Auvers-sur-Oise in northern France.
But as a result of that drive, Mr.
Janssens gave up his career and sold virtually everything he owned to become the innkeeper of the Auberge Ravoux, the house where van Gogh spent his last days, produced some of his greatest works and died, two nights after he returned from the wheat fields where he had shot himself.


Is This Jets Team a Monster or a Mirage? Eagles Hold the Answer
After reviewing the film from the Jets' 45-7 victory over New England on Sunday night, Coach Bruce Coslet declared today that it was the Jets' best overall game in his three-year tenure.
Who could quarrel?


BARNES &amp; NOBLE OFFERING PRICE RISES TO $20 A SHARE
Investors who want a stake in Barnes &amp; Noble, the country's largest operator of book superstores, will have to come up with $20 a share, or $2 more than the retailer's most optimistic expectations, when trading starts today on the New York Stock Exchange.
In its filing last month with the Securities and Exchange Commission, Barnes &amp; Noble said it hoped to sell its shares for between $16 and $18 each, but institutional investors looking for new places to put the rivers of money flowing into the stock market allowed the underwriters to ask even more for the stock.


Connecticut Sued on Care Of Children
Officials at 19 private psychiatric and special-education centers in Connecticut that care for some of the state's most seriously disturbed children are awaiting a court ruling this week that they say could affect the centers' very survival.
The nonprofit centers are hoping the court will overturn a system of state reimbursement, adopted in 1990, that they say has seriously underpaid them for children in their care, costing them $5.5 million in aid in 1991 alone.


Yeltsin Rejects Dual Elections Despite Rising Support for Them
President Boris N. Yeltsin declared today that he was "categorically against" early simultaneous elections for President and Parliament, rejecting a proposal that has gathered growing support in the six days since Mr.
Yeltsin opened his latest assault against the legislature.
Mr.
Yeltsin's unyielding stance was echoed by leaders of holdout legislators in the increasingly dismal Parliament building, ringed by security forces and without electricity, telephones and hot water for three days now.


Giants Are 4th in Payroll List
The Giants have the fourth highest payroll in the National Football League, according to figures recently compiled by the N.F.L.
Players Association.
And while a high payroll is an indication that a team pays its players well, these days big payrolls are more of a burden because of the impending salary cap.
The Giants' payroll, according to the figures, is $43 million.
Above them are the New Orleans Saints, who have the highest payroll at $45.5 million, followed by the San Francisco 49ers ($45 million) and the Washington Redskins ($44 million).


Hearst Considering Sale of Its Book Units
After months of discounting rumors that it was considering selling its book divisions, the Hearst Corporation said yesterday that it had begun exploring the possibility of a sale.
A spokesman for the company said that a handful of publishers had expressed interest in the book divisions, which include William Morrow and Avon Books, but that nothing had come of the earlier rounds of discussions.


Outer 'Wall' of Troy Now Appears to Be a Ditch
WHEN archeologists resumed excavations at ancient Troy this summer, they expected to uncover remains of a thick wall that marked the outer limits of the city at the time of the legendary Trojan War in the 13th century B.C.
Discovery of the wall, which they thought they had detected the previous summer, would for the first time define the full size of the city, well beyond the inner citadel excavated in the 1870's.
Unless their geomagnetic survey was mistaken, archeologists thought buried remnants of the wall would be found about 1,300 feet outside the central fortress and its palaces, where the wall presumably encompassed the much larger settlement of craftsmen, merchants and soldiers and sailors.
The archeologists dug and dug in the area where the survey had indicated the presence of a thick clay wall, but could find no sign of it.


INSIDE
Strike Halts Publication Of The New York Post
Rupert Murdoch's company said it would cease efforts to buy The New York Post after workers honored one union's picket lines.
Page B1.
Yeltsin Rejects Election Plan
Both President Boris N. Yeltsin of Russia and holdout legislators rejected the compromise proposal for early simultaneous elections for President and Parliament.
Page A10.
CBS Concedes Cable Battle
CBS conceded defeat in its long struggle to win payment from the cable television industry for the rights to carry the signals of the local broadcast stations it owns.
Page D1.
Doctors Appraise the Plan
For a young doctor in private practice, the health proposal is a threat.
But for a doctor in an H.M.O., the plan is a non-event.
Page B11.
James H. Doolittle Dies
The aviation pioneer who led the first bomber raid against Japan in World War II was 96.
Page B13.
Wait Till Next Year
The Yankees were eliminated as the Toronto Blue Jays clinched the American League East title.
The Chicago White Sox won the West.
Page B15.


Mets May Be Looking To Make Bid for Grace
The Mets have many needs, and so this off season they will have many targets.
You can bet that they will take serious aim at Mark Grace.
One executive for the Mets indicated recently that the club had been given official signals by the Cubs that the first baseman could be available after this season.


Seymour Fogel, 74, A Geneticist Known For Studies of Yeast
Dr.
Seymour Fogel, a molecular biologist and geneticist long associated with the City University of New York and the University of California at Berkeley, died on Friday in Alta Bates Hospital in Berkeley.
He was 74 and lived in Berkeley.
The cause was cancer, his family said.


Study Finds Severe Hurricane Is Due in Alabama
USING carbon-dated sediment from the bottom of a lake in Alabama, scientists have calculated that severe hurricanes strike the area every 600 years on average.
That means the area may be overdue for another one.
Dr.
Kam-biu Liu, an associate professor of geography and anthropology at Louisiana State University in Baton Rouge, said the research that he led showed that the Alabama coast was last hit directly by such a hurricane 770 years ago.
The results of the study are reported in the current issue of the journal Geology.


Body Shop Starting a Campaign on AIDS
This week, the 150 or so Body Shops around the country will take down posters in the stores' windows that usually advertise liquid eye shadow or peppermint foot lotion.
In their place will hang inscribed photographs of Melissa and Ozzie and Milton, three people who have nothing to do with skin and hair products and everything to do with AIDS.
Body Shop International P.L.C., the British chain that has grown explosively in the last decade with a melange of cosmetics and social consciousness, is about to start an AIDS awareness campaign that includes dispensing condoms, lubricants, educational pamphlets and advice.


Poll Finds Florio's Tax Increase Winning Approval in Retrospect
Gov.
Jim Florio of New Jersey, whose political career seemed all but finished three years ago, has taken advantage of a lackluster Republican challenge to revive his reputation as a leader and has even won a surprising degree of acceptance of his 1990 decision to raise taxes sharply, according to a New York Times/WCBS-TV News poll.
With the Nov. 2 vote five weeks from today, the poll indicates that more New Jersey voters approve of Mr.
Florio's performance in office than disapprove of it.
Forty-nine percent now even say that Mr.
Florio, in the poll's words, "did the right thing" in raising taxes by $2.8 billion in 1990.
That action was once thought to have fatally wounded his governorship and was the hook on which his Republican challenger, Christine Todd Whitman, has ever since lashed her ambition to unseat him.
Voters also tell the polls that the best thing he has done has been instituting stricter gun control.


Richard B. Power, 75, Ex-Iona College Head
Brother Richard B. Power, a former president of Iona College in New Rochelle, N.Y., died on Friday at New Rochelle Hospital.
He was 75 and lived in New Rochelle.
The cause was complications after a surgical procedure, associates said.


C. F. Mooney, 68, Religion Professor And Noted Author
The Rev.
Christopher F. Mooney, professor of religious studies at Fairfield University in Connecticut, and winner of two national Catholic book awards, died on Saturday at Yale-New Haven Hospital.
He was 68 and lived at the Fairfield Jesuit Community.
The cause was cancer, the university said.


Books of The Times; Rewriting Religion's Role For the Political Arena
The Culture of Disbelief  How American Law and Politics Trivialize Religious Devotion  By Stephen L. Carter  328 pages.
Basic Books. $25.
Just published two weeks ago, "The Culture of Disbelief," a study of religion in America by the Yale law professor Stephen L. Carter, has already become one of those books discussed at dinner parties by people who haven't read them.
Mr.
Carter has been interviewed at length on "The MacNeil/Lehrer Newshour," his ideas have been debated by political columnists and his book even garnered a recommendation from President Clinton at a recent prayer breakfast.


CHRONICLE
Invite a few people over for dinner and there's almost certain to be some last-minute glitch.
Invite 500 to a black-tie evening to honor a world figure, and political upheaval can intercede, as it has for the Appeal of Conscience Foundation's banquet and award ceremony tonight at the Pierre Hotel.
Patriarch ALEKSY II, head of the Russian Orthodox Church and spiritual leader for its 60 million adherents, was to have received the foundation's 1993 award at the dinner but felt he had to return to Moscow in the face of the parliamentary crisis there.
He left New York yesterday.
He had been traveling in the United States since Sept. 18.


On My Mind; So Where's the Catch?
First, take the three foreign affairs speeches made in the past week by President Clinton, his national security adviser and his U.N. delegate.
Then squeeze them good and hard to get rid of the inevitable pulp of jargon, pieties and diplomatic roundabouts.
What is left is the juice of some important policies, and an unusual question.
1.
When military action is needed, the U.S. will ask the U.N. for help and permission -- when it is in American best interests to do so.


Sports of The Times; Getting In Touch With Reality
ON a "Saturday Night Live" skit last weekend, Charles Barkley was scripted to take a seat on the proverbial couch, to playfully get beyond the superficiality of ego and get in touch with more meaningful id.
By the end of the very funny satire, he was tearfully admitting to the comic shrink that his multimillions and worldwide fame did not compensate for a lack of self-esteem directly related to his owning zero championship rings.
Out pranced huggable Muggsy Bogues to gaze into Barkley's eyes, to keep a straight face and tell big, bad, bald Barkley how special a person he really is.


Marlins' Santiago Is Out for the Season
Florida Marlins catcher BENITO SANTIAGO will miss the last six games of the season after a pair of ganglion cysts were discovered in his left hand yesterday.
The cysts were discovered during an examination by Dr.
ANNE OUELETTE of the University of Miami Hospital.
The Marlins said Santiago's hand will be in a splint for six weeks, after which he can begin off-season conditioning.


The Heat's on Glanville as Steelers Feast on His Falcons
Missed blocking assignments and bungled tackles led to huge breakdowns.
And those breakdowns led to a total collapse for the Atlanta Falcons in the Georgia Dome on Monday night.
Hoping to avoid a hapless 0-4 start, that's right where the Falcons find themselves after an embarrassing 45-17 thrashing by the Pittsburgh Steelers before 65,477 fans and a national television audience.
Exposed for everyone to see were all of the Falcons' weakness: an extremely hot and cold offense, an all-out blitzing defense that too often does not put enough pressure on the quarterback, and turnovers, turnovers and more turnovers.


Migrating Birds Set Compasses By Sunlight and Stars
SCIENTISTS have known for more than two decades that birds and many other animals navigate with help from the earth's magnetic field.
It now appears, however, that birds must frequently calibrate their sense of magnetic direction using many nonmagnetic cues, including the natural polarization of daylight.
New research, moreover, suggests that in at least one species, the bird's eye detects the earth's magnetic field using the energy of daylight to sensitize a chemical in the retina to the earth's magnetic polarity.


A Tax Code Rule That Quashes Art
To the Editor:
The direct grant funding of artists and museums is an essential part of public policy support of the arts by the Federal Government.
Unfortunately, Section 170-e of the Tax Code does a fairly efficient job of counteracting its positive effects.


Face to Face With an Asteroid


Rafer Johnson Salutes the Saluters
His hometown in Kingsburg, Calif., has named a junior high school after RAFER JOHNSON, who not only is a former Olympic decathlon champion but was one of the first blacks to live in the San Joaquin Valley farm town.
Rafer Johnson Junior High was dedicated on Sunday before several thousand people, including the honoree and his boyhood hero, BOB MATHIAS, who preceded Johnson as Olympic decathlon champion (1948 and 1952) and grew up in Tulare only 25 miles away.
Said Johnson: "It's a great responsibility to have a school named after me. I've been honored all over the world, but to be honored in your hometown, it's just very special."


The Talk of Hollywood; As Rumors and Charges Swirl, MGM's Trying To Regain Its Balance
Frank G. Mancuso, chairman of the once-great studio Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer, picked up the phone the other morning, his friends say, and called Jeff Berg, chairman of International Creative Management, one of the biggest talent agencies in town.
"Why, why are you doing this?" Mancuso asked plaintively, the friends say.
"You know how hard we're working to stabilize the place." (Mr. Berg has in recent days strenuously denied that he was seeking to destabilize MGM.)


Mets Drop 103d Before 'Crowd' of 2,334
On the sort of night where only the true believers venture out, 2,334 fans showed up at rain-soaked Shea Stadium last night to see the last-place Mets play the St.
Louis Cardinals.
It is not known how much each and every soul present believes in the Mets.
Was it so whole-heartedly that when they looked out at a lineup containing names like Baez, Thompson, Huskey, Burnitz and Kent, they saw the nucleus for a last-to-first place miracle in embryonic form?
Dallas Green hopes not.
Because no matter how optimistic he would wish to be, Green is starting to supply some harsh answers to the harsh questions that now must be asked about the rebuilding of the Mets.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-17  U.S.
LIMITING SOMALIA GOALS  The United States has moved away from the goal of capturing a Somali faction leader and is focusing instead on creating a viable political structure without him, Administration officials said.
A1  CLINTON WARNS ON PEACEKEEPING  President Clinton laid down conditions for sending troops to Bosnia and said the United Nations should be more selective on where it sends troops because of the high cost.
A1


Philip Morris to Invest in Kazakhstan Plant
To reach smokers in regions of the former Soviet Union where American cigarettes have not been available, the Philip Morris Companies announced yesterday that it would spend more than $200 million for a minority share of a manufacturing plant in Kazakhstan, the fourth most populous of the former Soviet republics and the third in which Philip Morris would operate a tobacco business.
The company said it would buy 49 percent of the state-owned Almaty Tobacco Kombinat, which employs 1,700 people, and would acquire additional shares within a year to gain majority ownership.
The agreement represents one of the first major American investments in Kazakhstan, the second largest of the former Soviet republics after Russia.
Kazakhstan has recently begun attempts to privatize state-owned industries.


Campaigning in Clinton's Wake
By musing aloud Sunday on whether too many New Yorkers were reluctant to support Mayor David N. Dinkins's re-election in part because he is black, President Clinton voiced a sentiment that many of the Mayor's supporters have tried to raise for years and opened a volatile new front in the mayoral campaign in a way that Mr.
Dinkins never has or could have.
Some politicians warned that the President's comments, made with great care and subtlety, might be distorted by partisans of both Mr.
Dinkins and Rudolph W. Giuliani, which could turn their already bitter contest into an explicitly racial brawl that would agitate voters and benefit neither the candidates nor the city.


Curbing Growth Factor Could Help Fight Scars
SCARS serve the salutary purpose of healing wounds, but they may also be ugly and in children may retard growth.
Recent advances in cellular biology suggest that wounds caused by accidents or resulting from surgery might be made to heal without a trace.
For years scientists have puzzled over the remarkable ability of a fetus that has had surgery in the womb to emerge at birth scar-free.
In humans, this occurs if the surgery is performed in the first five months after conception.
After that time, scarring occurs as it would after birth, leaving what may turn out to be lifelong reminders of assaults on the body's soft armor.


D'Amato, Raising Funds, Assails Cuomo's Record as Governor
Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato began what might, or might not, be a 1994 challenge to Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo last night, telling about 1,000 people at a Manhattan fund-raiser that New York had become "the taxasaurus and spendasaurus capital of the nation."
In a 25-minute speech devoted to attacking Mr.
Cuomo, Mr.
D'Amato sounded the themes that he would use if he runs next year: tougher jail sentences, restrictions on welfare, a death penalty for murder, and lower taxes to stem what he called the flight of jobs and middle-class families out of the state.


Review/Music; Blues and the Sound of the Griots
Scholars have traced aspects of early blues back to the songs of West African griots.
Ali Farka Toure, a guitarist from Mali, has reclaimed the blues as part of his own music, connecting the guitar riffs of John Lee Hooker to traditional music of Mali.
At S.O.B.'s on Sept. 21, he played both griot-style songs and riffing blues.
They were two different worlds; blues accompaniments bend notes, griot songs don't.
But both styles often use pentatonic (five-note) scales, both depend on incantatory repetition, and Mr.
Toure is at home in each one.


U.S. SHIFTS STANCE IN COURT APPEALS
Starting to speak to the Supreme Court in a voice that is distinctly its own, the Clinton Administration has rejected Bush Administration positions in four cases that the Court will hear when the new term begins next week.
The latest shift came in a child pornography case.
Solicitor General Drew S. Days 3d filed a brief this month that repudiated the Government's lower-court victories under a 1984 child pornography law and asked the Justices to set aside a judgment upholding the conviction.


Bridge
One of the most unusual endings of the year occurred on the diagramed deal, played a week ago in the Israel Cancer Research Fund charity game.
Many pairs reached six no-trump from the North side and had no real chance on any lead.
If spades are led and continued, for example, the run of five diamond tricks squeezes the South hand before the West hand.
There was a significant variation at one table.
The North-South cards were held by the eventual winners of the event, Lynn Tarnopol of Manhattan and Selma Schlechter of Purchase, N.Y.
They were using a style in which responder's jump to two no-trump may conceal a four-card major suit, and thus reached six no-trump from the South position.
This ran the risk of disaster after a spade lead, but Schlechter was favored by an unwise club lead.


Antibiotics Block H.I.V. In Laboratory Studies
A CLASS of well-known antibiotics has unexpectedly been found to block a step that helps the AIDS virus reproduce, researchers report.
But they caution that the antibiotics have not yet been tested in people, that they have dangerous side effects and that many candidate drugs that show promise in the laboratory fail in the clinic.
Nevertheless, the researchers believe that they may have found a new approach to designing drugs to fight H.I.V., the virus that causes AIDS.


Upper West Side Market Robbed by Five Gunmen
A gang of five robbers, evidently oblivious of the finer points of kohlrabi and fresh poblano peppers, invaded Fairway Fruits and Vegetables, one of the culinary citadels on Manhattan's Upper West Side, just before midnight closing time Sunday night.
They made 40 terrified employees lie in the sawdust, forced a manager at gunpoint to open two safes and snatched up $10,000.
But it was not just a piece of carrot cake.
Two police officers on community patrol happened to look into the normally bustling produce market on Broadway, between 74th and 75th Streets, and saw an unfamiliar sight: lights blazing and no one around amid the shelves of eggplant and jicama, figs, zucchini and Brie.


OPEC to Trim Output, as Saudi and Iranian Talk
OPEC announced today that its members had agreed to lower oil output to 24.5 million barrels a day in the fourth quarter from 24.7 million currently as a way to bolster sagging prices.
The cut in production is considered minimal, but OPEC officials said Hisham M. Nazer, the oil minister of Saudi Arabia had submitted proposals for further "voluntary" cuts that might reduce the overall output of OPEC below the new ceiling.


PAC-less Campaigns
To the Editor:
Senator Robert Dole writes that he opposes taxpayers' financing of political campaigns ("Rules Have Changed on Election Spending," letter, Sept. 16).
And he states that most citizens agree with him.
But I think most citizens equally oppose the financing of campaigns by corporations that gives them access the average citizen cannot hope to share.
This is grossly unfair.
Perhaps the solution may be to follow the British system, which limits campaigns to a few weeks, a small amount of money and shared free television time.
Has this policy been considered?
If not, why not?
L.
E.
PARTRIDGE  San Francisco, Sept. 16, 1993


Global Warming's Doomsday Nowhere in Sight
To the Editor:
"Scientists Confront Renewed Backlash on Global Warming" (Science Times, Sept. 14) well documents the absence of any scientific consensus on the existence of enhanced greenhouse warming, on the magnitude of any future temperature increase, and on whether any such climate change would be harmful or beneficial.
It is important to emphasize this uncertainty in order to counteract unsupported claims that "all scientists agree."


PENTAGON CHANGES ITS SOMALIA GOALS AS EFFORT FALTERS
Faced with mounting Congressional concern about the mission of American troops in Somalia, the United States has moved away from the goal of capturing the faction leader Mohammed Farah Aidid and is focusing instead on isolating him and creating a political structure without him, Administration officials said today.
The new strategy, which has gained urgency since the killing of three American soldiers on Saturday, is aimed at dispelling the view that the United States is nothing but a combatant in the fighting, determined to use whatever force may be necessary to punish General Aidid.


Review/Music; Shakespeare as Muse In Symphony Concert
The literary images presented in readings by Claire Bloom on Sunday before each composition in the American Symphony Orchestra's first concert of the season were familiar: of Lady Macbeth describing how easily she could dash out the brains of an infant sucking at her breast and of Hamlet contemplating the nightmares that might haunt him even in death's sleep.
These, along with fleeting glimpses of Desdemona and Ariel, led directly into musical images and portraits far more obscure but quite fascinating: orchestral works inspired by Shakespeare and ably conducted by Leon Botstein, the orchestra's music director, at Avery Fisher Hall.
The temptation is to put the word "controversial" before Mr.
Botstein's name, for as most listeners know by now, he is also the president of Bard College and the editor of the Music Quarterly.
It has seemed unjust to many that out of an amateur's love of music and a part-time career, he has managed to become music director of a not insignificant orchestra and the dominant figure in the most important contemporary trend in concert programming during the last 50 years.


Diamond May Prove Ideal Display Screen
A CONSORTIUM of American companies and the nation's main nuclear weapons laboratory have joined forces to develop and market a revolutionary new type of computer and television display screen based on synthetic diamond film.
The new display screens would exploit a recent discovery that synthetic diamond emits showers of electrons when exposed to weak electric fields.
The consortium hopes to steal a long march on competitors in the electronics industry, particularly the Japanese, in a technology expected to earn some $9.4 billion by the year 2000.


2 Fighting Coaching Aides Are Suspended
Two assistant coaches who fought after the North Carolina-North Carolina State game will be suspended for one game each, officials said yesterday.
Moments after North Carolina's 35-14 victory at Carter-Finley Stadium on Saturday, the North Carolina assistant, DONNIE THOMPSON, tackled North Carolina State assistant, TED CAIN.
That followed an earlier fight between players in the first half. (AP)


Review/Music; Brooklyn's Melting Pot Reaffirms Its Vitality In an 8-Hour Concert
The utopian vision of New York as the city where people and cultures from all over the world are friendly neighbors was thriving on Sunday afternoon at the first Brooklyn Ethnic Music and Dance Festival in Prospect Park.
The eight-hour concert, presented by the Ethnic Folk Arts Center and the Prospect Park Alliance, offered 10 groups in traditional and traditionalist styles, turning the Picnic House parking lot into a dance floor for most of the afternoon.
Music from Haiti, Greece, Puerto Rico, Yemen, China, Ireland, the Balkans, Eastern European Jews and South Carolina Pentecostalists was on the program.
The festival is the relocated version of an event held from 1976 to 1990 at a beer garden in Astoria, Queens.
The new setup is less atmospheric, without the old festival's aroma of roasted lamb; it has also lost some of its old ethnic audiences to the change of borough.
At Prospect Park, a tent in the parking lot held musicians and dancers, while the Picnic House had food vendors, dance workshops and more musicians.
The advantage is that the new festival had free admission, room to spread out and both outdoor and indoor performances, providing a second chance to hear some groups.


SPORTS PEOPLE: BASEBALL;
GARY SHEFFIELD, the Florida Marlin third baseman, is close to an agreement with the team on a contract that would pay him more than $20 million over the next four years.
"We're definitely making progress," Sheffield's agent, JIM NEADER, said yesterday.
"There's a real good chance it will be completed this week."


Scoreboard Has Last Word: Jays and Sox Are In
The Yankees did not want to watch their funeral.
While their pennant hopes were being officially erased in the ninth inning of the Toronto-Milwaukee game, three televisions in the visiting clubhouse at Camden Yards and one in the manager's office stayed dark.
No one turned them on.
No one dared.
Even though the Yankees had defeated the Orioles, 9-1, tonight and had several minutes to return to the spacious clubhouse and watch the Jays protect a two-run lead in the ninth, they refused to do it.
It was almost as if they wanted to cling to their final moments as contenders.


How to Make the Most of 'the New Papyrus'
SOUND cards, discussed last week, and CD-ROM drives are the entry level of PC multimedia, which will make computers as entertaining as television and movies instead of as compelling as typewriters and slide rules.
Compact Disk Read-Only Memory refers to five-inch disks that carry text, pictures and sound, as audio compact disks store sound.
You can play the music or pictures, but not record new information or edit the contents. (You cannot modify a book either, although you can make notes in the margin.)


In the Floods' Wake, Anxiety Just as Terrible
On a balmy Sunday after church, Elizabeth Crane stood in a parking lot trying to recall her address.
It had been a month since the river took the house she lived in for 44 years, the little town of Hardin, Mo., where she settled as a war bride, the antique table linens from her mother in Germany and even the cemetery where she buried her husband.
"Let me see," she said, looking to the pavement for clues.
She thought hard, then opened her purse and began mining for anything with her house number on it, growing more frustrated with each wrong envelope she found.


James Doolittle, 96, Pioneer Aviator Who Led First Raid on Japan, Dies
James H. Doolittle, an aviation pioneer and a retired lieutenant general in the Air Force who led the daylight air raid on Tokyo and other Japanese cities four months after the Japanese attacked Pearl Harbor, died yesterday at the age of 96.
He died at his son's home after suffering a stroke earlier this month, The Associated Press reported.


10% of Voters May Choose A Comptroller
After a caustic campaign marked by the travails of one of the city's durable politicians, the candidates in today's Democratic runoff for city comptroller set out yesterday to insure that the few voters expected to turn out are their own.
Although the latest polls show Assemblyman Alan G. Hevesi with a comfortable lead over the incumbent, Elizabeth Holtzman, party leaders and strategists for the two candidates said the vagaries of a low turnout made the election unpredictable, a test of organization more than popularity.


Business Digest
The Media Business
CBS conceded defeat in its struggle to win payment from cable TV systems that carry the signals of its broadcast stations.
Cable carriers have turned down three ideas from the network for new channels.  [ Page D1. ]


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt *
Colorado Health Facilities Authority is offering $53.3 million of refunding revenue bonds for the Rose Medical Center project through underwriters led by Paine Webber Inc.
The bonds were initially priced to yield from 2.70 percent in 1994 to 5.10 percent in 2008, with a maximum yield of about 5.368 percent for an issue due in 2021.
Another long-term issue due in 2013 was priced to yield about 5.286 percent.
All the bonds are insured by the Municipal Bond Investor's Assurance Corp. and rated triple-A by Moody's and S.&amp; P.


SENTENCE DELAYED FOR 2 IN BEATING
The two police officers who were to begin serving their 30-month sentences today in the beating of Rodney G. King were allowed to remain free at least two more weeks.
A Federal judge gave them that time to ask the United States Supreme Court to grant them bail.
The order for the temporary release came just 17 minutes before the noon deadline for Sgt.
Stacey C. Koon and Officer Laurence M. Powell to surrender to the authorities.
The two are asking to be allowed to remain free while they appeal their convictions for violating Mr.
King's civil rights during the videotaped beating in March 1991.
As felons, they face dismissal as police officers, but departmental procedures have not been completed.


No End to Talk of Taxes
The income tax has been a ripe issue for New Jersey politics since at least four governors ago.
When candidates talk about it, they either propose to cut it or they hedge.
Christine Todd Whitman, the Republican candidate to unseat Gov.
Jim Florio in November, has managed to do both.
Mrs.
Whitman nearly defeated Senator Bill Bradley in 1990 when he ignored her demand that he take a stand on the big tax increases Governor Florio pushed through the then-Democratic Legislature at the start of his administration.
The tax hikes were so unpopular that the Republicans won veto-proof majorities in both houses in 1991.
All seats in the Legislature are on the ballot again this year.


Patterns
Squeezing Models' Fees
Picking on models is like shooting fish in a barrel.
Few want to drum up sympathy for people who are beautiful, are fodder for gossip columnists, travel to exotic places and can earn $10,000 a day until they retire to marry rock stars.


Los Angeles Journal; A Reformer Who Tries To Preserve Skid Rows
In the annals of social reform, Andy Raubeson's goals may seem modest.
He does not want to abolish skid row.
He does not even want to abolish the term skid row, which makes some people squeamish.
Mr.
Raubeson just wants to build a better skid row.
And that, against long odds, is pretty much what he has done.


Classical Music in Review
The King's Noyse  The Frick Collection
Renaissance and Baroque string consorts are hardly novelties, but the King's Noyse presented an unusual take on the consort repertory on Sunday afternoon.
Having trawled the repertories of several provincial 17th-century German courts, the musicians offered a program of secular and sacred music, including several works imported to Germany from England and transformed to suit local tastes.
So, instead of dances by Campion, Johnson and Dowland -- familiar consort fare -- the ensemble presented versions of those composers' works reconfigured by William Brade and Thomas Simpson, English musicians who worked at the court of Count Ernst III of Schaumburg-Lippe.


Corrections
A headline on Sunday about Supreme Court sanctions against a professor who is selling audiotapes of Court arguments described the action incorrectly in some editions.
The Court told the National Archives not to let the scholar copy any more such tapes without the permission of the marshal of the Court; it did not move to stop the sale of the tapes.


Betty Klarnet; Magazine Editor, 75
Betty Klarnet, who retired last year as managing editor of Harper's Bazaar magazine, died on Sunday at her home in Manhattan.
She was 75.
She had suffered a long illness, said her daughter, Katy Klarnet.


Market Place; A Mexican truck manufacturer could be a nifty Nafta play.
ADVICE for buying Mexican stocks to play the North American Free Trade Agreement is developing a familiar ring: If you can't handle the risk that the accord will not be approved, which is certain to spark a drop based on emotion rather underlying economics, steer clear.
But if you're a long-term investor, then Mexico presents some decent bets.
Stocks often mentioned in the same breath include Telefonos de Mexico, the phone company, and Cementos Mexicanos, the large cement maker.
Of course, many others have realized that such stocks have a bright future, considering the need for infrastructure to support Mexico's expanding economy, and have already bid those stocks up.


U.S. and Europe Unable to Resolve Farm Issue
Top European and American trade officials met here today but were unable to resolve a dispute over farm subsidies, leaving world trade talks nearly paralyzed.
Both sides said after today's meetings that they remained committed to completing a global free trade deal by Dec. 15, when President Clinton's special trade negotiating authority will effectively expire.
But repeated failures to break the impasse on farm subsidies are steadily lengthening the odds that the deadline can still be met.


Israel and P.L.O. Have 'a Lot to Do' in Little Time
Two weeks after the handshake that stunned the world, Israel and the Palestine Liberation Organization are only just beginning to put together the political machinery needed to transform Palestinian self-rule in Israeli-occupied territories from a principle on paper into a reality.
Given the emotional power of the White House signing ceremony on Sept. 13 and the handshake between Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin of Israel and Yasir Arafat, chairman of the P.L.O., the subsequent lack of visible movement has caused a letdown among some people on both sides.
It is almost as though they had got all dressed up, only to discover they had no place to go.


Making Deals, Not Waves, Is Strategy for Health Plan
As the White House prepares to do battle over its health care plan, officials are bent on muting partisanship, staying vague as long as possible and re-orienting the conventional political debate between the White House and Congress.
Instead of conflict, White House advisers are counseling cooperation with members of Congress and lobbyists.
Broad strokes are favored over detail, and individual horror stories that illustrate the need for change are prized above all.


Presidents Always Clog Traffic, but 'This Is Worse'
As President Clinton shuttled from the Waldorf-Astoria Hotel to the United Nations and back again, the police presence was more noticeable and traffic seemed more congested than on his last visit to New York, when he expressed concern about the size of the police contingent assigned to him.
It was impossible to park on Park Avenue, and going from First to Third Avenues took more than a second.
Some blocks were sealed off, seemingly on the spur of the moment, and others for the whole day like 45th Street from First to Second Avenue and the 42d Street exit of the northbound Franklin D. Roosevelt Drive.
Crawling on 46th Street
To add to the dashboard-pounding, wheel-spinning frustration, it was raining.
People lounged on the hoods, killing time.
Passengers in taxicabs wondered what kind of traffic-artery-clearing procedure could be performed to unclog the trucks and vans parked, as usual, beneath "No Parking Anytime" signs.


Classical Music in Review
Finkel-Rutkowski Sonata Duo  Mannes College of Music
Elliot Finkel and Joseph Rutkowski began performing together in 1973 when they were students at the Mannes College of Music.
Since then they have gone on to separate careers: Mr.
Finkel, a pianist, has worked as a recital accompanist and as a conductor, largely in musical theater.
Mr.
Rutkowski, a clarinetist, was a member of the Norwegian Chamber Orchestra for several years, and now teaches and plays chamber music in New York City.


Kerala Raises Living Standard Democratically
To the Editor:
Your front-page article Sept. 7 raises the question of whether or not there is a link between repression and improvements in the quality of life in China.
While China may not be democratic, you point out, life there is better for millions than in the more democratic country of India.


Progress in Broadway Talks
Continuing progress was reported last night in contract talks between Broadway producers and Local 802 of the American Federation of Musicians.
After a meeting that lasted nearly 12 hours, several participants reported that the producers and the union were close to a tentative agreement on major issues.
Talks are to continue today at the offices of the League of American Theaters and Producers in Manhattan.
The main issue is the producers' proposal to reduce the minimum number of musicians required for Broadway shows.


Taking Three New Tacks on Moving the Cursor
IT is a shame most of us have only two hands, because there are three new hand-related personal computer products worth grabbing.
The Microsoft Corporation, an elephant among companies, has once again labored mightily to bring forth yet another mouse.
This new one is called the Microsoft Ballpoint 2.0, and it clips onto the side of a laptop or notebook computer to function as a miniature trackball.


TRANSACTIONS
Football National Football League  KANSAS CITY CHIEFS -- Signed Tim Watson, safety, to the parctice squad.
Hockey  National Hockey League  ANAHEIM MIGHTY DUCKS -- Assigned Allan Bester and Mikhail Shtalenkkov, goaltenders; Anatoli Fedotov, defenseman, and Trevor Halverson and Jean Francois Jomphe, forwards, to San Diego of the International Hockey League.
Returned Joel Savage, forward, to Fort Wayne of the International Hockey League.


In Crushing Blow to Georgia, City Falls to Secessionists
Abkhazian rebels captured their provincial capital today after an 11-day siege, sealing the break of the northwestern province with Georgia and dealing a devastating political blow to Eduard A. Shevardnadze, the Georgian leader.
Mr.
Shevardnadze had led the defense of the city and left only at the last moment.
The Itar-Tass news agency reported that the Abkhazian flag was raised over the legislature in the capital, Sukhumi, at 1 P.M.
Russian television reports from the Abkhazian side showed black smoke rising from several burning buildings as Abkhazian troops swept through the city center.


Review/Dance; A Festival of Korea's Courtly and Folk Traditions
The Asia Society's Festival of Korea, a yearlong multifaceted exposition of Korean culture, started out Sunday night with an aptly festive program that featured two contrasting groups of musicians and dancers.
Korea is not the only industrialized Asian country that has been concerned with preserving its traditional art forms.
History, however, has given its artists and cultural administrators a special task.
There is, for instance, no imperial household, as in Japan, to maintain an ensemble of court musicians and dancers.
And yet, as this program at Alice Tully Hall showed so splendidly, the classical music and dances that stem from Korean court life of the past have been nurtured, with Government support, to survive as cohesive professional presentations.


Westchester's Workfare Works, So Why Not New York City's?
To the Editor:
When I was a child growing up in New York City's Hell's Kitchen, my family relied on public assistance.
This experience has shaped my administration's social services policies.
At the core are twin beliefs that given a choice, people would rather work than be dependent and that a humane system of assistance must exist for those who cannot work through no fault of their own.


James Doolittle, 96, Pioneer Aviator Who Led First Raid on Japan, Dies
James H. Doolittle, an aviation pioneer and a retired lieutenant general in the Air Force who led the daylight air raid on Tokyo and other Japanese cities four months after the Japanese attacked Pearl Harbor, died yesterday at the age of 96.
He died at his son's home after suffering a stroke earlier this month, The Associated Press reported.


Lions' Ware Intends to Finish What He Launched
They are the two words that coaches dread, two words that can tear apart a team quicker than an all-out blitz.
The words are "quarterback controversy," and a new one has erupted in the National Football League.
This one is not on the Cleveland Browns, where Bernie Kosar remains No. 1 even though Vinny Testaverde relieved Sunday for the second straight week.
It's not on the Houston Oilers, where Warren Moon seems to have lost something and the talented Cody Carlson is the successor in waiting.
It's not on the Indianapolis Colts, where Jack Trudeau keeps the job over the more talented Jack George, who remains complainer non grata and gets booed whenever he gets into a game.


Baltic Russians Must Begin to Assimilate
To the Editor:
In "The Red Army Leaves Lithuania" (editorial, Sept. 11), you advise Latvia and Estonia to follow Lithuania's lead not to enact discriminatory laws against Russian residents, so as to make it politically easier for President Boris N. Yeltsin to withdraw the remaining Russian troops.


Karcher and Agency Part Ways on Carl's
Carl Karcher Enterprises and Goodby, Berlin &amp; Silverstein said yesterday that they had agreed to end their two-and-a-half-year relationship on the estimated $30 million Carl's Jr. fast-food restaurant chain account.
Trade publications had reported problems between the client and the agency, citing the recent arrival at Karcher of a new vice president of marketing, Karen B. Eadon.
Roger Pondel, a Karcher spokesman in Anaheim, Calif., confirmed a report of the split this week in Advertising Age.
He said a review would begin this week, adding that Karcher had hired a consultant, Effective Marketing Strategies Inc. in Marina del Rey, Calif., to handle it.


Missing Millions -- Kuwait's Bad Bet -- A special report.; Big Wallets and Little Supervision
During the late 1980's, when Spain was booming, Kuwait came shopping for corporations and investments, got a little carried away and plowed $5 billion into paper, chemical and fertilizer companies, as well as two leaning office towers whose bizarre silhouette dominates the Madrid skyline.
But now Spain's boom has turned to bust, the Kuwaiti corporate flagship here is in receivership, many of its businesses have closed, more than 20,000 jobs have been lost and the office towers are not even completed much less occupied.
As for the investment, it has become the object of countless lawsuits disputing how the money disappeared.


Study Undercuts Beliefs On Preserving Species
AMONG conservationists, it has been almost axiomatic that a geographical area rich in one group of species, like birds or mammals, will also be rich in other groups, like plants, insects and microorganisms.
A corollary says that where biological diversity is greatest, the highest concentrations of rare species will be found.
These beliefs have had an important practical effect: conservationists have felt confident that in concentrating their efforts on a single, easily surveyed species or group of species, usually vertebrates and higher plants, the full panoply of biological diversity will be preserved as well.


A Sleepy Suburb Gets the Geraldo Treatment
For 16 years the case of four mentally handicapped men who died in a boarding-house fire was forgotten, swept into the back corners of memory in a seaside town that measures time in cycles of onslaughts by summer visitors and angry winter storms.
For the last five weeks, however, Sea Bright has been squirming under a spotlight cast on the 1977 deaths and how suspicions about them were investigated.
The spotlight is coming from an unlikely source, a weekly newspaper based in nearby Red Bank, The Two River Times, and its owner, Geraldo Rivera.


Garden Hasn't Lost Its Punch
Madison Square Garden took itself out of the boxing-promotion business last summer following too much red ink and too many black eyes caused by scandals and hints of foul play.
But the name remains magic.


2 Officers Leaving Jordan, McGrath
The departures of two top executives at Jordan, McGrath, Case &amp; Taylor in New York were announced yesterday.
John L. Taylor, the agency's vice chairman, confirmed a report of his departure in Adweek this week.
Mr.
Taylor, who is 59, said his plans beyond his departure, scheduled for the end of the year, were uncertain.
"I have to stop, take a break and figure out how to reorganize my energies," he said.


Richter's Big Save: No. 1 Role In the Goal
Rangers Coach Mike Keenan finally admitted the long-expected last night: Mike Richter is in control of his own destiny.
Unless Richter somehow self-destructs during the last week of the preseason, he should be the team's No. 1 goaltender and in net when New York opens its regular season next Tuesday against the Boston Bruins in Madison Square Garden.
Last night, Keenan gave Richter his second consecutive start in goal and Richter responded by turning away 25 shots to help the Rangers to their second consecutive victory -- this one a 6-3 triumph over the New York Islanders at Madison Square Garden.
Saturday, Richter stopped 25 shots as the Rangers defeated the Whalers, 5-2, in Hartford.


Moving at a Speed Some Drivers Would Envy


Michael Harvey; Theatrical Producer, 49
Michael Harvey, a theatrical producer and real estate investor, died on Thursday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 49.
The cause of death was AIDS, his companion, Theodore Dell, said.


Clinton, at U.N., Lists Stiff Terms For Sending U.S. Force to Bosnia
President Clinton today laid down a long list of American conditions for sending peacekeeping troops to Bosnia and called on the United Nations to be much more selective about where it sends such troops in the future, saying the United States could not afford to go on subsidizing open-ended missions.
In his first address to the United Nations General Assembly, which has just begun its annual fall session, Mr.
Clinton also proposed a worldwide treaty that would ban production of fissile materials for nuclear weapons.
But the thrust of his remarks was an appeal to overhaul the peacekeeping machinery of the United Nations and to define more clearly its mission in the post-cold-war world.  [ Excerpts, page A16. ]


Report Due On Scandal At Leslie Fay
Shares of the Leslie Fay Companies hit a low for the year yesterday before rebounding slightly, as Wall Street anticipated the release of a report on an accounting scandal that drove the women's apparel maker into bankruptcy in April.
People close to the company said yesterday that the report, which Leslie Fay had expected to release in July, was delayed in part by the company's efforts to make sure it did not imply that senior executives were responsible for the scandal.
The garment industry has speculated for months that John J. Pomerantz, chairman and chief executive of Leslie Fay and son of the company's founder, would step down, but he has firmly denied that rumor.


Amid Debate Over Chinese, What's Women's Limit?
In the late 1970's, Jim O'Neill, an American track coach living in Hong Kong, trained several Chinese women in distance running.
One of them was Winnie Ng, the first woman of Chinese extraction to reach the world- class level in the marathon.
At a track meet between athletes from Hong Kong and China's Guangzhou province, O'Neill learned of a sports academy for children in Guangzhou, and he dispatched Ng to find out how the academy worked.
Barred from entering the school, Ng managed to sneak in and report back to her coach.


Dinkins and the Race Issue
By musing aloud on whether too many New Yorkers were reluctant to support Mayor Dinkins's re-election in part because he is black, President Clinton voiced a sentiment that many of the Mayor's supporters have tried to raise for years.
Article, page B4.


Gore Pitches New Health Program in California


Administration Plans New Export Initiative
President Clinton is about to introduce an aggressive national export policy aimed at using 19 Federal agencies to help manufacturers compete in foreign markets, Administration officials said today.
The new policy calls for a quick lifting of controls on some high-technology exports, the opening of Federal export assistance offices and more overseas lobbying by the President and Cabinet officials on behalf of American companies.


Corrections
A front-page article yesterday about women who seek political asylum in the United States misattributed an anecdote about a judge's clipping his fingernails while hearing testimony about a gang rape.
It was Robert Jobe, a San Francisco immigration lawyer, who described the incident, not his partner Jonathan Melrod.


A Road to Pure Water Paved With Anxieties
LEONARD UTTER has a fat scrapbook of photographs to remind him of his hometown and of the way life used to be.
But lately he doesn't need the pictures.
With drought lowering reservoirs throughout the Catskills, all he has to do is drive to the end of his road and walk through the woods and look down on the flat, dry bottom of the upper Pepacton Reservoir.
There he can see the foundations of houses that once made up Arena, the village where Utters lived for generations until New York City came and destroyed the community to build the reservoir.
Some images never fade.
He and his wife, Betty, still see the smoke billowing out of the valley of the East Branch of the Delaware River in 1953, as Arena's bulldozed homes were burned.


Bruno Pontecorvo Is Dead at 80; Physicist Defected to Soviet Union
Bruno Pontecorvo, an Italian-born physicist who was a pioneer in the study of the elusive subatomic particles called neutrinos and who defected to the Soviet Union in 1950, died Friday in Dubna, outside Moscow.
He was 80.
The cause was pneumonia, according to reports in Italian newspapers.
He had suffered from Parkinson's disease for several years.


Bonds Help to Lift Stocks; Dow Rises 24.59
After a trading week in which the Dow Jones industrial average suffered its worst loss in more than seven months, stocks were pushed higher yesterday by a sharp increase in bond prices.
The Dow closed at 3,567.70, up 24.59, while the broader Standard &amp; Poor's 500 index closed at 461.80, up 4.17.
For the third day in a row, the Nasdaq composite index hit a record high, closing at 759.95, up 5.30.


Transit Authority Sells Bonds
The Metropolitan Transit Authority of New York sold $217.98 million of tax-exempt transit facilities revenue bonds yesterday through underwriters led by CS First Boston.
Serial bonds were initially priced to yield from 3.50 percent for an issue due in 1994 to 4 percent in 1998, 4.60 percent in 2003, 5.05 percent in 2008 and 5.15 percent in 2010 and 2011.


Corrections
An article in some editions on Thursday about a disturbance outside a Bronx grocery store included an incorrect account, from the police, about the eviction of the G &amp; P Supermarket.
Jerry Ende was the landlord, not the store owner; it was he who evicted the tenants.


Midland Shares
Midland Bank P.L.C., A British- based banking and financial services group, yesterday priced 10 million American depository shares through an underwriting group led by Merrill Lynch.
The shares, each representing a series A noncumulative dollar-denominated preference share, were priced at $25 each to yield 8.75 percent, with the first dividend date Dec. 15.
Underwriters said the shares were noncallable by Midland bank for five years and rated Baa-1 by Moody's and BBB+ by Standard &amp; Poor's.


Agency Withdraws From Sega Review
Lord, Dentsu &amp; Partners said yesterday that it had withdrawn from a review for a new assignment from Sega of America after a head of a sibling direct-response agency threatened to quit over a perceived client conflict.
Kathryn Woods, a spokeswoman for Lord, Dentsu in New York, confirmed a report of the conflict this week in Advertising Age.
She said Lord, Dentsu had pulled out of the review, which is to select an agency for an $8 million to $10 million video games campaign aimed at younger children and their parents, after a protest from Murray R. Bowes, chairman and chief executive at Bowes, Dentsu &amp; Partners in Los Angeles.
Mr.
Bowes warned that he would take a paid leave of absence to protest Lord, Dentsu's participation in the review because Bowes, Dentsu has a $10 million account with Nintendo of America, Sega's principal rival.


Review/Opera; Dueling Tenors Open the Met's Season
If a visitor unaccustomed to opera had stumbled into the opening-night festivities at the Metropolitan Opera last night, he might have supposed that just after Siegmund and Sieglinde's passionate embrace at the end of the first act of Wagner's "Walkure," the tenor and the soprano had somehow returned after intermission incarnated as a Moorish officer and his wife.
But the most peculiar change would have come after the second intermission, when the tenor, transformed into the supposed son of a gypsy, actually split in half and fought a mock duel with himself.
Such are the vagaries of opening-night galas.
This one consisted of three separate acts, from three separate operas, united by one theme: the power of the two tenors playing the three roles, who happen to be among the most renowned voices of their generation.
The two tenors, in case anybody has missed the best-selling recordings and videos and a generation of hype and well-deserved praise, were Placido Domingo and Luciano Pavarotti (in alphabetical order, to avoid any possible ruffled feathers in their long-term rivalry).
Mr.
Domingo has the leaner, more pointed voice, able to take on more robust roles in the dramatic category with intelligence and skill; Mr.
Pavarotti has had the fleshier, more extroverted (and possibly more popular) instrument, preferring a narrower repertory focused largely on the lyric roles.


Long Battle Ahead for Health Care Reform


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY FROM FREE PIZZA TO PROTECTION MONEY  On the first day of hearings into corruption in the New York City Police Department, a former officer described how lax supervision and an ingrained departmental culture allowed him to evolve from taking free drinks and pizza on his first days on the job into taking $8,000 a week to protect a drug dealer.
A1.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Youth Dew, an Estee Lauder classic, is getting a promotion worthy of a new fragrance line.
EVERYTHING old becomes new again.
The Estee Lauder Companies' Estee Lauder division has reintroduced its classic Youth Dew fragrance, which was brought out in 1953, with a new advertising campaign intended to capture the attention of new users and jog the memory of old users.


Bronx Man Is Drive-By Victim in Miami
As a part-time taxi driver in New York who regularly worked late hours and long days hoping to earn enough to send his children to college, Miguel Sanchez was no stranger to dangerous situations.
But when the violence of the streets caught up with him on Sunday night, he was on vacation, a passenger in a car on a Miami expressway.
In the third fatal attack in less than a month against a visitor traveling on a Florida highway, Mr.
Sanchez, a 40-year-old Dominican immigrant who lived in the Bronx, was shot to death here as he was riding with his cousin and the cousin's wife on their way to dinner at a Chinese restaurant.


Ex-Rogue Officer Tells Panel Of Police Graft in New York
On the first day of hearings by a mayoral commission into corruption in the New York City Police Department, an admitted rogue officer described yesterday how lax supervision and an ingrained departmental culture allowed him to evolve from taking free drinks and pizza on his first days on the job into taking $8,000 a week to protect a Brooklyn drug dealer.
The former officer, Michael Dowd, described a force where police brutality was common, honest officers were intimidated into ignoring abuses, and commanding officers often shut their eyes to suspicions of graft, violence, drug use and alcoholism by officers.


Israel Peace Radio to Be Laid to Rest
Abie Nathan, Israel's best-known peace campaigner, says that at the end of the week he will shut down the Voice of Peace radio station that he has run from aboard a ship since 1973.
The ship, built in 1940 and anchored in international waters just outside Israeli jurisdiction, has become too expensive to operate, said Mr.
Nathan, 66, and so on Friday he plans to sink it in the Mediterranean -- or "lay it to rest," as he preferred to express it.


Paramount Board Seeks Proof of QVC Financing
Paramount Communications Inc. cleared the way yesterday for merger talks with QVC Network Inc., the home shopping service, but the Paramount board insisted on proof of QVC's financing before it began discussions.
The effect was to create a delay in the start of any talks with QVC.
At the same time, by not turning its back on its agreement with its original merger partner, Viacom Inc., Paramount gave Viacom's chairman, Sumner Redstone, additional time to improve his bid.


Go Personal, Whitman Is Implored
Top advisers to Christine Todd Whitman said today that the Republican gubernatorial candidate needed to shift her campaign strategy to an all-out attack on Gov.
Jim Florio in response to a poll showing the New Jersey Governor with an unexpectedly large lead.
"Negative campaigns work; it's one of the tragedies of American politics," said Ed Rollins, chief political adviser to the Whitman campaign and a veteran of national campaigns.
"Obviously, Florio has been running a very negative campaign and we have to do something about it. I think it is safe to say that if New Jersey voters have forgotten what Jim Florio did to them over the last four years, we are going to remind them."


RESULTS PLUS
TENNIS  Lendl Lasts Only One Round Again  Ivan Lendl, a former No. 1 player who now can't seem to escape the first round, lost, 7-5, 7-6 (7-4), yesterday to Jan Siemerink in his opening match at the $800,000 Swiss Indoors tournament in Basel.
In losing to the unseeded Dutchman who is ranked 45th in the world, Lendl suffered his eighth first-round defeat this year.
The 33-year-old American was a semifinalist last year at this event and the champion in 1980 and 1981.
"The return was my problem," Lendl said.
Aleksandr Volkov of Russia was upset, 6-2, 7-6 (7-5), by David Prinosil of Germany.
Marc Rosset of Switzerland, coming off a Davis Cup loss to Israel, scattered 12 aces in routing Andrei Cherkasov of Russia, 6-0, 6-2, to reach the second round. (AP) Graf Makes Haste of a 14-Year-Old: Steffi Graf routed Syna Schmidle, 6-1, 6-0, yesterday to reach the second round at the Volkswagen Card Cup in Leipzig, Germany.
The 14-year-old Schmidle, one of Germany's best young players, delighted the crowd of 2,700 by winning the first game against the world's top-ranked player.
But Graf dominated behind her serve and powerful forehand to roll to victory in 45 minutes against the wild card, ranked 512th in the world.
In other featured matches, Stephanie Rotter of the Netherlands upset world No. 10 Anke Huber of Germany, 7-6 (8-6), 6-2, and third-seeded Jana Novotna of the Czech Republic slipped past Miriam Oremans of the Netherlands, 6-7 (5-7), 6-1, 6-1.
In a matchup of Americans, Kimberly Po outlasted Gigi Fernandez, 6-1, 7-6 (7-3).
Judith Wiesner of Australia, seeded sixth, edged Kristie Boogert of the Netherlands, 3-6, 7-5, 7-5.
Graf has won all three titles since the tournament's inception in 1990. (AP)


New Accusations About Waldheim Recycle Old Bitterness
To the Editor:
A new book, one of whose authors is a former employee of the World Jewish Congress, alleges that I discovered, then concealed, evidence of alleged World War II crimes committed by Kurt Waldheim (news article, Sept. 12).


In Defeat, Holtzman Sounds Note Of Healing
Alternating between warmth, irritation and sadness as she spoke of her 21-year commitment to public service, Elizabeth Holtzman last night stood at the front of a crowd of cheering, emotional supporters, took a breath, faced the cameras and announced that it was over.
Her short but graceful concession speech, delivered in the unlikely venue of a TriBeCa bar, included an unqualified endorsement of the entire Democratic ticket.
But it made no mention of what may come next for a woman who for years has defined an aggressive, combative style of advocacy that won her as many enemies as victories.


Completing College in Only 3 Years? Idea Is Gaining Support Nationwide
With a savings of thousands of dollars, up to perhaps $25,000, as the incentive for students, the concept of a three-year college degree is gaining adherents around the country.
In both California and New York, leaders of state-supported university systems see the idea as a way to cope with the prospect of rising enrollment and declining state financing.
Elsewhere, administrators of small liberal arts colleges look upon accelerated degree programs as a way to prevent the loss of students to less-expensive public institutions.


William Ballard, 88, Architect Who Guided New York Planning
William F. R. Ballard, an architect who was chairman of the New York City Planning Commission from 1963 to 1966, died on Friday in a London hospital.
He was 88.
The cause was a stroke that followed hip replacement surgery, said his son, Robert.


A 'New' Richter Shows Up as Goaltender for Rangers
No one has forgotten what happened last season. Mike Richter knows that.
There were soft goals.
There were blatant mistakes.
There were games when Richter looked shaky, and games when it looked as if his confidence had completely disappeared.
There were days, too, spent in a minor league uniform in Binghamton, days when the player the Rangers once considered their goaltending future had left to wonder if his biggest New York moments had passed.


Hip Deep in a Sea of Berries


Behind Veil of Mystery: A Little More Mystery
THE place had the look and smell of a Legion Hall after a beer party or a suburban catering establishment gone bust.
There were cloudy mirrors and unlighted chandeliers and everywhere images of a laughing girl with a daring peasant blouse and a headdress of tropical fruit.
A group of sexy grandmothers and matrons were arriving at the otherwise empty lounge, coming in under the canopy that said Copacabana.
"You look gorgeous," one of them said to Julie Wilson, the Broadway performer and nightclub singer.


Richer Proves He's Just a Devil at Heart
Stephane Richer has always had an immense talent for skating, shooting, twisting and turning opponents inside out.
Now, he is also a happy man for the first time in his three years with the Devils, despite making less money this season.
The flamboyant Richer, twice a 50-goal scorer in the National Hockey League with the Montreal Canadiens, could have signed for more than a $1 million a year as a free agent with several teams last summer after playing out his option, but he proved his commitment to the Devils by signing a three-year contract for just over $800,000 a season.


Making the Best of a Second Chance
Perry Klein, who has National Football League scouts calling for directions to the campus of C. W. Post College these days, had just finished studying game film on his next opponent.
"Tough team," said Klein, tugging at the bill of his baseball cap and shaking his head.
"We'll need to be prepared."


In America; Voodoo Lunch
I was dressed very nicely, thank you, in a sport jacket, neatly pressed slacks and a striped tie.
I told the man behind the counter in the Upper West Side restaurant that I wanted a cheeseburger, not too well done, with ketchup.
I also told him that I had no money.
He laughed without showing any amusement and then his face settled into a look of impatience.


Reeds for a Roof


Johnson Works on Bid, Not Jumpers
MAGIC JOHNSON said yesterday that he was concentrating on becoming owner of a proposed National Basketball Association expansion franchise in Toronto and was not considering coaching or trying another comeback as a player.
"I'd be lying to you if I said I never think about it, because I see guys who I can still dominate," Johnson said during a publicity appearance for Swatch at Macy's in Manhattan.
"I play every day, two or three hours. It would be great, but I'm not coming back. I'm excited about owning a franchise in Toronto."


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
A regulation stipulating the amount of U.S. tobacco in American-made cigarettes gives tobacco farmers and Philip Morris a big lift.
But it could raise costs for some cigarette manufacturers and further complicate troubled world trade talks.  [ Page A1. ]
Resolution Trust reached a $45 million settlement with Paul, Weiss, Rifkind, Wharton &amp; Garrison over the law firm's role in junk bond investments that helped the Centrust savings and loan.  [ D1. ]


Four States for Sixth Tour DuPont
The sixth Tour DuPont, America's major cycling stage race, will cover 1,000 miles next year through Delaware, Maryland, Virginia and North Carolina.
At a news conference yesterday in Richmond, DuPont and race officials said the race would start with a prologue time trial on May 4 in Wilmington, Del., and end with a time trial on May 15 in Winston-Salem, N.C.
Only five stage races, including the Tour de France and the Tour of Spain, last longer than 12 days.


Paper at Berkeley Trims Publication
For the first time in nearly a century, The Daily Californian, the independent newspaper run by students at the University of California at Berkeley, has cut publication to three days a week.
Effective Sept. 13, the temporary decision to publish each Monday, Wednesday and Friday is the most recent and visible attempt to keep the newspaper in business in the face of dropping advertising revenues, debt and hefty mortgage payments.


Review/Pop; A Parade Through a Hit Maker's Broad Territory
The music of Jimmy Webb, one of American pop's last purely romantic songwriters, was celebrated in a gala concert at Avery Fisher Hall on Monday evening in which he was joined by several performers who have recorded his material, along with a rock band and a string section.
Glen Campbell, who had a succession of hits written by Mr.
Webb in the late 1960's, and Art Garfunkel, another longtime Webb champion and an unannounced special guest, appeared on the stage.
So did David Crosby and Michael Feinstein, each of whom has a recent album that includes one Webb song.
Another surprise visit, one redolent with rock-and-roll nostalgia, brought Johnny Maestro and the Brooklyn Bridge together to sing their 1968 hit, "The Worst That Could Happen."


Food Notes
A Plethora of Wares
The American Institute of Wine and Food is holding its annual Marketplace Tasting on Saturday in the Winter Garden Atrium of the World Financial Center in lower Manhattan.
Farmers, cheese makers, wine makers, beer makers and bakers will display their wares.
Admission is free, but those who wish to taste must buy a button for $10.
The doors open at 9 A.M. for members of the institute, at 11 A.M. for others, and will remain open until 5 P.M.
Cutting Cookware Prices
Chantal Cookware, a line of heavy, brightly enameled pots, pans and kettles, will be sold at deep discounts during a factory sale tomorrow through Sunday at the Radisson Hotel Englewood, 401 South Van Brunt Street, off Route 4 in Englewood, N.J., near the George Washington Bridge.
The hours: 10 A.M. to 7 P.M. tomorrow through Saturday, noon to 5 P.M.
Sunday.
Roll Out the Barrel
New York is turning into an Octoberfest, with beer events, beer dinners at restaurants and beer benefits.
One of the most elaborate is the New York Beerfest sponsored by the Fund for the Borough of Brooklyn, on Sunday from noon to 7 P.M. on the esplanade under the Brooklyn side of the Brooklyn Bridge and in the adjoining Empire-Fulton State Park.
More than 50 breweries will offer information and samples.
Beer-friendly food will be served.
Tickets are $20 in advance from Ticketmaster, (212) 307-7171.
At the door they are $25.
Pub-Crawl Guide
"The Insider's Guide to Manhattan Bars" by Eric Zicklin (Citadel Press, $7.95) is a pocket-size directory that sums up the drinking scenes in hundreds of bars and restaurants.
Whether your taste runs to black leather jackets or three-piece suits, to romance or blaring rock music, you will probably find listings of places with like-minded drinkers.
The guide groups the bars by location, describes the decor and indicates prices.
Chilis con Carnival
With beer?
Chilis of course, and in Brooklyn, too.
On Sunday from 10 A.M. to 4:30 P.M., the Brooklyn Botanic Garden is celebrating chili peppers with a multi-ethnic festival that includes lectures, cooking and gardening demonstrations, music, dance, crafts and food from places where chilis are king, like South America, Thailand, Mexico, the Caribbean and the American Southwest.
The event is free, and food will be sold in the Terrace Cafe from 11 A.M. to 4 P.M.
Scrutable Asian Cuisine
Kelley &amp; Ping, a new Asian grocery store at 127 Greene Street, near Houston Street, is the brainchild of Brad Kelley and Lee Ping, who are aiming to make Asian ingredients and equipment more easily understandable for non-Asians.
They also want to offer a taste of the colorful, raffish market atmosphere typical in Asian countries.
"We're selling a selection of products from China, Japan, Korea, Thailand and Vietnam, and we have people who can explain them," said Mr.
Kelley, who with Ms.
Ping also owns Kin Khao, a Thai restaurant on Spring Street.
At the store, packaged foods, including soy sauce, vinegar, cooking wine, rice, noodles, seaweed, spices, tea and candy are displayed on dark wood shelves.
Prices are closer to those of Chinatown than at Dean &amp; DeLuca nearby.
For example, a 21-ounce bottle of excellent Pearl River soy sauce is $1.85.
Five chefs turn out soups, noodle dishes, Asian-style sandwiches, salads and so on, to eat in or take out.
A copious and delicious bowl of duck broth, with pieces of duck, noodles and vegetables is $5.95.
The store is open from 9 A.M. to 9 P.M. every day. Information: (212) 228-1212.


Parts Production Debated in Chrysler Talks
Facing a strike deadline of 11:59 P.M.
Thursday, negotiators for the Chrysler Corporation are trying to fend off demands by the United Automobile Workers union that the company keep making the same proportion of its vehicle parts in-house, thus preserving and possibly creating jobs.
The U.A.W. imposed the deadline on Monday, as a way to focus Chrysler's attention and speed up the talks, union officials said.
Both sides said negotiators were likely to agree on a new contract without a strike.


Never Too Early to Worry About Rotation
Now the Yankees can finally admit it.
One day after they were officially eliminated from the the American League East race, the Yankees could concede that they need serious pitching help for next season.
Manager Buck Showalter discussed the pitching situation in his office before the game, and General Manager Gene Michael chimed in with his sentiments on the field during batting practice.
Since the Blue Jays clinched their third straight division title, the Yankees are busily pondering next April.
They are thinking about what they must accomplish to catch Toronto.


Nina Berberova, 92, Poet, Novelist and Professor
Nina Berberova, a Russian-born poet, novelist, playwright, critic and professor of literature whose biography is a classic of the Russian emigre Diaspora, died on Sunday at a nursing home in Philadelphia.
She was 92.
She died of complications from a fall last March, said Dr.
Murl G. Barker, a friend, who is chairman of the Russian department at Rutgers University.


Havana Journal; Castro Must Go, That's Agreed. Nothing Else Is.
As the summer baking of this faded city eases and tensions from power cuts that left residents at the heat's mercy let up, two radically different strands of opposition politics are hoping to channel Cuba's brooding discontent.
To hear both sets of dissidents speak, a future without President Fidel Castro is just a matter of time, not known precisely but not so long now.
To hear them speak of each other, however, is to witness the suspicions and betrayals that rend Cuba's small dissident movement.


The Ground Rules for Wireless
When the Federal Communications Commission announced rules last week for a new generation of wireless communications, the agency opened a huge swath of the nation's airwaves for new types of cordless telephones, computers, fax machines and paging devices.
Broadly defined as personal communication services, or P.C.S., these new services will be assigned radio frequencies now reserved for microwave links used by electric utilities, railroads and public safety agencies.


Peter De Vries, Writer, Is Dead; New Yorker Contributor Was 83
Peter De Vries, a writer who was best known as a comic novelist and as a contributor to The New Yorker, died yesterday at Norwalk (Conn.) Hospital.
He was 83 and lived in Westport, Conn.
The cause was pneumonia, said his daughter,, Jan.


Stocks Mixed in Lackluster Trading as Dow Falls by 1.68
Stocks were mixed yesterday in a lackluster session, with blue chips drifting lower while over-the-counter issues set a record high for the fourth consecutive day.
A decline in drug, food and retail prices helped to push the Dow Jones industrial average down 1.68 points, to 3,566.02.
The Standard &amp; Poor's index of 500 stocks also fell, dropping 0.27 point, to 461.53, but the Nasdaq composite index rose 3.71, to 763.66.


YELTSIN TIGHTENING CORDON OF TROOPS AT THE PARLIAMENT
President Boris N. Yeltsin severely tightened the cordon around the headquarters of the hostile legislature Tuesday, deploying hundreds of troops with concertina wire and water trucks, and even mounted police, at all approaches to the building.
From a yellow armored personnel carrier across the street from barricades erected by defenders of Parliament, police officers with a loudspeaker demanded that those inside surrender their arms today.


House Vote Urges Clinton to Limit American Role in Somali Conflict
In a demonstration of growing Congressional opposition to the continued deployment of troops in Somalia, the House overwhelmingly passed a resolution today demanding that the Administration put limits on its mission or face the probability of a cutoff of funds.
As the House began its debate, President Clinton and other Administration officials tried to assure Congressional leaders and the public that he would not allow American troops to get bogged down in Somalia.


Jordanians Won't Postpone Elections Set for November
Jordan said today that it would go ahead in November with its first multiparty elections in almost four decades despite pressure to postpone the vote because of uncertainty created by the Israeli-P.L.O. peace accord.
Over half of Jordan's 4 million people are of Palestinian descent.
"The elections will take place on Nov. 8 as scheduled," Prime Minister Abdel Salam Majali said.


Corrections
An art review in Weekend on Friday about works conceived by Lutz Bacher, painted by a commercial artist she hired and on display at the Pat Hearn Gallery in SoHo, referred incorrectly to the attribution provided by the gallery.
A news release distributed at the exhibition did acknowledge the use of the commercial artist.


Market Place; State legislatures have helped make Bell Sports a popular play.
A NEW awareness about preventable deaths among child bicyclists and the growing popularity of mountain biking have already made sales of bike helmets increase over the last five years by an average of 32 percent annually.
Now, thanks to state legislatures, a small growth industry appears ready to explode into a big business.
Seven states, including New York, New Jersey and Connecticut, have passed laws requiring young bike riders to wear crash helmets or pay a fine.
Similar statutes are pending in Washington State and Vermont, and a California bill is simply awaiting the Governor's signature.
Most believe other states will follow suit.


South African Deal Made By Food Processor Pillsbury
Moving quickly after Nelson Mandela, head of the African National Congress, called Friday for an end to trade sanctions against South Africa, Pillsbury said today that it would create a joint venture with a leading South African food company to make and market Pillsbury products there.
Groups that have monitored American trade ties with South Africa said that Pillsbury's move was the first significant investment by an American company in South Africa since the plea by Mr.
Mandela.
They expect many other deals for marketing ventures and investments.


Sports of The Times; Which Suits Will Control The Garden?
I DON'T know about you, but I'm having trouble sleeping these nights, worrying about the big battle for the heart and soul of the Rangers and the Knicks.
I'm not sure Mark Messier has enough left to lead the Rangers to anything close to a Stanley Cup.
And, yes, the Knicks had better sign Charles Oakley if they want to keep playing Pat Riley's style of corporate-management head-knuckle.
But that's not what's keeping me up at night.
I want to know who's going to be running these teams.
I mean, really running them.


Welcoming Fall With Peak-Season Flavor
SEPTEMBER is usually the month when tomatoes are most plentiful in the Northeast and, therefore, at their lowest price.
They have also reached peak flavor and are at their nutritional best.
Understandably, then, the first course, a cold tomato soup, takes advantage of the market.
Likewise, hake, my choice for a main dish, is still abundant and inexpensive.
To round out the menu, you may be lucky enough to find fresh new potatoes for a good price at your supermarket or at a farm stand, if you happen to live in the country.


Beta Well Service
Shares of Beta Well Service Inc. rose yesterday after the company's president expressed optimism that four rigs that service oil and gas wells in Siberia, which had been suspended from operations, would soon be put back to work.
Beta's stock, which soared when the contracts were announced last year, plunged recently.


With Caveat, House Approves Gay-Troops Policy
The House today overwhelmingly passed a modified version of President Clinton's policy on homosexuals in the military, prohibiting homosexual conduct but halting the questioning of recruits about their sexual orientation.
Following the Senate's lead, the House added language to the Clinton compromise that called homosexuality "unacceptable" in the military, but Administration officials said the language did not change the workings of the President's plan.


Review/Film: A Bronx Tale; De Niro on Each Side of Camera But Artfully Out of the Way, Too
Robert De Niro starts off "A Bronx Tale" with the perfect sound, as if he were striking a tuning fork: the sweet harmonies of an a cappella doo-wop group, to accompany an image of the Bronx sky at twilight.
This film, the first to be directed by one of the screen's most intuitive stars, instantly establishes a rueful, romantic view of its time and place.
Beginning in 1960, and never venturing very far from East 187th Street, "A Bronx Tale" offers a warm, vibrant and sometimes troubling portrait of the community it describes.
Almost everyone within that community sounds a little bit like Robert De Niro except Mr.
De Niro himself.
That the film's large and varied group of actors should echo its director is hardly surprising: "A Bronx Tale" is about small-time mobsters, and Mr.
De Niro has time and again set the standard for such characters.
He would dominate this film even if he did not happen to be in it, let alone be behind the camera.
Yet his work here, as both actor and director, is impressively unobtrusive.
The first test of any film in which a star directs himself is whether the viewer can ever forget who is at the helm, and Mr.
De Niro's direction is generous and thoughtful enough to let that happen.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.07
3.16
3.26
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
2.90
2.90
2.72
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.03
3.02
2.85
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
4.87
4.87
5.88
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
5.94
5.94
7.36
TELEPHONE BONDS
7.00
6.98
8.42
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
5.42
5.44
6.39
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Thompson Official Leaves for McCann
James R. Heekin, executive vice president and general manager at J. Walter Thompson New York, said yesterday that as expected he would leave that agency, effective in mid-October, to join McCann-Erickson Worldwide in the new position of president of McCann North America in New York.
Mr.
Heekin, who is 44, had been at Thompson New York from 1975 to 1978 and from 1985 until now; he has headed the office since January 1988.
For the time being, the agency said, Ron Burns, chief executive at Thompson North America, and Jim Patterson, chairman at Thompson North America and executive creative director of Thompson New York, will oversee the office.


Chinese Say Study Hurts Restaurants
A FEW days after a widely publicized study found high levels of sodium, fat and cholesterol in 15 popular Chinese restaurant dishes, Charlie Chiang noticed something strange taking place in his Northern Virginia restaurant: the American customers had all but disappeared.
"Oh, we had our regular Chinese customers, but you could count the Americans on one hand," said Mr.
Chiang, who owns nine Chinese restaurants in the Washington metropolitan area.


Memorial Service
A memorial service for Charles Mikolaycak, an artist and designer of children's books, will be held on Friday at 11 A.M. at the Donnell Library Center Auditorium at the New York Public Library at 20 West 53d Street in Manhattan.
Mr.
Mikolaycak died on June 23.


At U.N., Russian Stresses Peril of Ethnic Conflict
Saying the threat of ethnic violence today is "no less serious than the threat of nuclear war was yesterday," the Russian Foreign Minister today called for expanded United Nations peacemaking and peacekeeping, especially in the troubled republics of the former Soviet Union.
The general thrust of Andrei V. Kozyrev's address to the General Assembly ran counter to the appeals for prudence and realism made by President Clinton on Monday and by the British Foreign Secretary, Douglas Hurd, today.


At 68, a Broadway Star Gets Ready to Make Off Broadway Debut
Julie Harris, the soul of Broadway, was sitting on a red plush seat in an Off Broadway theater, musing about her Off Broadway debut on Tuesday in "The Fiery Furnace," a play by Timothy Mason.
Didn't the venue seem somehow incongruous for this actress, who first appeared on Broadway in April 1945, who has won five Tony Awards for her work and is often spoken of in the same breath as such legendary actresses as Helen Hayes, Jessica Tandy and Irene Worth?
"There is no stigma about it whatsoever," she said.
Miss Harris started a high-voiced imitation of a catty but ditsy thespian asking, 'Oh, dear, are you Off Broadway now because you can't get on Broadway?' "


Slimming Further, G.M. Is Selling Delco Units
On the eve of a new national labor agreement, General Motors today said it was selling 80 percent of its $760 million motors and actuators manufacturing units to ITT, a move meant to conserve capital and eventually to curb G.M.'s spiraling wage and benefit costs.
If the sale goes through, it would be the second big divestiture G.M. has made in 11 days.
The company said on Sept. 17 that it would sell five parts plants and the assets of a sixth to an investor group led by Richard E. Dauch, a former Chrysler Corporation manufacturing executive.


Defying President, Senate Votes To Keep Medicaid Abortion Limit
Bucking President Clinton, the Senate voted today to continue to prohibit the Federal Government from paying for abortions for most poor women.
The House of Representatives approved an identical measure last summer.
So for at least another year, no Medicaid funds can be used for abortions unless the life of the woman is at stake or the pregnancy is said to be the result of rape or incest.


Review/Opera; Tenors in a Friendly Duel Open the Met's Season
If a visitor unaccustomed to opera had stumbled into the opening-night festivities at the Metropolitan Opera on Monday, he might have supposed that just after Siegmund and Sieglinde's passionate embrace at the end of the first act of Wagner's "Walkure," the tenor and the soprano had somehow returned after intermission incarnated as a Moorish officer and his wife.
But the most peculiar change would have come after the second intermission, when the tenor, transformed into the supposed son of a gypsy, actually split in half and fought a mock duel with himself.
Such are the vagaries of opening-night galas.
This one consisted of three separate acts, from three separate operas, united by one theme: the power of the two tenors playing the three roles, who happen to be among the most renowned voices of their generation.
The two tenors, in case anybody has missed the best-selling recordings and videos and a generation of hype and well-deserved praise, were Placido Domingo and Luciano Pavarotti (in alphabetical order, to avoid any possible ruffled feathers in their long-term rivalry).
Mr.
Domingo has the leaner, more pointed voice, able to take on more robust roles in the dramatic category with intelligence and skill; Mr.
Pavarotti has had the fleshier, more extroverted (and possibly more popular) instrument, preferring a narrower repertory focused largely on the lyric roles.


State Trooper Is Acquitted In Tampering
A jury tonight acquitted a New York State police investigator of tampering with evidence in a 1991 armed robbery, a blow to prosecutors who had won three guilty pleas in the year-old evidence-faking scandal.
The investigator, David M. Beers, a 15-year state police veteran, was the first of five state police investigators to challenge the charges.
He faces a second evidence-tampering trial in November on charges he faked a fingerprint in a 1991 narcotics investigation.
He faced 5 to 15 years in prison if convicted in this trial.


Montclair State Coach Is Suspended
JOHN BLANTON, the head track coach at Montclair State College in New Jersey, has been suspended pending the completion of an investigation into unspecified charges, according to the college's president, IRVIN D. REID.
Reid and other college officials refused to discuss the nature of the investigation.


Mashburn Gives $500,000 to School Fund
JAMAL MASHBURN, who was an All-American at Kentucky, said yesterday that he was donating $500,000 to a university scholarship fund.
"I see this as my chance to give something back to the people who have helped me and to help those students who may not otherwise get a chance," Mashburn said during a news conference following the U.K.
Athletics Association meeting in Lexington.


Jury Duty Is Exactly That -- a Duty
In New York State, foot doctors are exempted by law from state juries.
So are embalmers, police, optometrists, lawyers and practitioners in more than a dozen other lines of work.
Such a long list makes it hard for courts to line up all the jurors they need at a given time.
That's wrong.
The list should be repealed.
The under-representation of minorities in jury pools is also wrong.
That happens because prospective jurors' names are taken from three lists that do not represent the whole population: registered voters, licensed drivers and the state's mailing list of taxpayers.
The Constitution guarantees every defendant the right to trial "by an impartial jury," which the courts have interpreted to mean a jury drawn from a cross-section of the community.
The remedy for New York's deficiency is rather simple -- broader lists.


F. Raymond Fosberg, 85, Tropical Plant Expert
Dr.
F.
Raymond Fosberg, an authority on the plants of tropical islands in the Pacific, Western Atlantic and Indian oceans, died on Saturday at his daughter's home in Falls Church, Va.
Dr.
Fosberg was 85 and lived in Reston, Va.
The cause of death was cancer, said his wife, Suzanne Ripley.


James Doolittle, 96, Pioneer Aviator Who Led First Raid on Japan, Dies
James H. Doolittle, an aviation pioneer and a retired lieutenant general in the Air Force who led the daylight air raid on Tokyo and other Japanese cities four months after the Japanese attacked Pearl Harbor, died on Monday at his son's home in Pebble Beach, Calif.
He was 96.
He had suffered a stroke two weeks earlier, the family said.


2 New Jersey Companies Offer Customized Nasdaq Data
On the New Jersey Palisades overlooking Manhattan, two small companies have brought out an innovative product that for the first time allows stockbrokers to get up-to-date, customized reports on each of Nasdaq's more than 4,000 listed companies by telephone.
Stockalert Inc., working with its technology partner, the Turbo Group, both of Guttenberg, N.J., are providing Nasdaq with Brokers Source, which enables brokers to call a toll-free telephone number and request a concise report on the company's finances that is transmitted back to the broker by facsimile machine.


EASTERN COLLEGE REPORT
Syracuse
Boston College is the next opponent, and the Orange coaches know what their counterparts, the Eagle coaches, see when viewing the tapes and preparing a game plan for Saturday's match at the Carrier Dome.


Making the Best of a Second Chance
Perry Klein, who has National Football League scouts calling for directions to the campus of C. W. Post College these days, had just finished studying game film on his next opponent.
"Tough team," said Klein, tugging at the bill of his baseball cap and shaking his head.
"We'll need to be prepared."


Beating Case Lawyer Uses 'Mob Frenzy' Defense
A lawyer for one of two black men accused of beating a white truck driver and other motorists in last year's rioting conceded today that his client may have committed assaults but should be excused because he was caught up in a mob frenzy.
In his closing argument, the lawyer, Earl C. Broady Jr., said his client, Henry Keith Watson, 29, was actually trying to protect the truck driver, Reginald O. Denny, rather than kill him, as prosecutors charge.


California Bonds Well Received
The hunger for yields while interest rates remain low made for a nice deal for California yesterday.
The state, which has yet to put its fiscal problems behind it, sold $800 million in general obligation bonds in a competitive sale won by Merrill Lynch &amp; Company.


The Focus Has Turned To Breeders' Cup Races
The division races in baseball are a lot clearer this week than the division races in horse racing, all of which are up for grabs just six weeks before the last-chance, $10 million Breeders' Cup series.
The seven races of the Breeders' Cup will be staged on Nov. 6 at Santa Anita, and any horse contending for a division championship had better show up and take a shot.
This includes Peteskie, who swept the Triple Crown of Canada but who still must extend his success to the United States to win the championship of the division of 3-year-old colts.


Sol Wachtler Reports to Prison


John Pennel, First Pole-Vaulter To Clear 17 Feet, Is Dead at 53
John Pennel, the wiry, Memphis-born pole-vaulter who set eight world records in the 1960's and was the first man to clear 17 feet, died on Sunday at St.
John's Hospital in Santa Monica, Calif.
He was 53.
A resident of Westlake Village, Calif., he had been suffering from stomach and liver cancer, his family said.


Just Whose Ozone Hole Is It, Anyway?
To the Editor:
In "Not So Fast on the Ozone Layer Celebration" (letters, Sept. 14), Jeffrey Holman states, "two-thirds of all Australians are predicted to get skin cancer during their natural lifetimes because of ozone layer depletion."


Glen Ellen Wines Sold To Heublein
Just as many wine drinkers have grown to recognize the taste and value of Glen Ellen products, so has Heublein Inc., a unit of Grand Metropolitan P.L.C. of Britain.
In a deal announced late yesterday, Heublein agreed to buy the Glen Ellen and M. G. Vallejo brands from the Benziger family.
Neither side would disclose the purchase price nor the terms of the acquisition.


CHRONICLE
GLORIA VANDERBILT has won a $1.5 million judgment against her former psychiatrist and her former lawyer, who is now deceased, The Associated Press reported yesterday.
They were accused of preying on her wealth and emotional fragility.
Justice EDWARD J. GREENFIELD of the State Supreme Court in Manhattan said he agreed with a lawyers' disciplinary committee that concluded in 1992 that Thomas A. Andrews, the lawyer, had misappropriated funds and diverted them to himself and to Dr.
Christ L. Zois, the psychiatrist.


Review/Television; Finally, Mother Knows Best
This television season, if you don't like sitcoms with single parents and their children, preferably three, maybe you should think about those yoga classes you've been putting off for years.
This is glut time at the commercial networks for wisecracking mamas.
Would-be Roseannes litter the electronic universe.
Two of the better new candidates can, as it happens, be found on ABC tonight: "Thea" at 8, and "Grace Under Fire" at 9:30.
Like Roseanne Arnold, the stars in the title roles come from stand-up comedy and the characters they play bear varying degrees of resemblance to their real selves.
The concept is bound to be with us for a while.
Everybody wants to dance to the "Seinfeld" polka.


Bridge
A pair from Brooklyn won the Royal Viking Instant Match Point game last Thursday, after some early scores had been corrected.
Jeanne and Albert Rahmey, playing at Club 100 in Brooklyn, topped the North American field with 73.5 percent in the North-South direction, and a pair from West Chester, Pa., originally thought to have won, fell to fourth.
Another high score in the New York area was 71 percent by Joan Gerard of White Plains, the 1992 president of the American Contract Bridge League, and Bob Klein of Dobbs Ferry, N.Y.
On the diagramed deal most pairs reached three no-trump from the North position and made 10 tricks.
The winners contrived to play from the South position, an improvement, and Jeanne Rahmey took all the match points by making 12 tricks.
She won the opening spade lead with the queen and drove out the club ace.
West persevered with spades and dummy's ace won.


Country Music Boom Has Nashville Dancing
Seven months ago Chas Sandford packed up 29,000 pounds of recording gear and moved his studio from Los Angeles to Nashville.
But it wasn't country music that drew him here.
"Between crime, riots, gangs, earthquakes, and fires, it's like 'Blade Runner' out there," said Mr.
Sandford, comparing Los Angeles to the 1982 film's nightmarish view of urban decay.
"I'd say 25 percent of the people I know have moved and a lot of them have come to Nashville, where you don't see graffiti every time you open your eyes, and you don't hear helicopters over your house all the time."


Lowe Penalized 2 More Games
Kevin Lowe, the veteran defenseman, will miss two more Ranger games after being suspended for three preseason games yesterday by the National Hockey League for a high-sticking incident against Hartford in a game last Saturday night.
Lowe drew a five-minute penalty in the second period after he cut Robert Petrovicky of the Whalers on the chin, drawing blood.
He was suspended for Monday night's game against the Islanders and will sit out tonight's game against Pittsburgh, as well as tomorrow night's game with the Devils.


For CD-ROM Fans, the Shape of Books to Come Is a Disk
In the beginning, there were words.
Then came pictures, cartoons, drawings, photographs, maps, sound, videotapes, movies, musical scores, games, even erotica.
But even that list is only the beginning, say experts in the rapidly expanding world of CD-ROM technology.
Before long, they contend, books and most other forms of printed material will give way to disks, with their enormous capacity for information, presentation and creativity.


Giuliani Disputes Race Role in Campaign
Two days after President Clinton questioned whether many New Yorkers were reluctant to reach across racial lines to re-elect a black mayor, Rudolph W. Giuliani said yesterday that issues related to race were less important to New Yorkers than crime, safety, jobs and education.
Flanked by officers of the Port Authority police union, Mr.
Giuliani, the Republican-Liberal candidate for mayor said that public opinion polls have shown that "race is one of the less significant issues in so far as New Yorkers reporting to us what they regard as the important issues facing their lives.


No Looking Back as Bills Await Giants
It is just a printing accident.
But the page that should have been devoted to Super Bowl XXVII (Dallas's 52-17 victory) is missing from the Buffalo Bills' press guide.
Not that Super Bowls past matter much to Coach Marv Levy anyway.
Forget his master's in English history from Harvard.
He is not a romantic about football and lost opportunities.
There will be no mention -- again -- that the Giants are a past Super Bowl nemesis and happen to be coming to Orchard Park Sunday night.


Eating Well
LISTEN up, all of you cynics who say there is no free lunch.
The Alliance Capital Management Corporation has been providing free lunches since 1986 for the 300 employees at its headquarters in midtown Manhattan.
Free breakfasts and free snacks, too.


U.S. Petroleum Data
In millions of barrels except refinery utilization
Sept 24
Sept 17
Sept 25
1993
1993
1992
Gasoline production, daily
7.8
7.6
7.3
Distillate production, daily
3.2
3.2
2.9
Gasoline stocks
207.6
204.6
208.2
Distillate stocks
129.4
129.1
133.1
Crude imports, daily
6.5
6.3
6.3
Product imports, daily
1.9
1.6
1.7
Crude stocks
327.5
339.0
322.8
Crude production, daily
6.8
6.8
7.0
Refinery utilization (%)
93.3
93.2
89.5
Source: American Petroleum Institute


Accounts
*
Home Base, Fullerton, Calif., narrowed the review on its estimated $15 million to $20 million broadcast creative account, previously at the Colby Agency, Los Angeles, to four California-based agencies from 18.
The finalists are Cohen/Johnson, Los Angeles; Kresser/Craig, Santa Monica; Lord, Dentsu &amp; Partners, Los Angeles, and Suissa Miller Advertising, Santa Monica.
The home improvement warehouse retail chain expects to make a decision late next month.


Boston Globe Sale to Times Co. Is Approved
At separate meetings in New York and Boston, shareholders of both The New York Times Company and Affiliated Publications Inc., which owns The Boston Globe, approved the $1 billion merger of the two companies yesterday.
The merger will make The Globe, the dominant newspaper in New England, the largest property of the Times Company after The New York Times.
The merger is to be completed on Friday.


Outside Post, Strikers Walk and Hope - Again
Three grim-faced men -- the top editors of The New York Post -- stepped out of the South Street entrance to the Post building at mid-afternoon yesterday and strode past a line of picketers, barely exchanging words with the men and women with whom they had worked and struggled so hard for so long to keep their paper publishing.
Once down the block, the editor, Ken Chandler, said, "It's over" -- that the paper would not publish again.


Texas Executes Inmate for Woman's Murder
An inmate was executed by lethal injection early today for the murder of a college instructor who was clubbed with a brick, raped and then run over with her own car.
The inmate, Antonio Bonham, 33, went to his death after asking the Texas Board of Pardons and Paroles and Gov.
Ann W. Richards to commute his sentence to life without parole.
He had no final statement.


Decision Near on Mercedes Site
Mercedes-Benz may finally indicate on Wednesday where it will build its first assembly plant in North America.
In keeping with the secretive air that has surrounded the five-month search for a site, the indication will come in the form of a Mercedes announcement as to where journalists should show up on Thursday for the official designation of the site.
It is presumed that Mercedes will not send journalists to Omaha to announce it is building a plant in North Carolina.
Not that Mercedes has decided to build its plant in North Carolina -- the company squelched that rumor last week.
But it did not rule out building its plant there, either.


HEVESI WINS EASILY AGAINST HOLTZMAN IN PRIMARY RUNOFF
Assemblyman Alan G. Hevesi of Queens defeated Elizabeth Holtzman by 2 to 1 in the runoff for the Democratic nomination for New York City Comptroller last night, blocking her bid for re-election after 21 years in public life and setting the stage for a November contest against former Representative Herman Badillo.
Just over 10 percent of the city's 2.28 million registered Democrats turned out in an election with no other races on the ballot, and Mr.
Hevesi racked up big margins throughout the city.
Ms.
Holtzman ran close only in black and Hispanic areas in the Bronx and won decisively only in the black neighborhoods in Brooklyn and Harlem that have long been her strongholds and where turnout was lighter.


City Loses Appeal On Building Garage
In a case that is the first serious test of a New York City law requiring a fair distribution of unwanted public works, an appellate court has ruled against the city on a $35 million municipal garage and filling station that is under construction on the Lower East Side waterfront.
But the finding by the Appellate Division of State Supreme Court, like an earlier ruling by a State Supreme Court justice, did not interrupt work on the project on Piers 35 and 36, which is more than halfway to completion.
A court order to stop construction was to take effect yesterday, but the city voided the order by notifying opponents of the project that it would try to take the case to the State Court of Appeals, New York's highest court.


The Marking of a President: First You Have to Buy His Book


Again, It's Kasparov the Escape Artist
That Gary Kasparov survived everything Nigel Short threw at him in Game 10 of their world championship match yesterday in London is hard to believe.
The pressure that the Englishman developed with a passed pawn on the seventh rank was so great that nothing should have been able to withstand it.
But wiggling and twisting and working to dredge every last trap out of his awful situation, Kasparov brought the game to a draw and retained his five-point lead, with the score now Kasparov 7 1/2, Short 2 1/2.
The Russian needs five more points to win the $1.43 million prize.
And if he is going to continue with wizardry such as he showed in this game, he may not even lose a single game.


A Curb on Imported Tobacco Aids Farms and Philip Morris
Faced with the likelihood that taxes on cigarettes will soar as part of the Clinton Administration's health care plan, two leading tobacco state lawmakers, worried about declining sales, rolled a little-noticed provision into the Federal budget bill that gives American tobacco farmers -- and the nation's biggest cigarette maker -- a big lift.
In the final, harried days of legislative deal-making over the budget, Senator Wendell H. Ford of Kentucky and Representative Charles Rose of North Carolina, both Democrats from major tobacco growing states, pushed through a regulation that American-made cigarettes must contain at least 75 percent American-grown tobacco.
That is more than twice the amount now used in some cigarettes.


Witnesses Tell Of Cover-Up In Police Graft
Witnesses drawn from the ranks of police corruption investigators yesterday recalled how they painfully discovered what they depicted as an unwritten policy in New York City's Police Department that discouraged major corruption inquiries from 1986 to 1991.
The witnesses were called by a mayoral commission on the second day of its hearings into police corruption.
While the witnesses did not name any specific police supervisor who stymied corruption inquiries, the sum of their testimony seemed to be intended to paint a portrait of a culture that sidestepped inquiries that had the potential for large-scale roundups that would embarrass the department and ruin careers.


Russians See Democracy by Decree
Yuri E. Lodkin, elected governor of this western Russian region by 53 percent of the vote last April, was on his way back from Moscow on Saturday when he heard on the radio that he had been dismissed by President Boris N. Yeltsin.
By the time he reached the local government building, his copy of Presidential Decree No. 1453, sent by fax, was so fresh it was still warm.
Mr.
Lodkin, a former journalist and a die-hard Communist, earned Mr.
Yeltsin's wrath by opposing decree No. 1400, the Sept. 21 edict that summarily disbanded the Russian Parliament.
Such treachery from a governor, even an elected one, was enough to force Mr.
Lodkin not only out of his job, but out of his office.
In a pre-dawn raid Sunday, local police, acting on orders from Moscow, occupied the government building.
Bryansk's new Governor, Vladimir A. Karpov, followed with a decree barring Mr.
Lodkin from even entering the building.


White House Defends Brown in Jury Inquiry
A day after Commerce Secretary Ronald H. Brown acknowledged for the first time that he had met three times with a Vietnamese businessman whose dealings are under scrutiny by a Federal grand jury, the White House was forced to defend the Cabinet member and a House Republican demanded a Congressional investigation.
An account of Mr.
Brown's meetings was provided by Reid Weingarten, the Secretary's lawyer, who said on Monday that Mr.
Brown's discussions with Nguyen Van Hao, a businessman and former Vietnamese official, were "incidental and innocuous." Mr.
Weingarten denied that Mr.
Brown engaged in any wrongdoing.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  American League
BALTIMORE ORIOLES -- Purchased the contract of Mike Cook, pitcher, from Rochester of the International League.
Placed Jerry Hammonds, outfielder, on the 15-day disabled list.


Cartooning Is All Set To Go Live
With a voice like Deputy Sheriff Barney Fife after five cups of coffee, a new cartoon character is the latest union of high technology and Hollywood.
The Cartoon Network, a cable television channel offered by Turner Broadcasting System, plans to introduce in November what it calls the first "live animation" cartoon.
In contrast to, say, Bugs Bunny, who is painstakingly drawn in advance, a live animation character can move freely and banter with people in "real time."


Theater in Review
Oedipus the King  Pearl Theater Company 125 West 22d Street Chelsea Through Oct. 23
By Sophocles; translated by Stephen Berg and Diskin Clay; directed by Ted Davis; stage manager, Sandra M. Bloom; set by Robert Joel Schwartz; lighting by Stephen Petrilli; costumes by Deborah Rooney; movement by Alice Teirstein; assistant stage managers, Polina Grinbaum and Daniel J. Kells.
Presented by the Pearl Theater Company.
WITH: Robert Hock, Sean Pratt, Margo Skinner and Timothy Wheeler.


Makaza Kumanyika, 60, Leader Of Civil Rights Protests in 1960's
Makaza Kumanyika, a civil rights leader in New York City in the 1960's when his name was Herbert Callender, died on Sept. 22 at his home in East Orange, N. J. He was 60.
The cause of death was cancer, his family said.


Corrections
The obituary of Lieut.
Gen.
James H. Doolittle in late editions yesterday misidentified his college.
He was at the University of California at Berkeley when the United States entered World War I; the University of California at Los Angeles did not exist then.
The obituary also misstated the history of the Richtofen Flying Circus, the squadron of German pilots that plagued the Allies.
It fought in World War I, not World War II.
A picture caption with the obituary misstated the year the general accepted the Medal of Honor from President Franklin D. Roosevelt.
It was 1942, not 1945.
The obituary is reprinted today on page B9 for readers who did not receive it.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Teh Big Three in batteries start up new campaigns
AMERICA'S three leading battery marketers are about to bombard consumers with a record $90 million advertising assault.
Duracell, Eveready and Rayovac, which together control about 92 percent of the nation's estimated $3 billion battery market, are all undertaking major new campaigns.
Two of them, for Duracell and Eveready's Energizer line, represent significant departures from long-running, and successful, strategic themes.


Michigan Senator in Savings Scandal Will Retire
Wounded by his involvement in a savings-and-loan scandal, Senator Donald W. Riegle Jr., chairman of the Senate Banking Committee, announced today that he would retire next year rather than seek a fourth term.
The Michigan Democrat, who had $1 million on hand for his re-election campaign, was one of five Senators accused of performing favors for Charles H. Keating, a major political contributor who owned Lincoln Savings and Loan.


Corrections
A picture caption yesterday with an article about the opinions of doctors about the Clinton health plan misspelled the name of a nurse shown talking to Dr.
Christopher Puca.
She is Carol Lau, clinical manager of the group practice for which Dr.
Puca works, not Tara Lau.


GEORGIAN LEADER CHARGES ATROCITY
The Georgian leader today accused rebel forces of carrying out atrocities in the capture of a provincial capital and pledged that Georgian forces would retake the city, even if it took a generation.
"This loss of Sukhumi is a great moral and political blow," the leader, Eduard A. Shevardnadze, told a news conference here.
"I say this for today because tomorrow we must get Sukhumi back. If this generation is unable to do so, the next generation will do it anyway."


Vague Mexico Wage Pledge Clouds Free Trade Accord
As they try to make the case for Congressional approval of a free trade agreement with Mexico and Canada, President Clinton and other supporters repeatedly say the pact will raise minimum wages in Mexico and reduce the country's ability to undercut businesses north of the border with cheap labor.
But by focusing on how minimum wages might rise, the Clinton Administration has put itself in a somewhat awkward position because that particular pledge is not found anywhere in the 2,000-page North American Free Trade Agreement it is meant to support.
Nor is it in the special side agreements to the pact, or in Mexican labor law.
A Promise by Salinas
Rather it is a personal promise made by President Carlos Salinas de Gortari of Mexico that this country's minimum wage -- which can go as low as $4 a day, depending on the type of work -- will be increased in tandem with increases in worker productivity.


Health Reform Must Treat Women Fairly
To the Editor:
A stated purpose of the Clinton Administration's health care reform is to improve coverage of preventive and primary care services, particularly for women and children.
Yet the coverage of women will be seriously undermined if an area of medicine that is fundamental to their health needs -- obstetrics and gynecology -- is excluded from the definition of primary care.


How Demand Surged for Prostate Test
DR.
JOSEPH E. OESTERLING, a urologist at the Mayo Clinic in Rochester, Minn., recently polled practicing doctors in his state to ask whether they were using a widely promoted screening test for prostate cancer.
Ninety-two percent said they routinely used it on men over 50.
But the blood test, which costs $50 to $80 per patient, has not yet been approved by the Food and Drug Administration as a screening test and no data yet exist to show that it has an effect on long-term medical outcome.


Rabin and King Hussein Reported to Meet Secretly
Did Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin of Israel meet clandestinely with King Hussein of Jordan on the Gulf of Aqaba on Sunday night?
Mr.
Rabin says no, and so do palace officials in the Jordanian capital of Amman.
But most major Israeli newspapers today reported the meeting as a fact -- even if they could not quite agree on the exact location -- and official spokesmen for the Prime Minister were less than ironclad in their denials, saying that he had spent Sunday night taking part in an unspecified "security exercise."


Personal Health; Early action is crucial in combating heart failure.
SWOLLEN feet and ankles, shortness of breath, palpitations, weakness, fatigue, disrupted sleep.
Most people have had one or more of these symptoms from time to time.
But for three million to four million Americans with heart failure, such symptoms are a way of life.
Unfortunately, for far too many they are also a way of death.
Heart failure is the leading cause of hospitalization among Americans over 65, and as people live longer, more and more will require costly care.
The ailment claims up to 400,000 lives a year, with the majority of deaths occurring in people under 65.
Some young people with underlying heart problems, like the basketball star Hank Gathers, also succumb to heart failure.


Hillary Clinton, on Capitol Hill, Wins Raves, if Not a Health Plan
Hillary Rodham Clinton invited Congress to join her and President Clinton to "give the American people the health security they deserve" as she captivated and dominated two usually grumpy House committees today.
She spent the morning and afternoon paying lawmakers compliments, patiently praising the occasional hostile representative for raising a good question.
Sharp questions from potential allies evoked solicitous answers; only the most unreachable opponents drew a hint of irritation.


INSIDE
Firm in S.&amp; L. Settlement
Paul, Weiss, Rifkind, Wharton &amp; Garrison reached a $45 million settlement with regulators over its role in a savings-and-loan failure.
Page D1.
Michigan Senator to Retire
Wounded by a savings-and-loan scandal, Senator Donald W. Riegle Jr., Democrat of Michigan, said he would not run again next year.
Page A16.
Shielding the Force's Image
Witnesses at a hearing into police corruption in New York City testified they were dissuaded from major inquiries into misconduct.
Page B1.
Bombing Trial Jury Selected
A jury of eight women and four men, all of them Christian, was picked to try four Muslims charged in the World Trade Center blast.
Page B3.
Court to Weigh Cable Law
The Supreme Court agreed to hear a case that may determine the status of cable television under the First Amendment.
Page A17.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-13  YELTSIN PRESSES LEGISLATORS  President Yeltsin of Russia tightened the cordon around the headquarters of the hostile legislature, deploying troops and water trucks.
The police gave those inside 24 hours to turn in their guns.
A1  ECHOES OF THE FIGHT IN MOSCOW  A drama being played out in a western Russian city is an example of how the political battle in Moscow is being replayed throughout much of Russia.
The issue is not only who will run the country, but how.
A12


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt  *
Breckenridge, Minn., is offering $27.1 million of tax-exempt health center revenue bonds through underwriters led by Paine Webber Inc.
The bonds, for a Catholic Health Corp. project, were initially priced to yield from 2.90 percent in 1994 to 5 percent in 2000 and rated A-1 by Moody's Investors Service and A+ by Standard &amp; Poor's Corp.


Bosnians Seem Likely to Demand Peace Plan Changes
The Bosnian Parliament met today to consider a peace plan for ending the 18-month-old war that has laid much of this former Yugoslav republic to waste.
But the mood among the mostly Muslim delegates appeared to be leaning toward sending the plan back to its international negotiators with demands for critical changes.
In a vote expected on Wednesday, more than 300 delegates appeared likely to endorse the plan in principle but to attach conditions that would be virtually certain to be rejected by the Serbian and Croatian nationalists, who are the other parties to the war.
These conditions seem likely to include a demand for more land and binding international guarantees that the plan would be carried out.


Book Notes
Everyone Loves a Mystery
Until now at least, the public's appetite for legal thrillers has seemed almost bottomless, judging by the very familiar successes of both John Grisham (who has more than 30 million copies of his books in print in the United States) and Scott Turow (14.5 million copies).
But with a new crop of such books by lesser-known authors blanketing the stores this season, the question for publishers who have loaded up their fall lists with them is whether the genre is beginning to play itself out.
Not at all, said Robert Wietrak, a director of merchandising for Barnes &amp; Noble.
"When a phenomenon like this happens, the reader has a voracious appetite for more," Mr.
Wietrak said.
"Once this has taken off, the customer goes into our stores and looks specifically for them, so similar titles and similar covers are a plus."


Don't Let Rabies Scare Cause a Fear of Animals; Overmanaged Wildlife
To the Editor:
You report that New Jersey had a special September hunting season for Canada geese because their droppings interfered with human use of certain areas (news article, Sept. 11).
Your article is especially informative because you point out the probable cause of the problem: accidental escapes from game farms and deliberate release by state wildlife management officials to provide better hunting opportunities.
The same problem arose in the Vancouver area after wildlife officials there released geese.


The Pop Life
Mel Torme's Lament
As Mel Torme sees it, the best period for American popular music was the big-band era, and it's been downhill ever since.
"The songwriters then -- the Johnny Mercers, the Jerome Kerns, the Irving Berlins, the Frank Loessers -- all raised the art of songwriting to a very, very high plateau," Mr.
Torme, who is considered a consummate pop-jazz vocal technician, said in an interview on Monday.
"It's fallen considerably since then."


U.N. Asked to Use U.S. Troops Only in Emergency
The United States has told the United Nations that it wants the 1,300 American combat troops in Somalia used only for emergency operations and not for routine patrols that other United Nations troops are capable of carrying out, senior Administration and United Nations officials said today.
The Clinton Administration also repeated its intention to move the American combat troops, known as the Quick Reaction Force, from Somalia onto ships offshore "as soon as possible," the officials added.


Return Of Booty Protested In France
It seemed like a reasonable exchange.
After France won a multi-billion-dollar contract to supply its high-speed train to South Korea, President Francois Mitterrand this month made the good-will gesture of returning a 19th-century Korean manuscript seized by French troops in 1866.
For the guardians of France's national treasures, however, the President's gift was neither reasonable nor legal.
The country's museums and cultural institutions may be weighed down by the booty of imperial wars and conquests but, by law, these paintings, sculptures and documents are now French.


Wine Talk
STANDING on the quay in front of the Sandeman port cellars on a warm morning in early autumn, it's difficult to believe that the wine made here owes its fame, probabably its existence, to bitter national rivalries and bloody wars.
Port wine takes its name from Oporto, Portugal's second-largest city, after Lisbon, and a major Atlantic port at the mouth of the Douro River.
But port wine has always been made here, just across the river from the ochre walls, red tile roofs and slate-colored steeples of Oporto itself.


Don't Let Rabies Scare Cause a Fear of Animals
To the Editor:
"In Rabies Spread, Veterinarians Put Profits Before Public Safety" by Carl Semenic (letter, Sept. 16) makes a valid point, but certain distortions add to an unnecessary and counterproductive fear of all animals.


Paul, Weiss Law Firm to Pay U.S. $45 Million
Federal regulators said today that they had reached a $45 million settlement with the New York law firm of Paul, Weiss, Rifkind, Wharton &amp; Garrison involving its role in junk bond investments that helped bankrupt the Centrust Savings Bank of Miami, a failure that cost taxpayers more than $1.5 billion.
The settlement with the Resolution Trust Corporation is one of the largest the agency has reached with a law firm in its attempt to recover from professional advisers to savings and loans some of the costs of taking over failed institutions.


Topics of The Times; Needed: School Volunteers
This year's delayed opening of New York City schools means extra work for administrators, teachers and students.
They could use some help.
Fortunately, the New York City School Volunteer Program is already helping.
The program matches needy students with tutors in reading, math and English as a second language.
The need for bilingual tutors is especially acute since immigration has caused net school enrollment to swell by 55,000 each year since 1990.
Last year, nearly 6,700 volunteers provided more than 590,000 hours of instruction to more than 83,000 students.
By 1995 the program hopes to enlist 7,500 tutors to serve up to 100,000 students annually.
In addition to tutoring in school, volunteers accompany students on trips to museums and other cultural institutions.
These activities help develop special relationships that, in turn, boost student confidence.


Mr. Clinton's U.N. Reality Test
President Clinton raised most of the right questions about peacekeeping in his speech Monday at the United Nations.
If he offered too few hints about his own intentions, that's understandable.
Stuck with an unpopular (and inherited) operation in Somalia, and still groping with the foggy complexities in Bosnia, Mr.
Clinton is hardly the only American who is wary about ever-expanding peacekeeping operations.
Just six years ago, he reminded the General Assembly, there were only 10,000 peacekeepers.
That force has now grown to an overstretched blue-helmeted army of 80,000, deployed in 17 operations on four continents.
Few would dispute Mr.
Clinton's cautionary conclusion: "If the American people are to say yes to U.N. peacekeeping, the U.N. must know when to say no."


Hunting Corruption at a Barbecue
Excerpts from testimony to the Mollen Commission by Detective Alexander Ferrugia about allegations of corruption among officers in the Ninth Precinct that were turned up by the police Internal Affairs Division and Field Internal Affairs Unit.
Q. What type of police corruption was most prevalent?


First Lady Takes Stage, Ending Era on the Hill
Tim Crippen, a member of the House Ways and Means Committee staff, stood in the deserted hearing room, peering at the two mugs in his hand.
"This one has a better lipstick print on it," he said, holding one up and grinning.
"Maybe I'll auction it off."


G.O.P. Scorches Democrats Over Rising Cable Charges
In what could emerge as an unexpected embarrassment for Democrats, Republican members of Congress are now trying to bludgeon them over soaring cable television prices.
Amid a chorus of gleeful I-told-you-so's, Republican lawmakers accused their rivals today of causing higher cable rates through the very law that Democrats pushed through last year to bring rates down.
The F.C.C. rules mandated by the law went into effect Sept.1.


Even 'Futility' Doesn't Do Falcons Justice
Sighted in the Georgia Dome on Monday night were Fred McGriff, Terry Pendleton, Deion Sanders and Brian Hunter.
The crowd of 65,477 got into the lopsided game by offering their fabled Tomahawk Chop along with the eerie chant to match.
Yes, these Atlanta Braves were about to . . .
Sorry. Wrong sport. Wrong team.
But who could blame the fans for wishing?


Now Hevesi and Badillo Turn to Face Each Other
For six months, Alan G. Hevesi and Herman Badillo were undeclared allies in a battle against a common foe, New York City Comptroller Elizabeth Holtzman, taking turns assailing her integrity and professionalism like tag-team partners in a political wrestling match.
But today, they become rivals in what is likely to be a far different and less rancorous battle than the one they waged together against Ms.
Holtzman.
Yesterday, Mr.
Hevesi defeated Ms.
Holtzman in a runoff for the Democratic nomination for comptroller and will now go toe-to-toe against Mr.
Badillo in the general election.


A Struggling Fiat Seeks $3.1 Billion in New Capital
Fiat S.p.A., Italy's unprofitable unprofitable automotive and industrial giant, announced plans today for a $3.1 billion recapitalization and said Gianni Agnelli, its longtime chairman, would postpone his planned retirement from the company for at least two years.
A company statement did not explain Mr.
Agnelli's decision to delay his scheduled retirement next year that would have placed his younger brother, Umberto, at the top of the family-controlled company, Italy's largest private enterprise.
But analysts interpreted it as a sign of the severity of the corporation's mounting financial troubles.


Teacher Is Offering to Guide Minority Students to College
As Johnathan Cuevas neared the end of senior year last spring at Chelsea High School in Manhattan, he turned to the only person who would or could help him with college plans: his English teacher, Robert Mitchell.
"He was really there to help me," said Mr.
Cuevas, now a 17-year-old freshman at DePauw University in Green Castle, Ind.
"He looked over my essays, he helped me with the application form and he helped me with the financial aid. I couldn't have done this without Mr. Mitchell."


Deal Reached In Westchester Housing Suit
Almost 1,000 poor black and Hispanic families will be offered apartments in predominantly white middle-class areas of Westchester County under a settlement of a lawsuit reached today in Federal court in Manhattan.
In its impact on integration, the settlement could be more far-reaching than the separate Yonkers desegregation case because the plaintiffs will be dispersed throughout the 450-square-mile county, not just in white areas of Yonkers.
Nationally, only suburban areas outside Chicago, Memphis and Cincinnati have been involved in housing integration plans of this scope, lawyers said.


Mora Is One Saint Whose Head Isn't in Clouds
No sooner had he pulled his cab out of the parking lot of the Saints' training facility than George Binet started recounting bits of New Orleans Saints lore.
He began with long forgotten names: "Billy Kilmer, you remember him don't you?" he asked.
"And that boy, Tom Fears, he was the first coach. Big Doug Atkins, think he's a prison guard somewhere up in Tennessee."


CHRONICLE
When SANDY PITTMAN, an inveterate mountain climber, suggested several months ago to MARTHA STEWART that they meet on top of Mount Kilimanjaro in Tanzania on Sept. 24, Ms.
Stewart thought it a dandy idea.
She listed the event in a calendar of her activities that she publishes in her magazine, Martha Stewart Living, amid such other notations as "Put up bread and butter pickles" and " 'Today Show' appearance," and began to prepare for her ascent of the highest mountain in Africa, which rises 19,340 feet.


Andrew Tully, 78, Author, Columnist And War Reporter
Andrew F. Tully Jr., an author who was one of the first American reporters to enter conquered Berlin in April 1945, died on Monday in a nursing home in Silver Spring, Md.
He was 78 and lived in Washington.
The cause was complications from Alzheimer's disease, said his wife, Molly.


Diet Sabotage: The New Battle Of the Sexes
EVE may have tempted with an apple, but to hear dieting women tell the tale, the sons of Adam have a larder of even more irresistible enticements.
"My husband uses ice cream, fudge cake, Toblerone bars and those buttery chocolate-chunk cookies," said a 37-year-old advertising executive in Manhattan who spoke at a Weight Watchers meeting last week.
"If he were going to tempt me with an apple, you bet it's going to be caramel-covered."


IN THE STUDIO WITH: Don Imus; It's a Hideous Life, And You Get to Hear All About It
ON a recent morning at 5:45, Don Imus trudges slowly down the hallway of WFAN-AM, the all-sports radio station, toward his dimly lit basement studio like a man headed to a day of torture.
His arms are full with a briefcase and a stack of newspapers.
Pain from lung surgery on Sept. 3 has sapped the 53-year-old hellion's bilious, irascible wit and energy.
Relief from Percoset, a painkiller, has not yet arrived.
After settling in and uttering his first words on "Imus in the Morning," his talk show, shortly after 6, Mr.
Imus tells Charles McCord, his newsman for 21 years: "I walked four miles along the water on the Belt Parkway yesterday, underneath the Verrazano Bridge. I wanted to see if I could jog."


Post Teeters on Brink as Murdoch Insists He Is Abandoning Purchase
The New York Post teetered on the edge of extinction once again yesterday, failing to publish for a second day as its erstwhile savior, Rupert Murdoch, stood by his decision to pull out of an agreement to buy the rambunctious tabloid.
The shutdown of the newspaper was precipitated when the Newspaper Guild went on strike on Monday night and the production workers refused to cross the guild's picket line despite the pledge of their leaders not to support a strike.
The support for the guild was a surprising development given the history of disunity among the newspaper unions in New York City.
Decision Called Final
The production unions met yesterday and appealed to the Newspaper Guild to go back to work and to Mr.
Murdoch to reopen the newspaper, but by last night, with the presses eerily silent, the newspaper failed to publish this morning's paper.


Rice, Too, Plays a Role In Absorbing Calcium
To the Editor;
In "What Is Your Body's Best Source of Calcium?" (letter, Sept. 11), Annette Dickinson reminds readers of a partial truth: that the calcium in spinach is not as easily absorbed as milk when eaten alone.


Accord on Broadway
A tentative agreement between Broadway producers and Local 802 of the American Federation of Musicians was announced yesterday, ending, for the moment, the threat of a strike that could have closed nine Broadway musicals and kept 11 more from arriving this season.
The agreement, subject to the approval of the executive board of the union and ratification by its members, is said to involve some reduction in the number of musicians that producers are required to hire for Broadway shows.
The agreement came after a four-hour meeting in the offices of the League of American Theaters and Producers.


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY  HEVESI WINS RUNOFF AGAINST HOLTZMAN
Assemblyman Alan G. Hevesi of Queens defeated Elizabeth Holtzman by 2 to 1 in the runoff for the Democratic nomination for New York City comptroller last night, blocking her bid for re-election after 21 years in public life and setting the stage for a November contest against former Representative Herman Badillo.
A1.
In a somber and somewhat idiosyncratic end to a long and sometimes brilliant career, Holtzman conceded defeat.
B4.
For six months, Hevesi and Badillo were undeclared allies in a fight against a common foe.
B4.
AT THE POST, A TERMINAL IMPASSE?
The New York Post, the newspaper that seems to make almost as much news as it prints, was not on newsstands, as members of the newspaper's crafts unions declined to cross the picket line of the union that represents newsroom and advertising employees.
In response, the paper's provisional owner, Rupert Murdoch, said he would not complete purchase of the tabloid.
A1.
Outside The Post building, two views. B3. GOOD OFFICERS PAY THE PRICE
Police officers' feelings of loss of public trust, coupled in many cases with shame and embarrassment on the part of many officers, leads some authorities to believe that many police officers will be in for a psychological jolt as a result of Mollen Commission testimony.
B2.
Excerpts from testimony before the Mollen Commission. B2. JURY SEATED IN BOMBING TRIAL
A racially balanced jury of eight women and four men, all of them Christian, was selected to try four Muslims charged with the deadly bombing of the World Trade Center last February.
B3.
RACE IS NOT THE ISSUE, SAYS GIULIANI
Two days after President Clinton questioned whether many New Yorkers were reluctant to reach across racial lines to re-elect a black mayor, Rudolph W. Giuliani said that issues related to race were less important to New Yorkers than crime, safety, jobs and education.
B5.
RECYCLING IS REPORTEDLY INCREASING
The quantities of trash that New York City collects for recycling are way up, in part because more neighborhoods are in the program, a Department of Sanitation report declares.
B3.
REGION  WHITMAN TOLD TO ATTACK
Top advisers to Christine Todd Whitman said the Republican gubernatorial candidate needed to shift her campaign strategy to an all-out attack on Gov.
Jim Florio in response to a poll showing the New Jersey Governor with an unexpectedly large lead.
B6.
DISTRICT ATTORNEY SAYS HE HAD CANCER
The Nassau County District Attorney, Denis Dillon, who is seeking re-election to a sixth term, said he had cancer last year and that he successfully underwent radiation treatments.
B6.
TROOPER ACQUITTED OF EVIDENCE FAKING
A jury acquitted a New York State police investigator of tampering with evidence in an armed robbery, a blow to prosecutors who had won three guilty pleas in the year-old scandal.
B6.
Chronicle B2
About New York by Michael T. Kaufman B3


Pact Allows Return of 1,500 Cuban Inmates
The Justice Department said today that about 1,500 Cuban inmates in Federal prisons would be eligible to be sent back to Cuba under a new agreement between the United States and Cuba.
Fearing possible rioting by Cuban prisoners who do not want to be sent back to their homeland, prison administrators today ordered more than 2,500 of the nearly 4,500 Cuban in Federal prisons to be locked in isolated cells so that they could not congregate with other Cuban inmates.


No Headline
"She said to tell you that not since Eleanor Roosevelt has she so admired a woman in public life -- and my mother is not a woman who admires easily." -- REPRESENTATIVE LYNN SCHENK, of California, to Hillary Rodham Clinton.  [ A18:5. ]


Sanitation Dept. Says Recycling Enlists More Tonnage and People
The quantities of trash that New York City collects for recycling are way up, in part because more neighborhoods are in the program and because many households have gotten better at sorting their trash, a Department of Sanitation report declares.
In addition, more materials have been added to the list of what must be separated and set aside for recycling.


COMPANY BRIEFS
COLUMBIA GAS SYSTEM INC., Wilmington, Del., said it would pare 150 of 577 jobs in Wilmington and Marble Cliff, Ohio, in the next three years.


Corrections
A front-page article yesterday about a New York Times/WCBS-TV News poll focusing on the New Jersey election for governor misstated the percentage of registered voters who said the Republican candidate, Christine Todd Whitman, lacked enough experience to govern effectively.
It was 40 percent, not 48.


Court to Hear Case on Cable TV Law
In a case likely to determine the status of cable television under the First Amendment, the Supreme Court today agreed to rule on the constitutionality of a 1992 law requiring cable operators to devote one-third of their channel capacity or more to local broadcast stations.
In a very rare departure, the Court jumped the gun on its new term, which is not scheduled to begin until next Monday, by announcing that it would hear a challenge to the new law filed by the Turner Broadcasting System and other cable providers and operators.
The cable companies are appealing a decision upholding the law issued in April by a special three-judge panel of Federal District Court here.


Books of The Times; A Serious Look at a Humorous Man
Will Rogers
By Ben Yagoda
Illustrated. 409 pages. Alfred A. Knopf. $27.50.
Why is it that certain legends pale after their own time?
Will Rogers is known to many today mostly because of the recent and frivolous Broadway musical.
You could say that a man who claimed he'd never met a man he didn't like deserves no better.
But you could also say, and show, as the journalist and English professor Ben Yagoda ably shows, that a man who managed to get himself liked and listened to by Calvin Coolidge, Dorothy Parker, Franklin D. Roosevelt, Woody Guthrie and H. L. Mencken deserves more sustained analytic attention.


Prudential Discusses Potential Project
The Prudential Insurance Company of America said yesterday that it had held informal talks with direct marketing consultants, direct response agencies and data base companies regarding a potential project for its Prudential Direct unit, which markets financial products like credit cards and home equity loans.
Joe Vecchione, a Prudential spokesman in Newark, disputed a report this week in Frohlinger's Marketing Report newsletter that described the insurance giant as searching for an advertising agency to handle a new $20 million account.
He characterized the discussions as exploratory, adding that Prudential Direct has no agency of record and "it is not the intent at this time to sign up an agency of record."


POWELL RESERVED IN A FINAL SPEECH
In an appearance as filled with political expectations as military musings, Gen.
Colin L. Powell made his last speech as Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff today and called for the United States to maintain leadership in an increasingly confusing world.
"The debates that we're seeing now about unilateralism or multilateralism or isolationism and interventionism and the other 'isms' are somewhat silly and they miss the point," General Powell said in an address to the National Press Club.
"The point is that history and destiny have made America the leader of the world that would be free.  And the world that would be free is looking to us for inspiration."


Meadowlands Grasses Cut to Weave Huts of Succoth
Were it not for the gas-powered hedge trimmers, the view from the New Jersey Turnpike would resemble something from a 16th-century painting.
Waves of foxtail marsh grass stretch on as far as the eye can see.
In a clearing, about 50 young men in black hats, white shirts and black yarmulkes scurry back and forth, many with thick bundles of 10-foot-long reeds slung across their shoulders.
Their shouts ring out above the line of a dozen Bushwhacker motors.


Metropolitan Diary
ELOUISE SLOANE of New Canaan, Conn., was having a birthday lunch with her granddaughter at Lord &amp; Taylor in Stamford, Conn., when she overheard three young women discussing their fingernail woes.
The problem of peeling polish and what could be done about it came up.
"Oh, how I wish I had Westchester nails!" one of them said.
"I'd even settle for Upper West Side nails," another said.
Mrs.
Sloane has been pondering this conversation ever since.
"What are Westchester nails?" she wants to know.
What we want to know is, does this mean that Upper West Side nails are second-rate?
And if so, why?
And what do they look like?
. . .
Further report on picking up money on the street from one of the champs, William Roberts of Manhattan.
He has found $35.50 in the first eight months of the year, including $12 in paper currency and a few foreign coins, which he converts to American from the daily currency listings.
His friends don't approve of his project, he says, but he couldn't care less.
He writes:
"I think that my project has many advantages. It encourages me to do a lot of walking, and I get more exercise each time I bend down to pick up my findings. Furthermore, my pleasure at finding a coin has to be good for my heart.
"There is a bad side to this project also. I have come to disdain those people who drop coins and then have the nerve to pick them up. I recently saw one guy drop a quarter and then retrieve it. This was the low point so far. And I absolutely loathe the wise guys who imbed coins in fresh pavement and wet concrete.
"I have decided to use my findings next year to purchase hot-fudge sundaes. What else? I figure that with all the walking and bending, I will lose weight and will need to put weight on next year.
"Well, I can't spend more time on this; I have to go look for money."
. . .
Fon W. Boardman noted a sign in the window of the Chase Manhattan Bank branch at Fifth Avenue and 14th Street that read, "Talk to one of our small business experts today."
What he wants to know is the maximum height for a small business expert at Chase.
. . .
OCTOBER  Nature opened her cosmetic bag of tricks
and painted the face of the earth.
A tart at heart, she brushed tangerine
shadow below gold brows
flaunted apricot lashes and apple blushes,
let her wine-soaked spirit lick the leaves
veined with cinnamon;
every curve of her cheek danced
with flaming flamboyance.
Only the willow
maidenhaired in green
now tells why it weeps. -- ESTHER C. GROPPER
.. .
Imagine Mel Mandell's surprise when, looking in the Bronx telephone directory for the number of the New York Botanical Garden, he spotted immediately above it a listing for the New York Board of Rabbits.
Mr.
Mandell had no idea that rabbits were that organized and decided to check it out.
With very little detective work he discovered that the Board of Rabbits was really the Board of Rabbis.
And, he added, "to add insult to injury, rabbits are not kosher."


Sylvia A. Boone Memorial
A memorial service will be held on Thursday for Dr.
Sylvia A. Boone at 1 P.M. at the Battell Chapel of Yale University at College and Elm Streets in New Haven.
Her headstone will be dedicated at the Grove Street Cemetery at 3:30 P.M. and there will be a reception at the History of Art Department from 4 to 6 P.M.
Dr.
Boone, a professor of art history and Afro-American studies, was the first black woman to be granted tenure at Yale.
She died on April 29.


District Attorney Tells of Cancer He Fought Last Year
The Nassau County District Attorney, Denis Dillon, who is seeking re-election to a sixth term, said today that he was diagnosed with cancer last year and successfully underwent radiation treatments.
The disease, he said, would not interfere with his duties.
"When I went for radiation, I didn't miss a day of work," Mr.
Dillon told a reporter from WPIX-TV today.
He added, " I'm in very good health, I feel fine."


Viacom Vows to Pursue Paramount
Viacom Inc.'s chairman, Sumner Redstone, reiterated his vow yesterday to continue his fight for Paramount Communications.
"It's a fluid situation, and we'll win," he said in an interview a day after Paramount's board indicated it would consider a rival offer from QVC Network Inc.


Bell Canada to Reduce Its Work Force by 10%
Bell Canada, the largest telecommunications company in Canada, today announced its first big retrenchment in recent years, the result of intensified global competition and the rejection by Canadian regulators of proposed rate increases.
The company, which is based in Montreal and provides telephone and other communications services to 6.5 million business and residential customers in Ontario, Quebec and the eastern Arctic, said it planned to cut its work force by 10 percent, or 5,000 people, in the next few months.


Nets Playing Against Time in Coleman Contract Talks
According to Derrick Coleman's attorney, the Nets' latest contract offer to their star player won't be nearly enough to sign him.
The Nets are trying to sign Coleman to a long-term deal before he exercises his right to become a free agent.
After this season, Coleman can become a restricted free agent, meaning the team would still be able to match an offer from another team.
After two more seasons, he can become an unrestricted free agent.


With Inquiry, Question of Public Trust
A little more than seven years ago, when he was still a fledgling officer, Todd Jamison found himself surrounded by a police scandal that he had nothing to do with, but that turned his life miserable nonetheless.
His precinct, the 77th in central Brooklyn, was rocked by what was then the largest eruption of police corruption since the Knapp Commission was convened in the early 1970's, and as he recalled yesterday, "It was like hell working there."
There were abrupt mass transfers of personnel, but, if anything, what was even more personally devastating was the experience of going out on calls and continually running into "people calling us drug dealers."


Washington Making Most of Crunch Time
Jets strong safety Brian Washington has always thought of himself as a hard hitter.
However, it's only now, with the addition of the unrestricted free agent Ronnie Lott, a veteran free safety who hits like a sledgehammer, that people are beginning to notice just how much of a wallop Washington and the other members of the team's secondary is packing.
Washington knew the unit's visibility would increase once Lott signed with the team, and he wants to take advantage.


Hospitals, Hoping for Simplicity, Generally Welcome President's Proposals
To find the heart of Huntington Memorial Hospital today, go upstairs from the gleaming efficient emergency room, past the pharmacy and around the corridor to the business office.
There, in cramped cubicles, 75 workers push the mountains of paper that are today more a part of hospital care than surgical gloves.
Two of them do nothing but copy medical records all day for insurance companies.
Others dun insurers and patients for payment in the hospital's ceaseless battle against red ink -- $10 million in losses last year alone because of indigent and uninsured patients.


Topics of The Times; The Annals of Dessert
The woman can do anything.
We speak with due reverence of the First Lady of the last remaining superpower.
It would be enough if she simply revolutionized health care and issued the occasional inspirational paean to the Politics of Meaning.
Yet who would have thought Hillary Rodham Clinton would also become the champion maker of chocolate chip cookies, finishing ahead of such competitors as Mrs.
Fields and Famous Amos?
Actually, it was cookies made with Mrs.
Clinton's recipe that got this acclaim, not cookies made with her own hands.
Still, it is reassuring to know that the woman who said "I could have stayed home and baked cookies" wasn't putting down homemakers so much as issuing a competitive threat to the American baking industry.


Dropping Dimes With Aid of Lasers; On Rikers Island, New Technology for Calls to the Outside
Life on Cell Block 6A of Rikers Island's Vierno Inmate Center was looking up a bit yesterday, what with the news on the block television set that the state's former chief judge was beginning his own Federal cell time and that a rogue officer was mesmerizing New York City with tales of the involvement of crooked police officers in drug racketeering.
Even better, telephone thugs were unable to monopolize the jailhouse phones and cause fights, because the city's prison population has entered a brave new world of laser charge cards.
Beginning this spring, 3,500 phone identification cards have been given to inmates and detainees, replacing the old Dickensian ledger system with a more equitable, automated way for prisoners to call lawyers and family, with fewer fistfights and claims of injustice.


Washington Joins Big 3 Auto Venture
The White House and the Big Three auto companies will announce today a radical new approach to car technology and Government-industry relations, under which Washington will give Detroit technology that originated in weapons programs, and Detroit will strive to build a car that goes three times farther than current models on the same amount of fuel.
Washington is already working with the auto makers on various technologies, but the new agreement, to be announced at a White House ceremony with President Clinton, Vice President Al Gore and the chief executives of General Motors, Ford and Chrysler, will set a unifying 10-year goal: very high fuel economy that far exceeds the regulatory requirements.  'Rewriting the Book'
"We think it's an enormous breakthrough," Mr.
Gore said of the partnership in a telephone interview last night.
"The goal has been consciously set at a point that lies beyond what we know how to do with current systems."


Seymour J. Wenner, 80, Lawyer Who Served on U.S. Commissions
Seymour J. Wenner, an expert in Federal administrative law and a former administrative judge for the Federal Power Commission and the Postal Rate Commission, died on Monday at the Manor Care Nursing Center in Silver Spring, Md.
He was 80 and lived in Chevy Chase, Md.
The cause was complications of cancer, his family said.


Biospherics
The four men and four women who lived in a huge greenhouse known as Biosphere 2 for two years finally emerged last weekend with a stronger claim to fame as a tourist attraction than as contributors to scientific knowledge.
The vaguely defined goal of the $150 million experiment in Arizona, bankrolled by the Texas oil billionaire Edward Perry Bass, was to learn more about the earth's ecology and about how to establish self-sufficient colonies in space.
The participants were to live almost wholly independent of the real world, breathing recycled air, drinking recycled water and growing their own food.
Some half-million visitors to the project paid $12.95 apiece to watch them.


Full-Time Job for Former College Star
ALEXI LALAS signed a contract yesterday that will keep him training full time with the United States national team through the World Cup next July.
Lalas, the 1991 college player of the year at Rutgers, joined the United States team in January.
He has been under a part-time contract as a defender-midfielder. (AP)


Misfortunes of Others May Help Enrich Mets
Revenues will crumble for some baseball clubs in 1994, and the Mets are more than eager to plunder the ruins for their own riches.
General Manager Joe McIlvaine of the Mets, who had to oversee part of the dollar-driven demolition of the Padres earlier this season as the San Diego general manager, is convinced more than a dozen clubs could be forced to consider painful trades as a way of radically reconstructing their payrolls next season.


Navratilova May Quit Singles in '94
MARTINA NAVRATILOVA, in town today to promote the Virginia Slims Championships at Madison Square Garden in November, is expected to announce that 1994 will be her final year of playing competitive singles.
Currently ranked No. 3 in the world, Navratilova is playing in her 21st year on the professional circuit.
Sixteen singles players and eight doubles teams qualify for the Slims Championships, which are Nov. 15-21.


60-Minute Gourmet
ONE of the most popular beef dishes in restaurants is still steak au poivre, in which beef is coated liberally with cracked black pepper before it is cooked in a hot pan.
The sauce is usually made with beef stock, shallots, red wine and maybe brandy.
It is a compelling combination if the cook skillfully balances the hot peppers and the sweet elements.
Home cooks may not have time to go through all of that, especially on a busy weeknight, so the recipe below is offered as a quick and pleasing alternative.
The beef is rubbed all over with cracked pepper, then placed in a marinade of red wine, olive oil, vinegar and seasonings.
While the steak is marinating you can begin the side dish and make other preparations.
At this time of year you may opt for broiling rather than grilling outside.
Both methods yield delicious results.


Pentagon's Medical School May Be Mustered Out
Tucked away in the Clinton Administration's plan for streamlining the Government is a way to save $300 million in five years: close the nation's only military medical school, a 21-year-old complex behind the Naval Medical Center here.
The Defense Department pays five times as much to train a student here as at a private medical school, according to the plan.
The cost of training a military doctor at the center, the Uniformed Services University of the Health Sciences, is $562,000.
That includes tuition, military pay and benefits, internship, residency and field training.
The Administration says it would be cheaper to expand its current practice of subsidizing some medical students.
Such subsidies average $110,000 a student, covering tuition, room and board.


Jury Is Selected in Trade Center Bombing Trial
A racially balanced jury of eight women and four men, all of them Christian, was selected yesterday to try four Muslims charged with the deadly bombing of the World Trade Center last February.
Although six alternate jurors remain to be selected, Judge Kevin Thomas Duffy told lawyers in Manhattan Federal Court to be prepared to present their opening arguments Thursday before the panel, which will not be sequestered.


When Carbohydrates Are the Stars
FOR those who wonder what New Age cooking is all about, a good place to begin is a dinner in which two starches, like lentils and potatoes, are the stars.
Such dishes are common in India, but Americans have been slow to take to them, in part because of the myth that carbohydrates are fattening.


Don't Let Rabies Scare Cause a Fear of Animals; Vaccination Program
To the Editor:
Carl Semenic was right when his May 14, 1991, letter, said rabies was making a serious move north and threatening those of us in the New York City area for the first time in many years.
He was also right when he noted that vaccinating cats and dogs against this disease can help stop its spread.


Dwayne's World Headed for Milwaukee?
Leaving the Nets with a difficult decision, the Milwaukee Bucks and the restricted free agent Dwayne Schintzius have agreed to a three-year, $4.8 million offer sheet.
The Nets have 15 days after receiving the offer sheet to match it, or they will lose Schintzius to Milwaukee.
"I guess right now, Dwayne's sort of in limbo, playing for the Milwaukee Nets," said Frank Martin of Pro-Exec, Schintzius's agent, who spoke from his car phone on his way to deliver the offer sheet to the Nets yesterday afternoon.
"I don't know if the Nets will match or not, but we're delighted for Dwayne. It's a good offer." The Whys Have It
What made Milwaukee pursue a center who played in only 10 games last season and who has a career 3.4 scoring average?
There are several factors.
Schintzius is 7 feet 2 inches, he turns 25 years old next month, he has ability and the rebuilding Bucks need a young center.
Schintzius's work ethic has been the big question mark during his three-year professional career.
But he was impressive during summer-league play, and he showed a willingness to improve by attending Pete Newell's Big Man's Camp in Hawaii.
Seven-footers with talent are not plentiful, and the Bucks are willing to take a chance on Schintzius.


Alice S. Morris, 90, An Editor and Writer
Alice S. Morris, for many years a figure on New York's literary scene, died on Friday at St.
Vincent's Hospital in Manhattan.
She was 90 and lived in Greenwich Village.
The cause was sudden respiratory failure, her family said.


Murdoch in Accord With Craft Unions On Reopening Post
After a flurry of behind-the-scenes activity, Rupert Murdoch said yesterday that he was willing to return, once again, to publishing The New York Post.
The price was capitulation by the production unions whose members, for a time, supported a strike by the New York Newspaper Guild, which represents news, advertising and circulation employees.


Unearthing the Past for a Ground-Breaking in the Future


Williams and Rasheed of Giants Are on the Spot
Giants cornerback Perry Williams is an 11-year National Football League veteran who has "been through the wars." The only wars rookie fullback Kenyon Rasheed has seen since joining the league have been on late-night television.
But in a strange way, the rookie and the veteran might have a lot in common.
The Giants (3-0) will play the Buffalo Bills (2-1) in Orchard Park, N.Y., on Sunday night in what is being called the biggest game of the season thus far for the Giants.
And they are calling on Williams, a talented player who was beaten out by Phillippi Sparks in training camp, and Rasheed, a rookie out of the University of Oklahoma who hasn't carried the ball since the third preseason game.


Mazda Now Sees $300 Million Loss
In the latest sign of a rapid deterioration for Japan's once mighty automobile industry, the Mazda Motor Corporation said today that it expected to lose $300 million this fiscal year, a deficit almost three times larger than it had projected four months ago.
The company attributed the larger loss forecast to declining sales in Japan and Europe, and to the rise of the Japanese yen against the dollar, which has made Japanese products more expensive in the United States.


Sports of The Times; The Merry-Go-Round Stops Here
TWO years ago this weekend, Dusty Baker, then a Giants' coach, stared at the Dodgers standing around the batting cage at Candlestick Park.
"You could see it in their eyes, in the way their shoulders slumped," Baker would say later.
"They knew they weren't going to win."


Senate Urges Federal Inquiry on Crown Heights
The Senate unanimously passed a resolution today urging the Justice Department to undertake a civil rights investigation into the August 1991 killing of Yankel Rosenbaum in Crown Heights, Brooklyn.
The resolution, which was offered by Senators Alfonse M. D'Amato, Republican of New York, and Bob Dole, the Republican leader from Kansas, does not have the force of law.
But it served to embarrass Mayor David N. Dinkins, who has faced criticisms that he was slow to respond to the Crown Heights disturbances.
Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan, Democrat of New York, voted for the resolution.


A.M.A. Rebels Over Health Plan In Major Challenge to President
The American Medical Association urged doctors today to lobby patients to oppose central elements of President Clinton's health plan, including Federal regulation of health insurance premiums and cuts in the growth of Medicare and Medicaid.
At a political education conference here and in documents sent to all doctors across the country, leaders of the A.M.A. punctured the spirit of bipartisan euphoria that has been hovering over the plan since Mr.
Clinton presented it in a speech to Congress last week.


So, What's Left for Navratilova to Do?
Calling herself a rare and fortunate creature who is finally ready to leave the rarest of careers behind, Martina Navratilova confirmed yesterday that 1994, her 22d year of competitive singles play, will be her last.
Navratilova, who turns 37 on Oct. 18, is currently ranked third in the world.
With four titles this year and another year to go, she has already won more tournament titles (165) than any man or woman in a sport that is one of the few professions to anoint an individual as its best.
That is what attracted this perfectionist to tennis in the first place.


New Index of U.S. Factory Activity Climbs
A new index intended to forecast activity in the nation's factories by giving special attention to inventories moved up slightly in September, but growth is likely to remain sluggish, the sponsors said.
A decline in inventories in the manufacturing sector "has come to an end, removing one source of contraction for the overall economy," said Michael Evans, creator of the Apics Business Outlook Index.


U.S. Considers Lifting Ban on Older Pilots
The head of the Federal Aviation Administration said today that he had "an open mind" about lifting a 34-year-old Federal rule that prohibits pilots over the age of 60 from flying commercial jetliners.
The remarks by the Administrator, David R. Hinson, made at a spirited hearing on the ban conducted by the aviation agency, were hailed by an audience of former pilots who maintained that they were being discriminated against because of their age.
They said their experience and skills more than offset any infirmities, and they noted that the ban did not extend to pilots of small charter and cargo planes or even to the F.A.A.'s own pilots.
They also pointed out that other industrialized nations allowed pilots to fly commercial planes until the age of 65 or 70, or beyond.


On the Way to Fight, Lawsuit Breaks Out
For once, the two heavyweights who will face off in this championship bout will be fighting for queen, not King.
But while Don King was nowhere to be seen today during a news conference at the Cardiff Coal Exchange, the man and his electrified locks would not have seemed too far out of place.


Unions' Bid At United Air In Setback
United Airlines' flight attendants' union is expected to announce today that it has quit the coalition it formed with United's pilots' and machinists' unions this summer to gain majority control of the carrier.
The attendants' action has not scuttled the buyout effort by employees at United -- the fourth since 1987 -- because the two remaining unions plan to continue seeking a majority stake, according to a recorded telephone message yesterday for United's pilots.
But the apparent departure of the flight attendants clearly creates much higher hurdles for the remaining parties.


Pop and Jazz in Review
Paco de Lucia  Avery Fisher Hall
Paco de Lucia, who performed on Saturday night at Avery Fisher Hall, has all the skill a great flamenco guitarist needs.
He can strum chords that are pitiless and driving or lacy and delicate; he can flick off hyperfast runs or clear, clean melodies; he can make every note sound like a knife thrust or a caress.
But while the Spanish guitarist is steeped in flamenco, he has broken away from the traditional forms of the music.
Instead of somber concentration on a single song, he prefers a rhapsodic flow of melodies.
And along with flamenco's Arabic modes, he has expanded his vocabulary to include sonorities from Debussy to jazz.
The result on Saturday was a con


Raid in Chinatown
Federal Bureau of Investigation agents raided a building on East Broadway in Chinatown last night and detained at least eight suspects in a case that includes kidnapping, a law enforcement official said.
The case involved at least one victim, a 52-year-old Asian man who was kidnapped and transported across the New York State border, the official said.
Further details were not immediately available.
Agents cordoned off the entrance to 88 East Broadway for several hours last night, but a spokesman for the F.B.I. said a statement would not be released until later.


MacLean Paces The Devils
John MacLean's second goal of the game, 1 minute 16 seconds into overtime, gave the Devils a 5-4 triumph over the Hartford Whalers in a preseason last night at Knickerbocker Arena.
Stephane Richer also had two goals and Jimmy Dowd had the other for the Devils, and Scott Niedermayer had three assists, including the assist on MacLean's winner.


Max Knight, Writer And Translator, 84
Max Knight, a writer, editor and translator, died on Aug. 31 at his home in Berkeley, Calif.
He was 84.
The cause was complications that developed after a heart bypass operation in February, said Joseph Fabry, a friend with whom Mr.
Knight published many short stories in German under the joint pen name Peter Fabrizius.


18 Are Indicted In Smuggling Of Immigrants
Eighteen members of the Fuk Ching gang were indicted yesterday by a Federal grand jury in Manhattan on a battery of charges that include immigrant smuggling, racketeering, conspiracy and murder.
But prosecutors said they have failed so far to find evidence to link the gang with the Golden Venture, the ship crammed with immigrants that wrecked off the Rockaway Peninsula early on June 6.
Ten people died trying to swim ashore.


Whitman, on Defensive Over Polls, Demotes Brother From Leading Campaign
Heading into the last month of the gubernatorial race with polls showing her trailing badly, Christine Todd Whitman today demoted her campaign manager -- her brother, Webster B. (Danny) Todd -- and put Ed Rollins, an experienced political strategist, in charge of her Republican campaign.
"Danny Todd is going to remain, but he is not going to be calling the shots," a senior Republican official said.


Clinton Hits a Nerve on Race
Bill Clinton struck a nerve when he said that Mayor David Dinkins of New York had a tough re-election fight partly because Mr.
Dinkins is black and his Republican challenger, Rudolph Giuliani, is white.
Mr.
Clinton's remarks have generated lots of sound and fury, so it's important to look at what the poll-takers have found.
Their numbers show that race matters, and matters a lot, in elections.


Libya Says Scotland Can Try Flight 103 Suspects
Facing a Friday deadline to hand over the two suspects in the bombing of Pan Am Flight 103 in 1988 or risk tougher United Nations economic sanctions, the Libyan Government said today that it would not object if the men went to Scotland to stand trial.
But in a brief statement issued in Tripoli, quoting an unidentified Foreign Ministry source, the official Libyan News Agency stopped short of saying the men would be surrendered to Scottish authorities, declaring instead that the final decision whether to go to Scotland was up to the suspects themselves.


Abortion View Can't Be Test for a Federal Judge
To the Editor:
The idea expressed in "A Threat to Abortion Rights" (editorial, Sept. 21), that President Clinton would be doing "a grave disservice to American woman" by approving the appointment of Federal judges who have expressed anti-abortion views, is offensive and absurd.


Harry A. Sylvester, Novelist, Dies at 85
Harry A. Sylvester, a writer of short stories and novels, died Sunday at the Friends Nursing Home in Sandy Springs, Md.
He was 85 and had been a resident of Washington for nearly four decades.
The cause was Parkinson's disease, his family said.


A Shaken Drechsler Denies Spying
HEIKE DRECHSLER a long-jump champion, emerged shaken from a five-hour viewing of her secret police file yesterday saying she never spied for the East German security force and was used by a man she thought was a friend.
Drechsler, the former East German star who won gold in the 1992 Olympics for united Germany, acknowledged that she received money from HEINZ BERGNER, whom the Stasi files list as her control agent.
The former sports photographer was a family friend and the money was a gift and not payment for spying on fellow athletes, she said.


Defendant in Youth's Strangling May Testify
Where was James P. Wanger when Robert A. Solimine Jr. was strangled?
Mr.
Wanger, on trial in Superior Court for his former friend's slaying, is "more than likely" to take the witness stand Thursday to explain, his lawyer said today at the end of the first day of defense testimony.


Executive Changes
HARSCO CORP., Camp Hill, Pa., named Ronald W. Kaplan executive vice president of the company's Plant City steel division, effective Oct. 1, and president of the division effective Feb. 1, upon the retirement of the current president, Moore Tappan Jr.
J. CREW INC., New York, appointed Gary Sheinbaum president of J. Crew Retail.


Blockbuster Hopes Deal Can Expand Its Empire
People who meet H. Wayne Huizenga are often struck by his eyes.
Icy blue and piercing, they seem to reflect the personality of a restless entrepreneur who has shown over the years that he can master almost any industry, from garbage hauling to professional sports to video rentals.
Yesterday, Mr.
Huizenga, chairman and chief executive of the Blockbuster Entertainment Corporation, fixed his gaze on a new target.
His company agreed to commit $600 million to the war chest of Viacom Inc., in its battle to buy Paramount Communications.
QVC Network has made a rival offer.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising -- Addenda; Top Honors For Doyle
For the second consecutive year, Doyle Advertising in Boston took top honors at the annual Hatch Awards ceremony, New England's creative awards show sponsored by the Advertising Club of Greater Boston.


Gulotta Goes On Attack In New Blitz Of TV Ads
The Nassau County Executive, Thomas S. Gulotta, began broadcasting three commercials yesterday that portray his opponent as a "liberal through and through," kicking off what is likely to be the most expensive political advertising blitz ever for any Nassau County office.
Mr.
Gulotta, a Republican, is facing the toughest challenge in his 18-year political career and the three commercials aggressively attack his opponent, Benjamin L. Zwirn, the Democratic Supervisor of North Hempstead.
Mr.
Zwirn won the Democratic primary after a campaign that emphasized his reputation as a fiscal conservative.


How Do You Spell Los Angeles? One Way Is 'P-A-L-M'
THERE are, of course, the palms of glamour lining the crescent roads of Beverly Hills and Pasadena and the everyday working palms bunched in threes and fours along Los Angeles freeway embankments.
Less obvious are the couples: the male and female palms stationed like husband and wife on either side of walkways up to Victorian houses, and the volunteers, the scrappy palms growing for their lives through sidewalk cracks, the gift of birds dropping seeds.
Nearly forgotten are the groves of palms with leonine manes in the city's aging oasis cemeteries: old palms mark old ground.


Alvaro Obregon Tapia; Mexico Governor, 76
Alvaro Obregon Tapia, the former Governor of Sonora, Mexico, died on Monday in a hospital in Tucson, Arizona.
He was 76.
Mr.
Obregon headed the northern border state from 1955 to 1961.
He was born on Dec. 18, 1916, to Gen.
Alvaro Obregon Salido, a Mexican revolutionary leader who helped pacify Mexico and create the modern Mexican state.


Long Bond Price Falls; Yield at 5.99%
Volatility continues to be the only constant in the bond market, as traders and investors await some surer signals on the pace of economic growth and speed of inflation.
The price of the 30-year bond fell 25/32 yesterday, and the yield flirted with 6 percent, but finished at 5.99 percent, up from 5.94 percent on Tuesday.
The prices of Treasury notes fell across the board.


LABOR PARTY CUTS UNIONS' INFLUENCE
John Smith, the Labor Party leader, narrowly won a knockdown, drag-out struggle today to weaken the hold of Britain's unions over the Labor Party.
Reformers within the party were convinced that the move was necessary to improve the party's image and so help propel it out of the wilderness of opposition to the ruling Conversatives where it has languished for 14 years.


Somalia: Learn From Cambodia
Finally, the Clinton Administration has gotten the message: Reports of U.S. and civilian casualties are threatening to sink public support for U.N. peacekeeping in Somalia -- and in general.
Humanitarian relief has degenerated into a turf war against one holdout warlord, Mohammed Farah Aidid.
Now Washington is demanding that U.S. forces no longer be used on patrol missions in the Aidid stronghold of south Mogadishu, and is seeking a redirection of the mission toward diplomatic and political reconstruction of a Somali government.


Giants Falter Against Rockies
With a touch of confidence, the San Francisco Giants were told today to pack for a nine-day road trip, which would optimistically include a pit-stop next week in Philadelphia for the opening of the National League Championship Series.
By day's end, though, the Giants had taken a back seat to Atlanta in the Western Division race.
By losing to the expansion Colorado Rockies, 5-3, at Candlestick Park this afternoon, then watching the Braves beat the Houston Astros, 6-3, in Atlanta tonight, the Giants fell one game out of first place with four to play -- all in Los Angeles.


CASE OF SENATOR: ETHICAL GRAY AREA
Senator Kay Bailey Hutchison, a Republican, says her indictment on charges of abusing her former office of Texas Treasurer is "politics at its lowest." Her Democratic prosecutor is just as unequivocal in insisting that the message is that "no one is above the law."
But with the prospect of Mrs.
Hutchison going on trial here in the midst of a campaign forre-election next fall, her case really seems to be shaping up as a test of one of politics' grayest areas.


Nikolais Memorial
A memorial service for Alwin Nikolais, the choreographer, designer and composer of electronic music, will be held on Monday at 6 P.M. at Hunter College in the Sylvia and Danny Kaye Playhouse at 695 Park Avenue, at 68th Street, in Manhattan.
Mr.
Nikolais died on May 8 at the age of 82.


Trash Memories
To the Home Section:
Mitchell Owens's amusing article "Treasures From the Trash" (Sept. 9) brought back great memories of trash finds of my own (gilded frames, marble lamp, lattice for our backyard, plants, books, to name a few) and the time I accidentally threw out a 16th-century Italian carving, never to be seen again!


Japan, in Need of Rice, May Turn to U.S. Growers
In an action that will at least temporarily remove a principal contributor to Japanese-American trade tensions, the Government here is about to give United States farmers a chance to sell rice in Japan.
Japan is expected to formally announce today that it will import huge amounts of rice in the coming year to prevent a shortage caused by an extremely poor harvest.
A significant amount will probably come from the United States, according to Japanese news reports.


PARENT &amp; CHILD
CHILDREN'S lives are permeated by rules.
"Hold my hand when we cross the street." "Don't talk with your mouth full." "Remember to say, 'Thank you.' "
From the parents' perspective, rules are a way of protecting children, conveying important values and encouraging social relationships.
They are words that parents hope to see reflected in their children's decisions as they grow older and become more independent.


Mother Is Found Sane in Killing Accused Molester
A woman who fatally shot her son's accused molester was sane at the time of the killing and legally responsible for opening fire on him in a courtroom, a jury found today.
The woman, Ellie Nesler, a 41-year-old single mother from Sonora, Calif., faces up to 16 years in prison when she is sentenced on Nov. 29 for the killing of Daniel Mark Driver.


COMPANY BRIEFS
ALLIED HEALTHCARE PRODUCTS INC., St.
Louis, said it had signed a letter of intent to acquire Life Support Products Inc. of Irvine, Calif., for an undisclosed cash amount.
AM INTERNATIONAL INC., Chicago, said its Chapter 11 reorganization had been approved by a Federal bankruptcy judge.
Under the plan's terms, holders of $84.1 million face amount of senior subordinated debentures will receive 6.79 million shares of new AM International common stock.
HIBERNIA CORP., New Orleans, said it had signed a definitive agreement to acquire Commercial Bancshares Inc. of Franklin, La., in a stock swap valued at $18.7 million.


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt  *
Connecticut Health and Educational Facilities Authority is offering $25.6 million of tax-exempt revenue bonds for Fairfield University through underwriters led by Goldman, Sachs &amp; Co.
The bonds were initially priced to yield a maximum of 5.15 percent for a bond due in 2018 and 5.10 percent for another due in 2013.
Yields on serial bonds range from 2.60 percent in 1994 to 4.85 percent in 2007.
Because the bonds are insured by the Municipal Bond Investor's Assurance Corp., they are rated triple-A by Moody's and S.&amp; P.


Let's Enforce the Laws Against Horn Honking
To the Editor:
While it is gratifying to know that the Department of Transportation is shifting its focus from simply increasing its revenues to one of improving the quality of life in New York City (news article, Sept. 12), the department is missing a perfect opportunity to do both.


TOOTSIE ROLL BUYS CANDY BRANDS FROM WARNER-LAMBERT
The Warner-Lambert Company announced the sale yesterday of its chocolate and caramel business including the Junior Mints, Sugar Daddy and Sugar Babies product lines to Tootsie Roll Industries of Chicago for undisclosed terms.
John Walsh, president of Warner-Lambert's consumer products sector, said the sale reflected the company's effort to focus on global marketing of its confectionery and consumer health products, such as Halls cough tablets and Trident sugarless gum.
Warner-Lambert, of Morris Plains, N.J., bought the candy business, which also includes the Charleston Chew and Pom Poms lines, in 1988 from Nabisco Brands.


China Tire
Shares of China Tire Holdings Ltd. have surged in the last few days.
The stock had languished for weeks after plummeting more than 20 percent from a high of 18 3/4 after its initial public offering on July 15.
The company said Tuesday that its second-quarter net income had almost doubled from a year before, exceeding forecasts.


Pop and Jazz in Review
Patricia Kaas  Alice Tully Hall
Like many other European stars who hope to conquer the world, the French pop singer Patricia Kaas is groping for an American audience by going in several directions at once.
In her performance at Alice Tully Hall on Tuesday evening, Sept. 21, Miss Kaas seemed to emulate the career path that has given the German pop diva Ute Lemper a foothold in the American market.
It is not the way to go.
Aside from nationality, the basic difference between Miss Lemper and Miss Kaas is that the former is an art singer who works mostly within the upper reaches of European music-hall tradition.
Miss Kaas, by contrast, is a pop singer who only occasionally ventures into that territory to show that she has class to match her pop savvy.


Howard J. Cerny, 68; Linked to Nixon Aides
Howard J. Cerny, a New York City lawyer who was an unindicted co-conspirator and a Government witness in the 1974 criminal trial of two former members of President Richard M. Nixon's Cabinet, died on Sept. 18 at his home in Manhattan.
He was 68.
The cause was a heart attack, said his son James, of Forest Hills, Queens.


Jesse C. Dobson; AIDS Treatment Advocate, 36
Jesse C. Dobson, a leader of AIDS treatment, information and advocacy organizations in San Francisco, died on Sept. 23 at Kaiser Permanente Medical Center in Oakland.
He was 36 and lived in Oakland.
The cause was AIDS, his family said.


Justice at Midtown
Coming soon to mid-Manhattan: a neighborhood criminal court pledged to provide swift justice, curb some of the hustling that plagues areas like Times Square and make a stab at treating some treatable offenders.
The Midtown Community Court, in a refurbished building next to the Midtown North police station on 54th Street, is a promising experiment.
Its business will be the petty crime that often slips through the downtown criminal courts yet makes the streets dangerous.
Too often in New York the courts process vandals, prostitutes and purse-snatchers right back to their pavement haunts.


New Proposal Would Automatically Limit Secrecy
Trying to establish a post-cold-war policy for classifying Government documents, the Clinton Administration is considering a proposal intended to give the public easier access to sensitive information but still allow officials considerable discretion to withhold some secrets.
The proposal was drafted by a committee of Government officials ordered by President Clinton in April to design a new system for the United States to keep its secrets.
A major part of the proposal is to declassify virtually all Government documents after 40 years.


Stevens Has New Face For Brand New Season
The face is movie-star handsome, nose perfectly symmetrical, the kind of look people pay plastic surgeons a lot of money to achieve.
There is a small furrow above the bridge of his nose, where a piece of bone is missing, leaving a slight indentation.
There is a scar over his right eye -- nothing unusual about that -- and another scar, more than 15 inches long, hidden beneath his thick brown hair.
For the most part, though, Kevin Stevens looks pretty normal.
And that, given the circumstances, is quite a surprise.


In Mostar's Muslim Area, 35,000 Endure in Rubble
When war returned to this divided river city almost five months ago, Asim Segetalo gave up expecting people to knock on his door before barging in.
The 43-year-old metalworker's house in Mostar's Muslim quarter has become a detour for pedestrians trying to skirt Croatian sniper fire on a 30-yard stretch of a main shopping street.
Each day, hundreds of people stream in the front door, through the kitchen he set up for his family on the house's well-shielded ground floor and exit through the back.
Hundreds more pass in the opposite direction.


Pop and Jazz in Review
John Zorn  The Knitting Factory
Of all the acts of musical reclamation the composer John Zorn dabbles in, his revamping of Ornette Coleman's music, called "Spy vs. Spy," has been the least satisfying.
Mr.
Zorn, as part of the monthlong festival of his own music at the Knitting Factory, performed Mr.
Coleman's work on Monday night, and though the performance didn't always add up to much, it was fascinating to see the music so thoroughly reinvented.


Company News; Mercedes Selects Alabama Site
After World War I, textile manufacturers began moving south to be nearer their suppliers -- the cotton fields of Alabama, South Carolina and other balmy states.
Now auto makers are making a similar pilgrimage, building plants by those old cotton fields to take advantage of cheap land, skilled industrial workers and the proximity of many auto parts manufacturers.
The latest to make the move is Mercedes-Benz, which will build its first automobile assembly plant in America in Tuscaloosa County, Ala.


Review/Dance; Distilling Flamenco to Its Fiery Base Elements
Mario Maya's Flamenco Dance Company from Seville is not your ordinary Spanish dance troupe.
Mr.
Maya, its Gypsy star and choreographer, looks amazingly like Merce Cunningham and dances with the same impish sense of surprise that Mr.
Cunningham, pope of the American modern-dance avant-garde, brings to his own work.
Mr.
Maya has also rebelled against a standard approach to the traditional forms in which he was trained: "Three Flamenco Movements," the three-part work he has brought to New York, is an impressive experiment in abstraction, often focusing on pure movement.
Whatever emotions are expressed tend to come out of pattern rather than passion in Mr.
Maya's choreography, and there are few of the fiery bravura outbursts popularly identified with Spanish dance concerts.


Now, a Culturally Correct Field Ration
The Pentagon is going vegetarian.
Reflecting the increasing use of the military for humanitarian missions, the Defense Department has created a field ration that is both nutritious and culturally correct.
Its kitchens today auditioned a new menu of meatless, ready-to-eat pre-packaged meals prepared especially for civilians in far-flung humanitarian crises.


Calendar: Folk Art And Tours
A Permanent Exhibition  Museum of American Folk Art, Feld Gallery at Lincoln Square, Columbus Avenue at 65th Street; (212) 977-7298.
"America's Heritage," a rotating exhibition of 60 works taken from the museum's collection, starts Tuesday.
The show will feature items from the 18th century to the present, including landscape and portrait paintings, decoys, quilts, ceramic vessels, painted boxes and tins, toys and trade signs.
Open Tuesday through Sunday, 11:30 A.M. to 7:30 P.M.
No charge.
Pompeii to Brooklyn  Cooper-Hewitt Museum, 2 East 91st Street; (212) 860-6862.
A seminar on the gardens and houses of the writer Edith Wharton will be held on Saturday, from 9:30 A.M. to 4:30 P.M.
Fee, including lunch and a walking tour of the Carnegie Hill neighborhood, $85; members, $70; students, $30.


National Medical to Pay $125 Million in Accord
National Medical Enterprises, the operator of psychiatric and acute care hospitals, said yesterday that it had agreed to pay $125 million to settle charges by three major insurers that it filed fraudulent claims.
The settlement comes as National Medical is struggling to revive its reputation after being battered for two years by charges of insurance fraud and patient abuse.


RESULTS PLUS
SOCCER Milan and United Each Win Cup Matches AC Milan of Italy and Manchester United of England advanced to the second round of the European Champions Cup last night in less-than-impressive form.
A crowd of 40,000 whistled at San Siro Stadium in Italy as Milan played a scoreless tie against the Swiss champion, FC Aarau, and advanced, 1-0, on aggregate in the home-and-home series.
United, in its first home game in the Champions Cup at Old Trafford in 24 years, beat Honved Kispest of Hungary, 2-1, on a pair of goals by Steve Bruce and advanced, 5-3, on aggregate.
On a night when 43 European games were played, all five Italian teams advanced.
Joining AC Milan were Torino in the Cup Winners Cup and Cagliari, Inter Milan and Lazio in the U.E.F.A.
Cup.
Scottish champion Glasgow Rangers, which won the first leg at home, 3-2, allowed Nikolai Todarov to score in the final minute, giving Levski Sofia a 2-1 victory and sending the Bulgarians into the next round on away goals.
The Spanish champion, Barcelona, led by a pair of goals from Jose Maria Bakero, beat Dinamo Kiev of Ukraine, 4-1, and advanced, 5-4, on aggregate. (AP) TENNIS No. 1 Edberg Still Feels at Home in Basel Stefan Edberg, who is bidding to win this tournament a fourth time, defeated Christian Bergstroem, 6-2, 7-6 (7-3), yesterday to advance to the second round of the $800,000 Swiss Indoors tournament in Basel, Switzerland.
Edberg, the No. 1-seeded player, last won this event in 1988 and is seeking only his second singles title this year on the ATP Tour.
Zvereva Advances to Quarterfinals: Natalya Zvereva recovered with a third-set rally to beat a former Stanford All-American, Meredith McGrath, 2-6, 6-2, 7-6 (7-2), for a quarterfinal berth in the Volkswagen Card Cup in Leipzig, Germany.
Zvereva next faces Steffi Graf, who eliminated Nicole Muns-Jagerman of the Netherlands, 6-1, 6-1, in 44 minutes.
Graf is trying to win this tournament a fourth straight time. (AP)


Detailing Burglars in Blue: Violent Search for Booty
A former New York City police officer, nicknamed "the Mechanic" for his zeal in assaulting drug suspects and innocent bystanders, gave a vivid account yesterday to an investigating commission of how, he said, police officers illegally broke into homes to plunder money, narcotics and illegal guns in the Bronx.
The renegade officer, Bernard Cawley, asserted that as a sort of rite of passage into two high-crime Bronx precincts, he was encouraged by his first supervising sergeant and other superiors to be brutal to demonstrate that on the streets, "we were in charge, the police."


Kelly's Zeros: Numbers Don't Add Up to Championship
The Miami Dolphins offered the Buffalo Bills a resounding wake-up call last Sunday and, no doubt, Jim Kelly's head must still be ringing from the rude alarm.
Miami turned the Bills inside out and upside down in jumping to a quick 19-0 lead before winning by 22-13 at Rich Stadium.
The Dolphins believe they may have finally found an answer to Buffalo's recent dominance.
These American Football Conference East rivals match up better now than in recent years.
They will be the front-runners for the A.F.C. championship all season.


Albany to Let Insurance Law Cover Partners
Reversing a 54-year-old policy, the Cuomo administration today lifted New York State's prohibition against providing family health insurance that covers the domestic partners of homosexuals and unmarried heterosexuals.
The ruling, which had been sought for years by advocates for gay and lesbian rights, opens a new and untested market for the insurance industry in New York, among private companies and local governments.
It also provides a major political opportunity for Mayor David N. Dinkins, who may now be able to grant insurance benefits to the domestic partners of city employees.
Such a move would almost certainly energize gay and lesbian supporters in Mr.
Dinkins's re-election campaign against Rudolph W. Giuliani, the Republican-Liberal candidate.


Eagles Are Off to a Flying Start in 1993
Winning does wonders for a pro football team.
It even erases the negatives of a few months ago, which explains why the Eagles have all but forgotten that of their 11 teammates eligible last spring for unrestricted free agency, all 11, including Reggie White, left.
Which explains why rebellious players ordered to stop criticizing the team coaches and executives or forfeit one week's pay now have only good things to say.
Which explains why Randall Cunningham, a gifted but mercurial quarterback and one of those former dissenters, is happy.
The surprising Eagles have a 3-0 record in this young National Football League season.
On Sunday, they should be tested when they meet the fast-improving Jets (2-1) at Giants Stadium.


W.P. Grayson, 79, Retired Executive Of Publishing Firm
William P. Grayson, former executive vice president of Johnson Publishing Company and associate publisher of Ebony and Jet magazines, died on Sunday at the Hospital of the Good Samaritan in Los Angeles.
He was 79 and had lived in Los Angeles since he retired in 1973.
The cause of death was bone cancer, his family said.


Dinkins Goes on Offensive Over Giuliani's Views
With the underbrush of the Democratic runoff for New York City comptroller cleared away, Mayor David N. Dinkins went on the offensive yesterday, broadcasting his first critical television commercial attacking Rudolph W. Giuliani's past stands on abortion, and squaring off with his challenger over the volatile issue of the city's affirmative-action program for minority contractors.
Together, the Mayor's moves highlighted the candidates' battle for the support of three vital constituencies -- women, liberal Jews and Hispanic voters -- as the race moved solidly into a new phase: direct confrontation.
Mr.
Giuliani responded by accusing Mr.
Dinkins of negative campaigning intended to confuse the voters. 1989 Revisited
By reviving Mr.
Giuliani's public reservations about abortion from the 1989 mayoral race, even though the Republican-Liberal candidate has long since said he unequivocally backs abortion rights, Mr.
Dinkins sought to reopen the gender gap that prevailed between them four years ago but has virtually disappeared in recent polls.


An Eagle Poses A Threat To Jets
Although the Jets are off to a surprising 2-1 start this season, they are 0-1 against fleet-footed quarterbacks.
Having failed to contain John Elway in a season-opening loss to the Denver Broncos, the Jets will be hosts to the elusive Randall Cunningham and the Philadelphia Eagles (3-0) on Sunday.
"We didn't do as good a job containing Elway as we did the next two games, containing Marino and Bledsoe," defensive tackle Leonard Marshall said, referring to Miami's Dan Marino and New England's Drew Bledsoe.
"We didn't put enough heat on Elway, we allowed him to make more plays than the other two guys made, and it cost us."


Carl Leff, an Executive And Philanthropist, 95
Carl Leff, co-founder of the National Spinning Company and a philanthropist, died on Tuesday at Mount Sinai Medical Center in Manhattan.
He was 95 and had lived in Manhattan and Palm Beach, Fla.
Mr.
Leff, who graduated from Columbia dental school in 1919, joined his brother, Phillip, soon afterward in establishing their yarn-manufacturing company in New York City.
The mills were in North Carolina.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-14  BOSNIA REJECTS PEACE PLAN  Bosnia's Muslim-dominated Parliament decisively rejected an international peace plan, possibly derailing a settlement that would end the war by partitioning the country into three ethnic states.
A1  PALESTINIAN AID PLEDGE PREDICTED  Palestinians in the West Bank and Gaza Strip will receive pledges of about $2 billion in aid from more than two dozen countries -- including Israel -- at a conference in Washington on Friday, American officials said.
A1


Viacom Gets Help From Blockbuster
Though he still has a ways to go before he can match a rival $9.8 billion bid for Paramount Communications Inc., the chairman of Viacom Inc., Sumner Redstone, yesterday found a way to raise an additional $600 million that can be used to sweeten his offer, currently valued at $7.6 billion, or $64.77 a share.
The Blockbuster Entertainment Corporation, the video rental company based in Fort Lauderdale, Fla., agreed yesterday to invest the $600 million in exchange for convertible preferred stock in Viacom.


Trying to Give Slovaks the Bad News
To the Editor:
Yes, there is a need to "Unshackle the Press in Slovakia" (editorial, Sept. 18), as my personal experience illustrates.


AUTO UNION WORKERS APPROVE NEW CONTRACT WITH FORD
Hourly workers at the Ford Motor Company approved the three-year labor contract negotiated by the United Automobile Workers and Ford two weeks ago.
About 67 percent of workers voted for the agreement -- a narrower margin of victory than in many past settlements.
Some workers said they were unhappy that the contract reduces starting wages for new hires and extends the length of time it takes for them to reach the full wage level.
The U.A.W. is negotiating a similar contract with the Chrysler Corporation against a strike deadline of 11:59 P.M. today.


Economic Scene; Companies Will Meet Health Costs With Higher Prices and Lower Pay
WHO will pay for national health insurance?
Why business, of course, President Clinton assured the nation.
Under the White House plan, most employers would be required to write checks for 80 percent of the cost of a generous package of medical benefits for employees and families.
But many economists think the President has it exactly backward: Of all the possible candidates, corporate America is least likely to be stuck for the buck.
One way or another, they say, the cost of employer-mandated health premiums will either be passed forward to consumers in the form of higher prices, or backward to workers in the form of lower wages.


Review/Opera: Madama Butterfly; Metropolitan Revives 35-Year-Old Staging Of 'Madama Butterfly'
It is a tribute to the powers of Puccini that at a time when directors and set designers are at the center of attention in the opera world, the Metropolitan Opera could revive a pallid production of "Madama Butterfly" that dates from 1958 and still make it convincing.
This is one of the oldest productions the Met keeps on hand, and on Tuesday night, when it made its first appearance of the season, the rather amateurish backdrop with its cartooned landscape, the painted trees with absurdly pasted cherry blossoms and the sometimes awkward staging became far less important than what was happening to the jilted Japanese teen-ager.
It was also, of course, a tribute to the soprano Yoko Watanabe, who was returning to a role she has sung with success at the Met.
The innovation of this production 35 years ago was its use of a Japanese director (Yoshio Aoyama) and set and costume designer (Motohiro Nagasaka) in an attempt to give a twist to the drama about the tragic meetings of cultures.
Ms.
Watanabe, who is also Japanese, provides a more genuine authenticity.


Mother Is Found Sane in Killing Accused Molester
A woman who fatally shot her son's accused molester was sane at the time of the killing and legally responsible for opening fire on him in a courtroom, a jury found today.
The woman, Ellie Nesler, a 41-year-old single mother from Sonora, Calif., faces up to 16 years in prison when she is sentenced on Nov. 29 for the killing of Daniel Mark Driver.


CHRONICLE
A University of Massachusetts English professor's contention in a Harper's Magazine article that sexual relationships between faculty members and students can in some cases be helpful to the student has set off a furor on the campus in Amherst.
Prof.
WILLIAM KERRIGAN, who is also director of the program on psychoanalytic studies, is quoted in the September issue of the magazine as saying: "There is a kind of student I've come across in my career who was working through something that only a professor could help her with. I'm talking about a female student who, for one reason or another, has unnaturally prolonged her virginity."


Texas District Prices Bonds
The Tarrant County, Tex., Water Control and Improvement District No. 1 yesterday priced $321.8 million of tax-exempt water revenue refunding bonds through underwriters led by Paine Webber Inc.
Initially the bonds were priced to yield from 2.65 percent in 1994 to 4.05 percent in 1998, 4.65 percent in 2003, 5.15 percent in 2008 and 5.25 percent in 2012 and 2013.
For investors in a 31 percent tax bracket, the taxable bond equivalent yields would range from 3.84 percent in 1994 to 7.61 percent in 2013.


Review/Music; Pure Simplicity On Instrument Of Complexity
When the Aaron Copland School of Music at Queens College unveiled a splendid new auditorium last year, organists took note of its handsome concert organ, built by Gene Bedient after northern German, early-18th-century models.
With three manual divisions and one pedal division comprising 36 stops, the instrument leans more to wind than to brass, with a burnished solidity in the principals and an array of sharp reed timbres.
The shrill attack of the Brustwerk (chest-level) pipes takes a little getting used to, but those pipes are an integral part of the overall character.
Donald Ingram responded on Sunday afternoon with a program heavy on the Austrian-German tradition: Bach's Prelude in E flat and "St. Anne" Fugue, Mozart's Bach-like Fantasie in F minor, two of Brahms's Chorale Preludes, two canons by Schumann and, for variety, Ives's "Variations on America" and Chorale Prelude on "Adeste Fidelis."


Bonn Renews Bid for Security Council Seat
Germany, with strong support from France, renewed its bid for a permanent Security Council seat today in less ambiguous terms than in the past.
And, in an apparent bid for third-world support, it said more developing countries should become members, too.
But Foreign Minister Klaus Kinkel acknowledged that it is still unclear whether Germany is ready to play a more active part in United Nations affairs by contributing troops to its peacekeeping operations.


Israelis Seize a Leader Of West Bank P.L.O.
Israeli officials announced that a P.L.O. leader described as their most-wanted fugitive was arrested in the West Bank today.
The Palestinian was identified as Ahmed Awad Ikmail, the commander of a military wing of Al Fatah, the mainstream group of the P.L.O.
Mr.
Ikmail and four people identified as followers of his Black Panthers group were arrested overnight in the northern West Bank village of Qabatiyeh.


Garden Q.&amp;A.
A Woodland Poppy
Q.
I've heard there's a yellow poppy that's good for shade.
Can you tell me what this might be? -- Peter Goldsmith, Washington.


Milken Case Accord Near
The wearisome business of settling the myriad lawsuits filed against Michael Milken and Drexel Burnham Lambert was all but completed yesterday when a Federal judge signed orders clearing the way for investors and their lawyers to begin receiving $1.3 billion collected from Mr.
Milken and Drexel, his firm.
Mr.
Milken and Drexel were the pillars of the junk-bond business, which towered for a while in the 80's but later collapsed.


Inquiry to Focus on Charge of Fixed Bouts
Florida boxing officials said yesterday they are investigating an accusation of fixed boxing matches, including fights involving RANDALL (TEX) COBB and MARK GASTINEAU.


Settings Too Perfect For Words. Almost.
HERE are some things you'd never see in Martha Stewart's offices or Peri Wolfman's home: Shopping bags overflowing with fabric samples.
Stacks of magazines layered with last season's Smith &amp; Hawken catalogues.
Overstuffed manila file folders.
Candlesticks without candles.
Multicolored towels.
Chipped coffee mugs.
A smudge or two.
In other words, real life.
But the search for perfection is itself a way of life as seen in both the new offices for Martha Stewart Living magazine in midtown Manhattan and the former factory loft in SoHo that Ms.
Wolfman and Charles Gold have just renovated.


Key Finishes Year in Style
Jimmy Key did not have a pennant race to pitch in, but there were other objectives.
Like the chance to win 18 games for the first time, to solidify the Yankees' grasp on second place, to increase his career-best strikeout total and to further demonstrate that the team was wise to make a four-year, $17 million investment in him.
Key accomplished all of the above and finished his first season with the Yankees in style tonight by pacing them to an 8-3 victory over the Orioles at Camden Yards.
In allowing one run and striking out nine in seven innings, Key improved to 18-6 and finished with 173 strikeouts and a 3.00 earned run average.
He bettered his victory total of 1987 when he was 17-8 with a 2.76 e.r.a. for Toronto.


No Ceilings Are Involved, but the Sky Is the Limit on This Job


Florio, on Stump, Pledges $1 Billion in Business Aid
Seeking to offer a counterproposal to the economic plan unveiled last week by Christine Todd Whitman, the Republican gubernatorial candidate, Gov.
Jim Florio promised today to make nearly $1 billion available in state-backed business loans and investments over the next four years.
"There's no pie in the sky in this. No promises. No ledger sheets that don't add up," said Mr.
Florio, who took to the stump to tout his plan to expand the Economic Development Authority, a state-run agency that guarantees bank loans for business.


WOMEN PAY PRICE FOR BEING OBESE
Women who are fat suffer enormous social and economic consequences, a new study has shown.
They are much less likely to marry than women of normal weight and are more likely to be poor and to earn far less.
Fat men are also less likely to marry than men of normal weight, but they seem just as well off financially, the researchers found.


No Longer Family Matter: Whitman Demotes Her Brother


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising -- Addenda; National Car Rental Seeks New Agency
National Car Rental System in Minneapolis has placed in review its estimated $25 million account, previously at Chiat/Day in New York.
Vic Olesen, a consultant in Minneapolis hired to help National, confirmed a report of the review this week in Adweek.
He said National was looking at 10 agencies in the Chicago, Detroit, Minneapolis and New York areas, to handle strategic planning and creative work.


OPEC Accord Hurts Transportation Stocks
Oil stocks soared and transportation issues plummeted yesterday, as OPEC announced limits on oil production that meant good news for fuel producers and bad news for users.
The Dow Jones transportation index sank a sharp 16.25 points, or 1 percent, to 1,637.53, after the announcement by the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries.
Although the announcement was made fairly late in the New York trading day, preliminary reports had moved the market strongly.


Dolphin Linebacker Fined for a Gesture
Miami Dolphins linebacker BRYAN COX was fined $10,000 by the National Football League yesterday for making obscene gestures to the crowd before Sunday's game at Buffalo.
He plans to appeal.


Leslie Fay Releases Scandal Audit Results
The Leslie Fay Companies yesterday released the results of an investigation into the accounting scandal that has bedeviled the women's clothing maker since January.
The audit of the company's books showed that the manipulations falsely inflated Leslie Fay's after-tax profits by $62 million between the fourth quarter of 1990 and last January.
It is now operating under the protection of Federal Bankruptcy Court.


First Republican Supports Health Plan
Hillary Rodham Clinton won her first Republican convert today when Senator James M. Jeffords of Vermont announced his support of the Clinton Administration's health care plan.
"I am pleased to be the first," Mr.
Jeffords said.
"I am absolutely confident I will not be the last."


J. Lindsay de Valliere; Budget Official, 92
J.
Lindsay de Valliere, a former budget director of New Jersey and an official who helped set up the Federal Railroad Retirement Board, died on Friday at a nursing home in Red Bank, N.J.
He was 92.
The cause was heart failure, said his daughter, Mary Louise van der Wilden.


San Diego Issue's Top Yield at 5.40%
A $250 million bond offering by the San Diego Public Facilities Financing Authority through underwriters led by Morgan Stanley was initially priced yesterday to yield a maximum 5.40 percent for a bond due in 2018.
For purposes of comparison, the taxable bond equivalent yield for an investor in a 31 percent tax bracket would be about 7.83 percent.


U.S. Journalist Feared Dead In Battle for a Georgian City
An American journalist who was a frequent contributor to The Wall Street Journal is presumed to have been killed in the battle between Georgian troops and separatists for control of a regional capital, The Journal said yesterday.
The reporter, Alexandra Tuttle, 34, is thought to have been killed on Sept. 22, when Abkhazian rebels shot down a Tupelov-134 plane flying from Tbilisi, the capital of Georgia, to Sukhumi, the capital of the Abkhazia region.
The separatists took control of the city Monday night.


Bosnian About-Face
To the Editor:
"U.S. Policymakers on Bosnia Admit Errors in Opposing Partition in 1992" (news article Aug. 29) implies that, as United States Ambassador to Yugoslavia, I encouraged Alija Izetbegovic, the Bosnian President, to renounce the February 1992 Lisbon agreement on the division of Bosnia.
The truth is the reverse.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.25
3.08
4.47
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
2.91
2.90
2.67
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.04
3.03
2.82
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
4.94
4.87
5.88
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
5.99
5.94
7.37
TELEPHONE BONDS
7.08
7.00
8.45
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
5.45
5.42
6.39
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Corrections
An article on Tuesday about The Two River Times, a New Jersey weekly newspaper, misstated the current assignment of Maury Povich, a television host who lives in New Jersey.
He is host of "The Maury Povich Show"; he is a former host of "A Current Affair."


In Another Part of Somalia, Resentment of the U.N.
There are no United Nations peacekeepers here, and graffiti-covered jeeps mounted with anti-aircraft guns and crowded with armed Somali youths career through the streets.
But Hargeisa is a relatively peaceful Somali city.
The colorful markets buzz with noise.
Uniformed, armed policemen patrol the town and arrest thieves.


And So, After 17 Innings, the Mets Finally Rest
The Mets don't have much talent.
They don't have many triumphs.
Mercy isn't anything they come by easily, either.
But compassion, along with the game's only run, arrived in the 17th inning last night at Shea Stadium.
Jeff Kent doubled with two out to score Eddie Murray as the Mets defeated the Cardinals, 1-0, in the longest scoreless game for New York since Aug. 19, 1968.
The Cardinals hadn't played a scoreless game for that long since 1933.


Review/Opera; New Cast in City's 'Turandot'
The City Opera's "Turandot" changed casts on Tuesday night, and it was not a change for the better.
Problems arose just a few minutes into the performance when it became clear that Quade Winter, the tenor singing Calaf, simply did not have the power to carry the role.
In duets with the female leads, he was nearly inaudible.
"Nessun dorma" woke no one.
Michele Boucher, as Liu, had the opposite problem: she was too full and flamboyant.
With a wide, authoritative tone, she seemed better suited to the lead than to tender Liu.
She overshadowed Timur, which was sung handsomely enough by Kevin Bell.


Review/Theater; Drag Star Tries On a More Serious Context
Making what a news release refers to as his "classical stage debut" in "The Maids" by Jean Genet, Charles Busch, arguably New York's most beloved drag performer, is curiously subdued, as if classical simply meant quieter.
As Solange, ostensibly the more violent of the two eponymous domestics, Mr.
Busch has scaled down his movie-diva mannerisms -- the grand Norma Desmond gestures, the Katharine Hepburn vocal tremolo -- but they are still in evidence.
And whether played loud or soft, they seldom feel appropriate to this searing study of the fantasies bred by oppression.


Corrections
An obituary on Tuesday about Betty Klarnet, the retired managing editor of Harper's Bazaar magazine who died on Sept. 26, misstated the residence of her daughter, Katy Klarnet.
She lives in West Hartford, Conn., not West Haven.


High Toll in India Quake
As many as 1,000 people were reported killed in a series of powerful earthquakes that rocked western India today.
The police in Maharashtra state said 1,000 people were killed in Khilari, about 280 miles east of Bombay.
Hundreds of homes were flattened there.
At least 22 people were reported killed in surrounding areas.
Article, page A8.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising -- Addenda; Accounts
*
Pepsico Wines and Spirits, Purchase, N.Y., is reviewing its estimated $5 million Stolichnaya vodka account, now at Calet, Hirsch &amp; Ferrell, New York.
A Pepsico spokesman said the review, in which Calet, Hirsch would participate, was not linked to plans by the agency's top executives to buy the office from its parent, the Ross Roy Group.


7 Are Convicted and Fined in French Insider Trading Case
Seven businessmen were convicted today of insider trading that earned them close to $9 million in illicit profits from the 1988 purchase of Triangle Industries in New York by Pechiney S.A., a French state-owned aluminium group.
But a former top Finance Ministry official, Alain Boublil, whom the prosecution had portrayed as an important source of inside information on the $1.26 billion acquisition, was acquitted.


Frank Rich Appointed An Op-Ed Columnist
Frank Rich, chief theater critic for The New York Times for 13 years, has been named The Times's newest Op-Ed columnist.
His appointment was announced yesterday by Arthur Sulzberger Jr., publisher of The Times.
Mr.
Rich, 44 years old, will write twice-weekly commentary on American society and culture, Mr.
Sulzberger said.
The column is to begin in the first week of 1994.
Mr.
Rich will remain theater critic through this fall season.


Nothing Is Simple in Picking a Trade Center Blast Jury, but 12 Are Found
A large woman in a purple sweater and bushy hair -- Ms. 100 -- was the first to be considered for the jury, her number pulled at random from a wooden wheel in Manhattan Federal Court.
Ushered to the first green leather chair in the first row of the jury box, she would have become, automatically, the forewoman in the trial of four men charged in the World Trade Center bombing.


Puerto Ayora Journal; Galapagos Burden: Goats, Pigs and Now People
An afternoon stroll down Charles Darwin Avenue captures the rapid evolution of Homo sapiens in the Galapagos.
Ecuadorean rap music blares from the Blowout Bar; an Otavalo Indian peddles Andean wool ponchos outside a new pizzeria, and at a souvenir kiosk tourists pick through T-shirts, including one praising an endemic bird species: "I Love Boobies."


Feathers! Androgyny! The Folies-Bergere Reopens
When the Folies-Bergere closed its doors in December after losing more than $600,000 in 1992, the conventional wisdom was that the curtain had come down for good on the most famous Parisian music hall, whose formula of topless girls in endless feathers seemed as tired as the dwindling busloads of jet-lagged tourists traipsing into the premises.
The owner, Helene Martini, vowed that she would reopen the theater immortalized by Manet's painting, the posters of Erte, the voice of Maurice Chevalier and the legs of Josephine Baker.
But world-weary Parisian pontificators were convinced the 124-year-old Folies had no future in an age of video clips and toplessness on beaches from Deauville to St.
Tropez.


Campbell Gets a New Lakers Contract
The Los Angeles Lakers said yesterday that they have a new contract with ELDEN CAMPBELL, the 7-foot forward who had a strong playoff performance against the Phoenix Suns last spring after nearly three seasons as a reserve.
Campbell, 25, became a restricted free agent July 1.
His ability as a shot-blocker gave him additional stature with the Lakers when the team's rebounding leader, A. C. GREEN, signed with Phoenix on Tuesday.
No details on the pact were made public. (AP)


Ex-Officer's Account of a Brutal Police Fraternity
Following are excerpts from testimony to the Mollen Commission by Bernard Cawley, a former police officer who testified about assaulting drug suspects and innocent bystanders in his Bronx precinct.
The excerpts were transcribed by The New York Times.
Q. After your graduation from the Police Academy, what was your first assignment?


Peter Lipman-Wulf, Sculptor, Dies at 88; An Abstract Stylist
Peter Lipman-Wulf, a German-born sculptor who lived in the United States for nearly 50 years, died on Saturday in Hamburg, Germany.
He was 88 and had homes in Manhattan and Sag Harbor, L.I.
He died of cardiac arrest at the home of his wife's relatives, said Frank Mecklenburg, a family friend.
Mr.
Lipman-Wulf had gone to Hamburg after attending the opening of an exhibition of his work in France.


MCI Reorganizes, Leaving Key Posts Open
The MCI Communications Corporation, declining to fill its vacant posts of president and chief operating officer, yesterday reorganized its major divisions and gave the current head of its residential long-distance business the principal responsibility over the majority of the company.
Daniel F. Akerson, MCI's 44-year-old president and chief operating officer, left the company without apparent acrimony last month, to join General Instrument as chief executive.
Bert C. Roberts Jr., 50, who remains as chairman and chief executive, declined to fill the posts in favor of the reorganization.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising -- Addenda; 2 Executives To Leave Y.&amp; R.
Two well-known agency media executives said yesterday that they would leave Young &amp; Rubicam New York to form their own media buying service.
Paul Isacsson, 57, executive vice president and media director, and Gerri Donini, 46, executive vice president in charge of the agency's national television, will open IDM International in New York, specializing in buying commercial time in electronic media.
At the new company, which is without clients or other employees, Mr.
Isacsson will be chairman and Ms.
Donini will be president.


Market Place; A Smaller Share of Mutual Fund Money Is Going to U.S. Stocks
MUTUAL fund investors are increasingly sending their money out of the United States.
And that could cost some indigestion in the home market.
The flood of money into foreign stock funds, which has been growing for several months, is now being joined by money leaving this country to invest in foreign bond funds, money managers said yesterday.


Mother Is Found Sane in Killing Accused Molester
A woman who fatally shot her son's accused molester was sane at the time of the killing and legally responsible for opening fire on him in a courtroom, a jury found today.
The woman, Ellie Nesler, a 41-year-old single mother from Sonora, Calif., faces up to 16 years in prison when she is sentenced on Nov. 29 for the killing of Daniel Mark Driver.


Somalia, Through a Glass Darkly
The following is an item, dated Dec. 9, 1992, in my personal diary, which I have kept intermittently for most of my life.
I have left it unedited, exactly as then written.
When I woke up this morning, I found the television screen showing live pictures of the Marines going ashore, in the grey dawn of another African day, in Somalia.
It is clear that with a very large part of the American public, but particularly with that part of the public that speak or writes on public affairs, and -- not last -- with the political establishment, there is general support for this venture.


Why Women Need U.S. Estrogen Study
To the Editor:
As a medical journalist completing a book on gender bias in health care and health research, I take issue with "Estrogen Trials -- and Errors" (Op-Ed, Sept. 17) by Carol Ann Rinzler.


Fernandez's Days as Met May Be Coming to an End
Sid Fernandez will report to Shea Stadium tonight, perhaps for the last time as a member of the Mets.
The left-hander's emotions, much like his enigmatic career, will be mixed.
Fernandez will go through his routine at Shea mildly fatalistic about his chances of signing a contract extension, nostalgic for the highlights of a decade in Queens and determined not to be shortchanged in the marketplace.


George Rainsford, 65, Ex-College Executive
George Nichols Rainsford, who was president of Lynchburg College in Lynchburg, Va., for 10 years, died last Thursday at Santa Rosa Memorial Hospital in Santa Rosa, Calif.
He was 65 and lived in Windsor, Calif.
He died of colon cancer, the college said.


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY DINKINS'S ADS ATTACK GIULIANI Mayor Dinkins went on the offensive, broadcasting his first critical television commercial attacking Rudolph W. Giuliani's past stands on abortion and squaring off with his challenger over the volatile issue of the city's affirmative-action program.
A1.


Zita Johann Dead; Actress, 89, Played The Mummy's Love
Zita Johann, a stage and film actress who played Boris Karloff's love interest in "The Mummy," died on Friday at Nyack Hospital in Nyack, N.Y.
She was 89 and lived in Orangeburg, N.Y.
The cause was pneumonia, said a friend, Rosemary Franck.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  National League  FLORIDA MARLINS -- Agreed to terms with Gary Sheffield, third baseman, on a four-year contract.
Basketball  National Basketball Association  LOS ANGELES LAKERS -- Agreed to terms with Elden Campbell, forward.
Continental Basketball Association


First Republican Supports Health Plan
Hillary Rodham Clinton won her first Republican convert today when Senator James M. Jeffords of Vermont announced his support of the Clinton Administration's health care plan.
"I am pleased to be the first," Mr.
Jeffords said.
"I am absolutely confident I will not be the last."


Clinton Held Ready to Order Standard on Recycled Paper
In an apparent victory for environmentalists over the paper industry, the White House is said to be leaning toward an executive order that would direct Federal agencies to purchase office stationery and other paper with at least 20 percent of its content recycled from trash.
Such a Federal move is expected to provide a powerful stimulus for recyling efforts by setting a standard that might also be adopted by state and muncipal governments and by corporate buyers of paper seeking a good environmental image.
Expanded use of recycled paper, moreover, could also help create a larger market for the tons of paper that cities and towns collect each year in recycling programs.


What's SoHo Known For? It May Be Furniture
MANHATTAN divides itself again and again into idiosyncratic enclaves.
The West 20's are noted for flowers, the West 30's for buttons and fabric, the West 40's for jewelry.
And SoHo?
It may soon become a furniture district.
Today, three furniture shops or galleries -- Neotu, 1950 and GVG Editions -- opened at new locations in and around SoHo.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, the Futures Markets column in Business Day yesterday misstated the reason for a rise in oil prices.
Prices rose on the belief that OPEC would reach an agreement to hold down exports, not on lack of confidence that an agreement would be reached.


Government Dream Car; Washington and Detroit Pool Resources To Devise a New Approach to Technology
As the White House and Detroit set a goal today of developing a reliable, well-priced car that is three times as energy efficient as those now on the road, they did far more than lay out a research target.
They are drafting a new model for how Washington and industry interact.
Like the quest for the car, it is a step down an unknown road.
This is not a stab at building a better mousetrap; it is a new approach to mice.


Georgians Bitter Over Loss of City to Rebels


OPEC Agrees to Oil Production Quotas for Next 6 Months
After five days of talks, OPEC announced today that its 12 members had agreed to individual quotas to limit production over the next six months to 24.5 million barrels a day.
Kuwait and Iran scored significant increases in their individual share of OPEC's overall output, while Saudi Arabia, the world's largest producer and exporter of oil, agreed to freeze its production at current levels until April.


RACE FOR VIRGINIA GOVERNOR TIGHTENS
For a while this year it seemed that Virginia voters were once again ready to write history large in an election for governor.
In 1989 they installed L. Douglas Wilder in the antebellum Capitol here, making him the first black ever elected Governor of any state.
And with state law preventing Mr.
Wilder's serving a second, consecutive term, as the summer of 1993 wore on, it appeared that a woman, former Attorney General Mary Sue Terry, would be chosen to succeed him.


120 Buildings, All Dressed Up
TO New Yorkers, George and Edward Blum are unknowns.
But the brothers, who were architects, designed 120 prewar apartment buildings here, enlivening the streetscape with tile mosaics and terra-cotta leaves and flowers.
"They created a unique, integrated, ornamental vocabulary," said Andrew Dolkart, a co-author, with Susan Tunick, of "George &amp; Edward Blum: Texture and Design in New York Apartment House Architecture" (The Friends of Terra Cotta Press, 1993).
The Dallieu building at 838 West End Avenue (West 101st Street), at right, was partly inspired by France's low-income housing: facades richly ornamented with patterned brick and terra cotta.


Mary G. Carpenter, 74, Expert on the Shakers
Mary Grace Carpenter, a Connecticut schoolteacher who was an expert on the American Shakers, died on Saturday at the Greenery, a rehabilitation center in Hyannis, Mass.
She was 74.
Mrs.
Carpenter had Parkinson's disease.
She died after a fall, said her husband, Charles.
She had been a resident of New Canaan, Conn., since 1951 and a summer resident of Nantucket since 1963.


U.S. Shipbuilding Plan
A plan to revitalize American shipbuilding was announced today by the Clinton Administration.
It calls for up to $3 billion in loan guarantees for ship construction, reviving an existing program; seeking the elimination of foreign shipbuilding subsidies through negotiations; regulatory reform to reduce burdens on shipyards and suppliers, and helping American companies to get foreign orders through better marketing and promotion.
In addition, the Pentagon will award $220 million over five years for new ship designs and technologies.


BOSNIA LEGISLATORS REJECT PEACE PLAN IN A LOPSIDED VOTE
Bosnia's Muslim-dominated Parliament decisively rejected the international peace plan for this devastated republic today, thus deferring and possibly derailing a settlement that would end the 18-month war by partitioning the country into three ethnic states for Croats, Muslims and Serbs.
The Parliament ended two days of agonized debate with a vote that drew only 4 votes out of 69 for the partition plan as it stands.
There were seven total rejections.


Clinton Repeats Support for Yeltsin
President Clinton offered a powerful endorsement for President Boris N. Yeltsin today as Administration officials expressed confidence that the Russian President did not intend to use force to resolve his showdown with his opponents in the Russian Parliament.
In a meeting at the White House, Russia's Foreign Minister, Andrei V. Kozyrev, presented Mr.
Clinton with a letter pledging Mr.
Yeltsin's "firm decision" to avoid bloodshed in the crisis.
The letter also promised that "no storming" was being planned of the Parliament headquarters where the rebel lawmakers have taken refuge.


New Jersey Trying to Lure Yankees, an Aide to Cuomo Says
A close adviser to Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo said yesterday that he was certain New Jersey had made a lucrative offer to lure the New York Yankees from the Bronx and worried that New Jersey would reach an agreement with the Yankees' principal owner, George M. Steinbrenner, before New York can act.
"I just hope he doesn't say he's got a deal and says, 'I don't want to talk to you,' " said Vincent Tese, New York State's economic development director.


U.S. Plans More Aid To Exports
Responding to American companies' complaints that red tape has hobbled the nation's ability to compete in world markets, President Clinton announced a 65-part plan today that is aimed at increasing American exports of goods and services to $1 trillion by the end of the decade, from $628 billion last year.
The plan, disclosed in a meeting with business executives at the White House, calls for the Federal Government to lift controls on many high-technology exports, lobby harder in foreign capitals on behalf of American companies, open export assistance offices across the nation and begin making $600 million a year in heavily subsidized loans for foreign purchases of American goods.
Avoids Sticky Question
But the Administration sidestepped the politically touchiest question of whether the United States should continue to spend 80 percent of its export financing money on agricultural products, which account for only a tenth of American exports.
The plan calls instead for a review by the end of this year of whether money should be redirected to exports of manufactured goods.


Nadia Stark Dies at 81; Carpet Manufacturer
Nadia Stark, a founder and president of the Stark Carpet Corporation in Manhattan, died on Tuesday at Sloan-Kettering Memorial Hospital.
She was 81.
The cause was cancer, family members said.


Corrections
The crossword puzzle yesterday included a garbled definition for 27 Down.
It should have read, "Overwhelm with humor," not "Otherwhelm." (The answer was "slay.")


Trash Fantasy
To the Home Section:
Since the 1960's, my husband and I have discovered many "Treasures From the Trash" (Sept. 9), much to the embarrassment of our sons who had to stand by while we dug in the trash.


Kelly Sees Hearings by Panel As 'One-Sided' and 'Scripted'
New York City's top police official yesterday described the hearings by a city commission investigating police corruption as "one-sided" and "a scripted presentation," and suggested that their purpose was to put into practice a decision that he said the panel had already made: creation of an outside agency to monitor the police.
The remarks by Police Commissioner Raymond W. Kelly, during his weekly news briefing at Police Headquarters in lower Manhattan, were the Commissioner's most detailed response to the hearings since they began on Monday.


Marlins Let Sheffield Take It to the Hoop
The Florida Marlins agreed to let GARY SHEFFIELD play basketball for fun, and he agreed to keep playing third base for them.
Sheffield had balked at a contract clause forbidding him from playing in pickup basketball games, one of the few hangups in negotiations that led to the $22.45 million, four-year contract he agreed to today.
At age 24, he becomes baseball's highest-paid third baseman and the Marlins' best-paid player.
His salary will average $5,612,500 a year, the 10th-highest in baseball.


Coleman Won't Listen Later, So Talk Now
Talks between the Nets and the agent for DERRICK COLEMAN are not exactly deadlocked, but they are definitely on the hold button.
They will be disconnected Oct. 8, the first day of training camp, because Coleman doesn't want to be distracted during the season.
"This was initiated by the Nets and not by us," said Coleman's Detroit based attorney, HAROLD MacDONALD, by telephone yesterday.
"We came up with an offer that we think Derrick would sign for and they came with another offer. It was a good offer if Derrick was a free agent starting this year. I don't want to get into numbers because if it turns out different then it looks like somebody won and somebody lost."


Top Editor Resigns at Mademoiselle
Gabe Doppelt, who was charged last year with turning Mademoiselle into a cutting-edge magazine for women in their 20's, resigned as editor in chief yesterday over differences about just how cutting the edge should be.
S.
I.
Newhouse Jr., chairman of Conde Nast Publications Inc., which publishes Mademoiselle, described the disagreements as "conceptual differences" over the further evolution of the magazine.


Finding Out if a Product You Bought Has a Recall
WHEN a car is recalled by its manufacturer, it's usually easy enough for the vehicle's owner to find out: car dealers keep records, and they notify the owners, either by mail or telephone.
Large-scale recalls are often reported in newspapers and on radio and television, too.
For consumer products, though, the path of information from manufacturer to owner isn't quite so straight -- and consumers often have to do the bulk of the work.
Radio and television reports are often cursory, if they exist.
And notice of recalls or advisories on many items may depend on the buyer's filling out and mailing in the warranty card, which only a small percentage of buyers do.


Mysterious Cuban Epidemic Seems to Subside
An epidemic of a mysterious illness that has impaired vision and damaged nerves among nearly 51,000 people in Cuba seems to have ended without a specific cause being found, the World Health Organization said yesterday.
The most likely explanation is a combination of a nutritional deficiency and another unidentified factor, probably a toxic substance, Dr.
Bjorn Thylefors, an official of the health organization, said in an interview after his return from a visit to Cuba.


IN THE PARK WITH: Elizabeth Barlow Rogers; Trying to Make Money Grow On 26,000 Trees
ELIZABETH BARLOW ROGERS is in her yard -- well, not exactly her yard but hers more than most.
She's tooling along in a "Jimmy," a utilitarian green vehicle, putting out a hand now and then to give a half-wave to the men and women who are planting, pruning and weeding.
She's "Betsy" to most of them, and as she smiles, she's talking a mile a minute -- considerably faster than she's moving.
Ms.
Rogers, 57, the administrator of Central Park, is en route to the north end of this 843-acre urban landscape, specifically to the recently restored Harlem Meer, an 11-acre lake, and the new Charles A. Dana Discovery Center, which is scheduled to open Wednesday.
The center, part of a $12 million restoration project, is the first large building to go up in the park in more than three decades.


Edward T. Littlejohn; Business Executive, 76
Edward T. Littlejohn, an executive at Pfizer Inc. for 16 years, died Sunday in Montecito, Calif.
He was 76.
His wife, Ellen, said he died of kidney failure.


Pop and Jazz in Review
Marc Cohn  Town Hall
Two years ago, Marc Cohn, a foggy-voiced singer and songwriter from Cleveland, scored a hit with "Walking in Memphis," a homage to soul music that won him a Grammy for best new artist of 1991.
In this reverential tribute, the singer strolls through Memphis in the rain, soaking in atmosphere and communing with the spirits of departed musical idols.


I.B.M. Helps Parts-Scam Investigators
I.B.M. said yesterday that it had been cooperating with the Federal Bureau of Investigation since 1991 in an investigation of a multimillion-dollar scam in which computer-parts dealers defrauded the company.
But the company insisted that it had taken measures to tighten controls during the last 18 months.
Although the cost of the fraud to the International Business Machines Corporation is not known precisely, loss estimates range from "tens of millions to hundreds of millions" of dollars over a period of more than two years, according to one investigator.


Status as Underdog Hardly Frightens Phils
Ten years ago Tuesday, the Philadelphia Phillies clinched the National League Eastern Division and were immediately given little chance of winning the pennant.
Funny how history repeats itself.


No Headline
"We have serious reservations about the President's proposal because it would limit choices by patients and physicians, undermine the quality of medical services and lead to Federal control of medical education and the physician work force." -- THE AMERICAN MEDICAL ASSOCIATION, in a letter to doctors.  [ A22:1. ]


Essay; On Dying Hard
At the Battle of Albuera in 1811, the wounded Col.
William Inglis, commander of the 57th Foot Regiment, cried out to his troops: "Die hard, men, die hard!" Since that victory, the Middlesex regiment has been called "the Diehards."
Diehards today are in ill repute, sometimes deservedly so.
In the besieged Parliament building in Moscow, cut off from food, water and electricity, an infuriated Aleksandr Rutskoi and a haggard Ruslan Khasbulatov lead a band of Communist apparatchiks defying the Russian President's order to surrender.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising -- Addenda; People
*
Joel P. Harrison was named to the new position of senior vice president and executive creative director at the Joey Reiman Agency, Atlanta.
Mr.
Harrison, 54, who was previously a managing partner and creative director at D'Arcy Masius Benton &amp; Bowles, New York, will co-manage the agency's overall creative product with Joey Reiman, chairman and chief executive. *
Luanne Calvert was named to the vacant position of media director at Citron Haligman Bedecarre, San Francisco.
She was previously an associate media director at Goodby, Berlin &amp; Silverstein, San Francisco.


CLINIC FIREBOMBED IN PENNSYLVANIA
A firebomb yesterday severely damaged a Planned Parenthood office in Lancaster, Pa., that offers abortion referrals and family planning.
It was the third such attack around the country in 10 days and brought renewed calls from abortion rights groups for a Federal investigation into the possibility of a conspiracy.
Investigators in Pennsylvania said a bomb was tossed through a rear window into the office of the director of patient services, damaging an office, examining rooms and equipment.
"We have no suspects, but there are leads," Wiliam A. Henry, a state police fire marshal, was quoted by The Associated Press as saying.


Outlines of New Pact That Could Reshape Broadway's Methods
After a high-decibel round of rallies and press conferences, the war of words between Broadway producers and Local 802 of the American Federation of Musicians ended in silence yesterday after the announcement Tuesday evening of a tentative agreement on a new contract.
The producers and the union both publicly insisted on confidentiality about details of the settlement before a vote on ratification by the union.
The approval is not considered a formality.


Books of The Times; New Beginnings Near the End of Life
Old Friends  By Tracy Kidder  352 pages. Richard Todd/Houghton Mifflin. $22.95.
"It was not the place itself but the visions of the life to come that got her down," Tracy Kidder writes about Ruth, a volunteer at the nursing home he describes so touchingly in his new book, "Old Friends."


Drug Companies Feeling Pressure of Clinton's Plan To Keep Their Prices Down
Exchanging verbal thunderbolts with the companies that make prescription drugs, President Clinton has denounced high prices that force some sick and elderly Americans to skip meals to pay for medicine.
His proposals for revamping the medical system would fundamentally reshape the playing field for drug companies, pressuring them to hold down prices and in some ways treating them as much like a crucial social service or public utility as private profit-seeking businesses.


Abortion View Can't Be Test for a Federal Judge; South Dakota Example
To the Editor:
Your Sept. 21 editorial on the possibility that President Clinton may appoint anti-abortion judges to the lower Federal courts is absolutely on target, as dramatically illustrated by a lawsuit we are bringing in a lower Federal court in South Dakota.


Like-New Romper, Worn Only on Weekends by Tiny Librarian
CHILDREN tend to outgrow clothes and belongings long before they wear them out, creating a vast pool of gently used garments, furniture, toys and books.
For parents who need to keep up with the costly cycle, and for parents who need to dispose of barely used wares, there is a satisfying solution: resale stores.
Such stores typically sell used items for less than half their original retail prices, and they work on consignment, giving a percentage of the profit to the client.


Whitman and Florio on Plans and Promises
Candidate: Christine Todd Whitman Producer: The Murphy Pintak Gautier Agency, Washington Visual: As Mrs.
Whitman talks directly to viewers about trimming waste in Government, pairs of scissors appear on the screen against the phrases "$1.2 Billion in Waste" and "Sell Florio's Helicopter."  The Script: I want to cut your state income taxes by 30 percent over three years.
To pay for it I have to cut Jim Florio's spending.
Here's how.
Trenton wants to spend $21 billion in the next year and one-half.
As Governor I'll cut out the $1.2 billion in mismanagement and waste that you know and I know is in there.
Like Jim Florio's $4 million state helicopter.
I'll sell it.
I'll take all the money I save and use it to cut taxes.
And Jim Florio?
His only plan is to attack me.
Come on, Governor, what's your plan?


First Republican Supports Health Plan
Hillary Rodham Clinton won her first Republican convert today when Senator James M. Jeffords of Vermont announced his support of the Clinton Administration's health care plan.
"I am pleased to be the first," Mr.
Jeffords said.
"I am absolutely confident I will not be the last."


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Middle East Peace Is Good News for Some Campaigns, Too
PEACE, it's wonderful, as William Saroyan opined.
But when it comes to the Middle East, the question is -- for the purposes of this column, anyway -- is it also marketable?
Salable?
Exploitable?
The answer so far seems to be a very qualified, almost hesitant, "yes." A handful of advertisements are saluting the suddenly, and rapidly, improving prospects for peace in the region after the historic series of agreements between Israel and the Palestine Liberation Organization.


CHRONICLE
LAINIE KAZAN has a flair for the dramatic, but what happened to her early Wednesday morning after the opening of a four-week stint at Rainbow and Stars in Rockefeller Plaza was more excitement than she had anticipated.
She and two assistants were locked into the 67-story building in pitch darkness.
Following the 11 P.M. show on Tuesday, Miss Kazan had gone up to the dressing room she is using on the top floor of the building, rather than the one used by most performers, on the 65th floor near the supper club.


Her Manner Controlled, Holtzman Gazes Ahead
Elizabeth Holtzman says she may run again.
She may teach first or practice law and accept an appointive post in government, which is how her public career began.
But yesterday, hours after suffering her third electoral loss and the first in which voters rejected her for a job she had vigorously campaigned to keep, Ms.
Holtzman seemed remarkably equanimous.


Hevesi Attacked by Badillo As From 'Queens Machine'
Sounding refrains he intends to repeat throughout the race for city comptroller, Herman Badillo yesterday described his opponent, Alan G. Hevesi, as an "undistinguished" Assemblyman and "Queens machine" politician who lacked the experience, independence and skill to be New York City's top fiscal monitor.
"Mr. Hevesi is nothing if not the creation of the party bosses and their cohorts," Mr.
Badillo, the Republican-Liberal candidate, said at a news conference outside the Manhattan Correctional Center.
"The question is: how dependent is Mr. Hevesi on the Queens Democratic organization?"


Corrections
A music review on Tuesday about the Dorian Wind Quintet misidentified the guest artist.
She was Deborah Hoffman, a harpist. (Nancy Billmann is the group's horn player.)


Trash Fantasy
To the Home Section:
Since the 1960's, my husband and I have discovered many "Treasures From the Trash" (Sept. 9), much to the embarrassment of our sons who had to stand by while we dug in the trash.


John F. Carroll, 67, Leader of Irish Groups
John F. Carroll, a leader of Irish-American organizations, died on Saturday.
He was 67 and lived in Brooklyn.
Mr.
Carroll, who moved from Ireland in 1949, served as president of the United Irish Counties and the Galway Association and was a trustee of the Irish Institute and the Ancient Order of Hibernians.


U.S. Shipbuilding Plan
A plan to revitalize American shipbuilding was announced today by the Clinton Administration.
It calls for up to $3 billion in loan guarantees for ship construction, reviving an existing program; seeking the elimination of foreign shipbuilding subsidies through negotiations; regulatory reform to reduce burdens on shipyards and suppliers, and helping American companies to get foreign orders through better marketing and promotion.
In addition, the Pentagon will award $220 million over five years for new ship designs and technologies.


Palestinians to Get $2 Billion In Pledges of Aid for Self-Rule
Palestinians in the West Bank and Gaza Strip will receive pledges of about $2 billion in aid to bolster their economy from more than three dozen countries -- including a multimillion dollar pledge from Israel -- at an American-organized sponsors' conference in Washington on Friday, Administration officials said today.
In the aftermath of the recent agreement between Israel and the Palestine Liberation Organization, Washington organized the conference to provide tangible evidence that the accord will improve the lives of the Palestinians in the occupied territories and defuse the attraction of groups like Hamas, the Islamic militant organization.


President Defends Commerce Secretary on Dealings
President Clinton defended Commerce Secretary Ronald H. Brown today as Republican lawmakers demanded a special prosecutor to investigate Mr.
Brown's relationship with a Vietnamese businessman whose dealings are under scrutiny by a Federal grand jury in Florida.
In a display of support, Mr.
Clinton walked with Mr.
Brown into the Roosevelt Room at the White House for an announcement of a new export strategy.
With Mr.
Brown sitting a few feet away, the President heaped praise on his Commerce Secretary and dismissed a reporter's question about whether the issue would undermine Mr.
Brown's effectiveness.


Weicker as Political Phoenix; Connecticut's Governor Rises From Ashes of Unpopularity
Two years ago, Lowell P. Weicker Jr. was considered king of the walking wounded in Connecticut public life, a gubernatorial ghost who would rattle around the Capitol for the rest of his term.
He had pushed through a tax overhaul plan and an income tax, and his approval ratings were plumbing new depths.
The conventional wisdom was that he could not recover.
Today, on the eve of a promised announcement about whether he will seek a second term, Mr.
Weicker appears very much to have retaken the reins of his destiny.
Like Gov.
Jim Florio of New Jersey, who was similarly vilified over taxes in 1990 and has since bounced back, Mr.
Weicker has succeeded in shifting the focus from his past actions to wide-eyed wonder about what he will do next.
In Constant Motion
From his call for regional efforts to end the de facto segregation of Connecticut public education, to his end run around Las Vegas casino developers who retreated in failure after spending millions to push for casinos in Bridgeport and Hartford, to his sudden and single-minded push to get a pro football franchise for Connecticut, Mr.
Weicker has been a player in constant motion.


Bridge
A delicate point on which experts disagree is the advisability of balancing against an opening no-trump bid.
In general such action is risky, because a good fit is unlikely to be available when both opponents are presumed to have balanced hands, but vulnerability, type of scoring and conventional agreements have to be taken into consideration.
All these factors, and one other, were in East's favor on the diagramed deal played Sunday at the Ramada Hotel, Seventh Avenue and 33d Street, in the New York City final of the North American Open Pairs.
South's eccentric no-trump opening was no doubt aimed at silencing his opponents, but had the contrary effect.
If he had opened one diamond and received a one-spade response, he would have been able to rebid one no-trump and end the bidding.
That would probably have failed by one trick, for a good score.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
In setting a goal to produce a more energy efficient car, Washington and Detroit are drafting a new model for how government and industry interact.
News Analysis.  [ Page A1. ]


Events: Gardening And Crafts
Chili and Gardening  Brooklyn Botanic Garden, 1000 Washington Avenue, off Eastern Parkway, Prospect Heights; (718) 622-4433.
There will be a chili-pepper festival on Sunday, from 10 A.M. to 4 P.M.
Events will include tours of the chili-pepper collection, at 11 A.M., 1 and 3 P.M.; cooking demonstrations, from 10:30 A.M. to 1 P.M.; demonstrations for children about growing peppers, 1 to 3 P.M., and craft demonstrations, 2 to 4 P.M.
No charge.


A Friendly Dog To Rock and Ride
A SPEN, a black 9-year-old Labrador retriever, is alive and barking in Los Angeles, the pet of Leonard Glasser, an artist and screenwriter.
He has also been immortalized as "Rocking Dog" (at right), which is ridden each day by Mr.
Glasser's two grandsons, Max Orenstein, 4, and Julian, 2, in their home near New Haven.
When Mr.
Glasser's daughter, Joanne, became pregnant with Max, she sent Aspen to her father's home in California because the Brooklyn apartment she then shared with her husband was too small.


Corrections
A table in Business Day on Sept. 1, with an article about revisions of second-quarter data on the gross domestic product, reversed the data for current prices and 1987 prices.
A corrected table, with final second-quarter revisions announced yesterday, appears today on page D8.


INSIDE
New Deadline in Russia
The Russian and Moscow governments ordered legislative leaders to evacuate Parliament and surrender all arms by Monday.
Page A14.
Outrage in Little Havana
Cuban exiles in Miami are alarmed at the Administration's agreement to send some 1,500 Cubans in Federal prisons back to Cuba.
Page A16.
Police Official Faults Panel
New York City's top police official called a commission's hearings into police corruption "one-sided" and a "scripted presentation." Page B1.
Partners Allowed Insurance
New York State has lifted a ban against health insurance for domestic partners of homosexuals and unmarried heterosexuals.
Page B1.
Mercedes to Build U.S.
Plant
Mercedes-Benz will announce its first automobile assembly plant in the United States, which it will build in Tuscaloosa County, Ala.
Page D1.
Pentagon Goes Vegetarian
With the military undertaking more humanitarian missions, the Pentagon has created a nutritious ration for diverse cultures.
Page A16.


U.S. Pact to Return Inmates To Havana Alarms Emigres
The Clinton Administration, in secret talks with the Government of Fidel Castro, has agreed to hand over to Havana some 1,500 Cubans held in Federal prisons, spreading waves of alarm among Cuban exiles here.
On the streets of Little Havana, there was concern over what could await the prisoners once they are returned to jails in Cuba.
But even more widespread were the fears that the deal announced by the Justice Department late Tuesday, the first of its kind in nearly a decade, might signal the start of a broader rapprochement between the United States and Cuba.


Gay Parents Become Increasingly Visible
In a small Michigan town, a third grader pipes up with his contribution for show and tell: he describes the gay and lesbian parents' convention he attended with his two mothers.
In Virginia, a lesbian mother who is too afraid to allow her name to be used tells of being forced by a judge to choose between her children and her partner.


First Republican Supports Health Plan
Hillary Rodham Clinton won her first Republican convert today when Senator James M. Jeffords of Vermont announced his support of the Clinton Administration's health care plan.
"I am pleased to be the first," Mr.
Jeffords said.
"I am absolutely confident I will not be the last."


Officer Kills Woman and Himself at Police Station
A New York City police officer shot a woman with whom he had a relationship to death outside a Nassau County police precinct today and then turned the gun on himself, the Nassau County police said.
A Nassau County police officer at the scene fired at the New York officer, Robert Anderson, 33, of North Merrick, L.I.
Nassau County police officials said they were not sure whether Mr.
Anderson killed himself or whether he was killed by the Nassau County officer.


Official Warning by Yeltsin Fails to Dislodge Legislators
In what sounded like a final ultimatum to the Russian Parliament, the national and city governments today ordered leaders of the legislature to evacuate the building and surrender all arms by Monday.
The ultimatum came as a "demand" addressed to the two leaders of the holdout deputies, Ruslan I. Khasbulatov and Aleksandr V. Rutskoi, who were warned that failure to comply could carry "grave consequences" for which they would bear "full responsibility."


Line Drive Still Hangs Over Yank
When the final out is made in Sunday's season finale between the Yankees and the Tigers at Yankee Stadium, Bernie Williams says he will be ready to return to Puerto Rico in the time it takes to pack his suitcases.
While a cynic might think Williams is eager to go home so he can leave the tattered ending of a promising season, the Yankee outfielder is truly in a rush to see his wife, Waleska, and 3-year-old son, Bernie Jr.


Toll Plazas Have Armed Security Full Time
To the Editor:
You leave the impression in a Sept. 9 news article that New York City's Triborough Bridge and Tunnel Authority has no armed security force to prevent and detect armed robberies.
The authority deploys an armed force of superior officers at each of its toll plazas around the clock, and has security technology that has resulted in arrests of those responsible for robberies.
We believe a large percentage, if not all, of the outstanding robbery investigations will be successfully completed in the near future.


In the Garden A Long, Long Time
DOES gardening keep you young?
The question hung in the misty air over Wave Hill last Thursday night as a dozen gardeners -- all in their 80's and 90's -- gathered in the 28-acre public garden that nestles in the cliffs of the Riverdale section of the Bronx.
In 30 years, the garden's horticultural director, Marco Polo Stufano, and his staff have turned an old forgotten estate into a mecca for plant lovers from all over the world.
This year, for its annual fund-raiser, Wave Hill raised its trowel to great gardeners, who keep trundling on despite aches and pains and the loss of beloved companions.
And the honored guests, from as far away as Seattle and Kansas City, Mo., came bearing gifts for the garden's plant auction, always a high point of the $85-a-plate picnic (though some donated up to $500 for the fried chicken).


Royce Franklin Ward; Civil Engineer, 84
Royce Franklin Ward, a civil engineer who helped develop the Watergate complex in Washington, died on Saturday at Alexandria Hospital in Virginia.
He was 84 and lived in Alexandria.
The cause was complications after a stroke, his family said.


Mother Is Found Sane in Killing Accused Molester
A woman who fatally shot her son's accused molester was sane at the time of the killing and legally responsible for opening fire on him in a courtroom, a jury found today.
The woman, Ellie Nesler, a 41-year-old single mother from Sonora, Calif., faces up to 16 years in prison when she is sentenced on Nov. 29 for the killing of Daniel Mark Driver.


The Cable Rate Shock
Sponsors of the 1992 cable television bill promised customers that their rates would fall by about 10 percent.
That's why millions of families were shocked this month to find that their cable rates had risen.
The worst hit were poor families who purchase bare-bones service.
Wealthy families who buy expensive services received price cuts.
How could this well-meaning effort to curb escalating cable fees misfire so badly?
Congress won't know how many families were hit with rate hikes, and why, until the Federal Communications Commission completes a survey early next month.
But some blunders are already clear.


